Software Engineering at the Speed of Light:
How Developers Stay Current using Twitter
Leif Singer
University of Victoria
Victoria, Canada
lsinger@uvic.caFernando Figueira Filho
Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Norte
Natal, Brazil
fernando@dimap.ufrn.brMargaret-Anne Storey
University of Victoria
Victoria, Canada
mstorey@uvic.ca
ABSTRACT
The microblogging service Twitter has over 500 million users
posting over 500 million tweets daily. Research has estab-
lished that software developers use Twitter in their work,
but this has not yet been examined in detail. Twitter is an
important medium in some software engineering circles|
understanding its use could lead to improved support, and
learning more about the reasons for non-adoption could in-
form the design of improved tools.
In a qualitative study, we surveyed 271 and interviewed
27 developers active on GitHub. We nd that Twitter helps
them keep up with the fast-paced development landscape.
They use it to stay aware of industry changes, for learning,
and for building relationships. We discover the challenges
they experience and extract their coping strategies. Some
developers do not want to or cannot embrace Twitter for
their work|we show their reasons and alternative channels.
We validate our ndings in a follow-up survey with more
than 1,200 respondents.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.3 [ Group and Organization Interfaces ]: Computer-
supported collaborative work
General Terms
Human Factors
Keywords
Social Media, Microblogging, Twitter, Awareness, Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Like many disciplines that rely on human knowledge and
invention, Software Engineering is rapidly transforming. De-
velopers have to stay informed, maintain relationships, and
keep their domain knowledge up to date, relying on many
forms of communication media to manage it all.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 14 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.Email is used to deliver commit messages and to support
code reviews [15], IRC is used during co-development ac-
tivities, and software forges support community develop-
ment [13]. Developers blog about their experiences and
disseminate them among their readers [12]. Stack Over-
ow helps developers access a crowd of experts willing to
help them with their challenges [9]. They use developer-
specic social media to connect and collaborate with one an-
other [17]. Despite|or because of|the availability of these
tools, it can be a challenge keeping up with and making sense
of new information, tools, and practices; the importance of
social media and related tools in supporting software devel-
opers is accepted. However, other communication tools are
not yet well understood in a software engineering context.
One of these tools is Twitter, the popular microblogging
service. More than 500 million registered users1post over
500 million tweets a day2. Many software developers use it
to communicate about software engineering topics [2, 18],
but we do not know why some developers adopt it and fer-
vently use it, while others do not and question its value.
While most developers will have a hunch regarding the ben-
ets and drawbacks of microblogging, research has yet to
provide empirical evidence for such hunches. Uncovering
how developers have appropriated Twitter for their work
could help software engineering research better understand
developers' needs and challenges regarding communication,
learning, and collaboration. Understanding the reasons for
non-use could shape the design of better tools that would
help software engineers make sense in this fast-moving world.
We report on a qualitative study focused on discovering
the perceived benets that Twitter brings to adopters, as
well as understanding why others reject it. We conducted
an exploratory survey with 271 GitHub users, 27 interviews,
and a validation survey with 1,207 GitHub users. We nd
that developers use Twitter to lter and curate the vast
amount of information available to them as part of their
programming activities. The benets we nd it brings can
be categorized across three themes: awareness of people,
activities, news, trends, and practices; learning of new tech-
nologies, practices, cultures, tools, and concerns; as well
as building relationships . Developers who feel that Twit-
ter benets them rely on a variety of strategies for posting
and reading Twitter content.
1http://semiocast.com/publications/2012_07_30_
Twitter_reaches_half_a_billion_accounts_140m_in_
the_US
2https://blog.twitter.com/2013/
new-tweets-per-second-record-and-howPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568305
211
Furthermore, we discover several reasons why developers
may choose not to use Twitter. Notably, some of the rea-
sons for non-adoption are what adopters praise about the
service: for example, some feel constrained by Twitter's 140-
character limit, though others welcome the resulting suc-
cinctness of tweets. Non-adopters also worry about Twit-
ter's information overload, while adopters talk about how it
helps them manage information.
This paper is structured as follows. We review related
work in Section 2 and introduce our study design in Section
3. Section 4 presents our ndings, which are then discussed
in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.
2. RELATED WORK
Microblogging is the practice of posting short thoughts,
ideas, and other content to the Web [11]. Several dierent
services exist, and each may implement the concept in a
slightly dierent way. Twitter, currently the most popular
microblogging service, restricts its users to posting up to
140 characters at a time, and integrates features of social
network sites: users can follow each other's posts ( tweets )
and read the tweets by those they follow in a combined,
time-ordered list|often called timeline or newsfeed.
In an early study on Twitter, Java et al. [7] analyze the
connections between users and the content of the messages
they post. Their research identies several core activities
of Twitter users, such as conversations, reporting news, and
sharing information through URLs. The most common ac-
tivity was what Java et al. call daily chatter : people talking
about their current actions and their plans for the day.
Honeycutt and Herring [6] investigate conversations in an
early version of Twitter, which did not yet support mention-
ing other users or conversational threads. They show how
users appropriated Twitter through conventions and note
that some started to use Twitter for collaboration as well.
Boyd et al. [3] examine the phenomenon of retweeting ,
a convention that emerged among early Twitter users. A
user who wants to pass on someone else's tweet to their own
followers would add a prex such as \RT: " to the tweet
and post it from their own account. Boyd et al. classify
retweeting as a conversational practice.
Marwick and Boyd [10] examine how Twitter users per-
ceive their followers and how they adapt their content to this
imagined audience. Because dierent kinds of people might
be following a user, people try to make their tweets relevant
and non-confrontational.
In their analysis of the entire Twitter database, Kwak et
al. [8] investigate social network topologies, inuential users,
and the spreading behavior of content through retweets over
time. Among their ndings, they report that Twitter sup-
ports fast dissemination of information.
Yammer is a microblogging service much like Twitter, but
designed for corporate use. Zhang et al. [20] investigate how
employees of a large enterprise use Yammer and how its
usage diers from Twitter. They nd that employees use
Yammer more for news about groups and less for posting
content about themselves. Conversations on Yammer seem
to be longer than on Twitter. Study participants reported
that Yammer helps them stay aware of what colleagues are
working on, and that it helps them make new connections.
In their exploratory study, Zhao and Rosson [21] inter-
viewed Twitter users working in corporate settings. They
nd that even in the corporate world, Twitter helps peoplekeep in touch with both friends and colleagues. It can in-
crease awareness regarding personal and work-related events,
and through this, can support the formation of common
ground and rapport between employees.
2.1 Twitter and Software Engineering
Bougie et al.[2] conducted quantitative and qualitative
analyses of 11,679 tweets by developers. They nd that soft-
ware engineers' tweets involve conversation and information
sharing more often than comparable studies examining more
general populations. In their qualitative analysis of a sample
of 600 tweets, they identify four developer-specic categories
of content.
Tian et al. [18] chose a random sample of tweets contain-
ing a set of potentially development-related hashtags, such
as #scrum, #java, and #testing. The authors then deter-
mined content categories for a subset, the tweets' popularity,
and analyzed which categories are retweeted the most. Re-
latedly, Prasetyo et al. [14] automatically classied tweets
according to their relevance to software engineering.
Wang et al. [19] analyzed 568 tweets from 24 Twitter ac-
counts associated with the open source content management
system Drupal. The authors nd that the Drupal project
uses Twitter to communicate issues, documentation, and
blog posts to its community. Twitter also serves as a channel
to solicit contributions from users.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no in-depth quali-
tative studies on why and how software developers use Twit-
ter. Also, there is no literature on why software developers
might notwant to use Twitter for their work. To ll this
gap, we set to understand whyandhow software developers
may or may not use Twitter. The following section describes
our study design in detail.
3. STUDY DESIGN
We conducted a Grounded Theory-based [4] study, which
consisted of three phases of data collection (exploratory sur-
vey, interviews, validation survey), and iterative phases of
analysis.
Our goal was to involve developers who do and do not
use Twitter. In previous work [13], we were able to recruit
such participants from GitHub3. GitHub is also a popular
code hosting site with a large user base that could provide
a relatively diverse pool of potential participants. For these
reasons, we used GitHub in our recruiting eorts.
First, we sent an online survey with open questions to
1,160 GitHub users4. In this exploratory survey, we asked
about their reasons for reading and posting on Twitter, ben-
ets and challenges of Twitter use, as well as the process for
discovering and following users. We included a section tar-
geting non-adopters, asking them about their reasons for not
using the service. The questions in the exploratory survey
were open-ended, and we received 271 responses.
In the second phase, we interviewed some of the survey
respondents who had volunteered for interviews. Prior to
this interview phase, we analyzed the exploratory survey
responses and used them as a guide for the semi-structured
interviews.
During our analysis of the exploratory survey and inter-
3https://github.com
4Selected from GitHub's public event stream in May 2013,
choosing users with public email addresses.212view data, we wrote memos about recurring themes and
emerging concepts, constantly comparing our ndings on
dierent levels of abstraction. Through this exploratory
process, we found that: Twitter can provide value to some
software developers, and some developers are constantly fac-
ing various challenges with adopting or using Twitter. To
counter this, they use diverse coping strategies . Some soft-
ware developers do not want to or cannot use Twitter at all.
This analysis led to our ve research questions, detailed in
the next section.
We then employed axial coding, iterating through our ex-
ploratory survey responses and interview transcripts, to an-
swer our research questions. The nal set of themes that
emerged informed the third phase of our research: a vali-
dation survey sent to 10,000 GitHub users, receiving over
1,200 responses.
The questionnaires and the script for the semi-structured
interviews are available in a technical report [16]. In our
coding and memoing activities, we used the work by Corbin
and Strauss [4] as a methodological guideline. We further
used the work by Hoda et al. [5] for methodological advice
that is more specic to software engineering research based
on Grounded Theory.
3.1 Research Questions
The rst three research questions are focused on the value
Twitter can provide to software developers. Our rst re-
search question approaches the awareness aspect:
RQ 1: How does Twitter increase software developer
awareness of people, trends, and practices?
Another theme that showed us how Twitter can provide
value was that it may help developers extend their knowl-
edge about new technologies, practices, tools, and software
engineering concerns (such as security or usability). This
leads us to our second research question:
RQ 2: How does Twitter help software developers
extend their software knowledge ?
The third main theme related to Twitter's value to soft-
ware developers was that of forming and maintaining rela-
tionships with others , as well as building trust and rapport
with them:
RQ 3: How does Twitter nurture relationships be-
tween software developers?
While analyzing the responses to our exploratory survey,
it became clear that Twitter also poses challenges to soft-
ware developers:
RQ 4: What are the challenges faced by software
developers using Twitter, and how do they cope with
them?
Finally, several survey answers simply stated that the re-
spondent was not using Twitter. We believed it was impor-
tant to understand the perspective of non-adopters as well:
RQ 5: What are reasons for non-adoption of Twit-
terby software developers?
3.2 Participants
This research targeted users of GitHub, a popular code
sharing site. This meant we would not restrict ourselves
to Twitter users in general, but that we would be able to
access software developers who might also be using Twit-
ter. To characterize the participants of our exploratory sur-
vey and interviews, we downloaded their account details forTwitter and GitHub, where available. The exploratory sur-
vey had 271 survey respondents (response rate: 23%); from
these, we received the details for 188 Twitter accounts and
254 GitHub accounts. 94 participants volunteered for an in-
terview, however, we achieved saturation of the themes we
identied after 27 interviews. Interviews were conducted via
Skype, recorded, and transcribed. Each interview lasted on
average 38 minutes (median: 36 minutes). For these 27 in-
terviewees, we found the data for 26 Twitter accounts and 27
GitHub accounts. The interviewees were from 9 geographic
regions: North America, Middle America, South America;
Europe; Africa; West Asia, Central Asia, East Asia; and
Australia / New Zealand.
3.2.1 Exploratory Survey Respondents
270 of the 271 survey respondents said they develop soft-
ware. Of these, 221 were professional developers (82%). 172
developers said they worked on private projects, and 155 said
they worked on one or more open source projects. 160 re-
spondents said they use Twitter at least once a week (59%).
37% were from North America, and 25% were from Europe.
For 24%, we were unable to nd their location.
Account ages ranged from 4 months to 6 years and 11
months. The number of tweets posted per account ranged
from 0 to 41,079. The number of followers ranged from 0 to
11,469, with a median of 144 (average: 490). The number
of accounts people followed ranged from 0 to 2,600. On
GitHub, users can indicate whether they are available for
hire: 80 respondents said they were for hire and 171 said
they were not. Account ages ranged from 4 months to 5
years and 8 months.
3.2.2 Interviewees
All of the 27 interviewees said they develop software in
some way. Of these, 25 were professional developers (93%).
20 developers worked on private projects, and 20 worked on
one or more open source projects. 22 respondents said they
use Twitter at least once a week (81%). 44% were from
North America, and 30% were from Europe. For 4%, we
were unable to nd their location.
26 interviewees had Twitter accounts. Account ages ranged
from 1 year and 7 months to 6 years and 2 months. The num-
ber of tweets posted per account ranged from 4 to 29,644.
The number of followers ranged from 11 to 7,921. The num-
ber of accounts people followed ranged from 23 to 1,999. On
GitHub, 9 interviewees said they were for hire; 18 said they
were not. Account ages ranged from 5 months to 5 years
and 7 months.
3.2.3 Validation Survey Respondents
1,207 GitHub users answered our validation survey. 987
of them were professional software developers, 634 said they
were contributors to open source projects, and 812 of them
were using Twitter at least once a week. 677 respondents in-
dicated that they used Twitter for their development-related
work. As this is the population that most of our research
questions aim at, the results we report from the validation
survey are ltered for these 677 software developers who use
Twitter in their work.
3.2.4 Summary
The majority of our population consisted of professional
software developers|82% in the exploratory survey, 93%213in the interviews, and 82% in the validation survey. While
this is a good indicator for research that will be relevant to
practitioners, our participants were still special. All of them
used GitHub and many worked on private and / or open
source projects. Over half of them used Twitter at least
once a week. These facts indicate that our population was
comprised of people that were relatively sympathetic to so-
cial media and open source software development. This may
be a stark contrast with developers in large enterprises who
might not be allowed to participate in open source. Yet, in
our view, the most relevant quality of our participants was
that they were not only novice or hobby programmers, but
instead professional developers working in software compa-
nies. Having targeted only users of GitHub, this was a sur-
prising result. Most participants were from North America
or Europe.
Yet, as the data collected from our participants' GitHub
and Twitter accounts show, our population was relatively
diverse internally. On GitHub, users' numbers of follow-
ers ranged widely from 0 to 1,321. On Twitter, that value
ranged from 0 to 11,469. Similarly, our participants were
not just veterans or newcomers to the services: account ages
ranged from 5 years and 8 months to 4 months for GitHub,
and from 6 years and 11 months to 4 months for Twitter.
This indicates that at least internally, our results may be
considered diverse.
4. FINDINGS
This section reveals the main themes we found in our
study. To illustrate the dierent aspects of each theme, we
provide a selection of quotes from the exploratory survey
(indicated by E#) and interviews (P#). Where applicable,
we provide quantitative results from the validation survey.
Fig. 1 shows the results for the Likert-type scale ques-
tions from our validation survey as net stacked distributions:
neutral answers are not reported, percentages are reported
for disagreement and agreement. We found relatively high
agreement with our ndings, even though some questions|
such as those related to job opportunities or business net-
working|were seen as less agreeable. This could partly be
explained by the idea that such activities require certain
contexts and skills that might be less prevalent. However,
even the lowest gure|28%|represents 186 professional
software developers who agree that Twitter helps them ac-
cess job opportunities.
4.1 RQ 1: How does Twitter increase devel-
oper awareness of people, trends, and prac-
tices?
The themes that emerged from the data can be catego-
rized into activities that Twitter users reported and the
impact the activities have on their awareness of people,
trends, and practices.
Activity: Following Developers and Projects. \I think
the main advantage is to be in contact with people who are
developing things that I use. [. . . ] I can communicate with
them through Twitter." [P11]
Exploratory survey respondents and 13 interviewees said
they follow specic developers and projects relevant to their
work. This provides a channel to other developers that
create the code they use. Direct conversations with these
developers are possible, providing information that would
have been more cumbersome to obtain otherwise. For some,
On Twitter, I follow leaders in my technological niche, which helps
me stay current about the latest technologies and practices.
9%
 77%
Twitter helps me promote projects and technologies I work with.
17%
 62%
Twitter helps me keep up to date about technologies and tools I use
for software development.
11%
 73%
Twitter helps me stay aware of new trends and practices in software
development.
13%
 69%
Twitter helps me extend my knowledge by exposing me to technolo-
gies and practices I should learn in software development.
14%
 62%
Twitter has helped me become a better programmer.
38%
 32%
Twitter helps me learn about things I wasn’t actively looking for.
11%
 70%
Twitter helps me manage my own image as a developer.
18%
 56%
Twitter helps me build community around projects I contribute to.
28%
 44%
Twitter helps me do business networking.
34%
 33%
Twitter helps me discover interesting software developers.
14%
 69%
Twitter helps me build trust or rapport with other developers.
20%
 52%
Twitter helps me receive validation from others for my work.
32%
 37%
Twitter helps me give and get feedback about projects I work with.
27%
 46%
Twitter helps me access job opportunities.
42%
 28%
I carefully decide whom I follow in order to avoid information overload
on my Twitter feed.
11%
 72%
On Twitter, I usually follow people on a trial basis and unfollow them
if they post irrelevant or too much content.
17%
 65%
disagree
 agree
strongly disagree
 strongly agree
Figure 1: Results from our validation survey.Figure 1: Results from our validation survey.
Twitter is a richer alternative to RSS. Being able to directly
contact developers and projects was important to them.
Activity: Following Technical News Curators. \So I
follow people who do read a lot on Digg and I'll follow their
posts and they usually have some interesting things to say on
the technology, so I get most updates, technology-wise, from
Twitter actually." [P15]
Many Twitter users selectively tweet URLs from news
sites, blogs, and other tweets. Following such accounts pro-
vides important updates without having to sift through lots
of content themselves. Developers followed people whose
judgement they trusted. Over time, they knew who had214posted interesting content previously, and used that knowl-
edge to decide which content would be worth looking at.
Five interviewees told us that they follow such accounts.
Activity: Following Thought Leaders. \But the ma-
jority of the people I follow are just [. . . ] leaders in whatever
it is they do, and it's just that they usually have a lot of in-
sight [. . . ]" [P27]
Developers follow thought leaders in their respective niches
to keep on top of what a community is talking about. These
leaders are said to \[shape] the community" [P24] by pushing
relevant content to their followers. Participants were not
only interested in updates to specic projects, but also in
which technologies thought leaders were interested in. This
phenomenon may result in a community that is conned
to the perspectives of a few individuals who dene what is
interesting. Seven interviewees reported to follow thought
leaders. From the validation survey, we see that the major-
ity of survey respondents follow leaders in their niche to stay
current about the latest technologies and practices.
Activity: Promoting Project Activities. \I try to pro-
mote [my project] [. . . ] hoping that someone will at some
point be interested enough to follow through and get some
more information from the links that I post. [. . . ] [More]
end users will write articles, blog posts, making the project
more well known, which in turn strengthens its brand, which
makes it more interesting for customers." [P19]
Toprovide awareness, developers actively post content.
Some use Twitter to promote their own projects, which helps
them get feedback and attract contributors. It might also
help with their careers, as popular projects can be an im-
portant part of a developer's prole. However, their promo-
tion is not restricted to code|they also promote blog posts.
Similarly, developers use Twitter to promote local events,
hoping to reach a more diverse audience. Promoting and
advocating projects and practices can also serve a strate-
gic role: if technologies become more popular, there will be
more demand for the expertise of their creators and early
users. Six of our interviewees told us about these strategies.
From the validation survey, 62% of the respondents (416)
indicated that Twitter helps in the promotion of projects
and technologies they work with.
Impact: Just in time Awareness. \It was evolving way
faster than I was able to keep up with it. And the only way
to keep up was to follow some Node.js people on Twitter. It
was remarkable for that." [P8]
Some developers work in an industry that is evolving quickly
and they have to adapt frequently. They use Twitter in an
eort to stay current with technologies, projects, and tools.
The service helps them to access new tools and practices as
they became available. This allows them to become familiar
with technologies that might become popular|at their own
pace and with less time pressure. A consequence is that de-
velopers may become more productive through better tools
and practices and, in turn, become more competitive. This
impact was reported by 16 interviewees. In the validation
survey, about 70% of the respondents agreed that Twitter
helps them keep up to date with changes to the technologies
they are already using, and to become aware of new trends
and practices in software development.
Impact: Access to Diverse Opinions. \I think the
thing about Twitter is, there's no sort of restrictions about
what you're talking about, you know? With GitHub, all
you're really ever talking about is that specic bit of codethat is relevant. And the community that is interested in
that little bit [. . . ] if you could contrast them I guess it's the
diversity of Twitter." [P18]
Exposure to diverse information sources benets develop-
ers in dierent ways. Six interviewees said they get informa-
tion about niches that are interesting and relevant to them,
but which would not come up in their own news resources.
As such, they are exposed to new perspectives. Develop-
ers also gain access to a broader set of topics not limited
to code-related resources in their own niches. By being ex-
posed to diverse viewpoints, developers think more broadly
about software development.
Impact: Dissemination of Knowledge. \Sometimes
I just dig into topics because I have a problem that needs
solving. Then I think it is rather rude not to describe the
[solution], because [other] people have to go the same way
and discover the same things. So I think it's sort of thinking
a bit about humanity." [P1]
Developers feel a need to share their discovered solutions
with others. However, disseminating knowledge isn't re-
stricted to posting on Twitter. They also take advantage
of other tools, such as Skype group chats or IRC channels,
to pass on the resources they nd on Twitter. Some devel-
opers act as information brokers, e.g., P20 describes himself
as an \in-between guy" using these dierent channels. Three
interviewees told us about this impact.
Impact: Increased Adoption. \The [Node.js] people did
a lot of evangelism because they wanted to get their product
adopted and they were very eective at that. They did that
quite well but that also meant that the ecosystem was built to
be aware of social media and aware of how to contact more
people more eectively." [P22]
Some developers use social media in general and Twitter
in particular to push technologies and practices they have
an interest in. In other instances, developers suspect that
whole communities were set up for promotion through social
media by key people in the respective technologies. Two
interviewees talked to us about this phenomenon.
4.1.1 Summary
On Twitter, developers follow a) other developers ,b) pro-
jects,c) news curators , and d) thought leaders to stay aware
of current technologies and practices. This lets them access
diverse opinions. Some use Twitter to promote their own ac-
tivities, content, and projects|this helps them disseminate
knowledge and increase adoption of technologies.
4.2 RQ 2: How does Twitter help developers
extend their software knowledge?
Our second research question asks how Twitter supports
developers' learning. We found that developers value learn-
ing about new technologies, and that Twitter plays a role in
building concrete and tacit knowledge of technologies, tools,
and practices.
Activity: Asking and Answering Questions. \If you
broadcast a question, you're likely to get interesting answers
or opinions that you may not have thought of." [P9]
Participants said that they ask questions on Twitter, and
some reported that this helped them understand and solve
their problems better|with only one interviewee being re-
ally successful at it. Most interviewees mentioned that they
do not have enough followers to actually receive any answers.
For those with a smaller audience, the public questions and215answers of others were interesting as this exposed them to
diverse opinions. While several developers saw answering
questions as an opportunity for everyone involved to learn
something new, others simply wanted to be nice when they
answered questions from others.
Activity: Following Experts. \[. . . ] because he's a re-
spected person in the industry, as far as Twitter goes, when
he posts something like \you shouldn't do this" or \you should
do this" or \this is interesting", I value that more because I
don't need to gure out what's the value of someone's tweet,
because I can assume that it's better or it's a high value
tweet." [P15]
Following experts helps developers learn and tap into ex-
periences they might otherwise not have access to. Develop-
ers use a person's status to judge the value of their tweets.
Following experienced developers further provided an oppor-
tunity to learn about the behaviors of successful people, and
thus, about the culture in certain projects and communities.
Five interviewees told us about this.
Activity: Participating in Conversations. \It's much
easier to learn about new things when you're part of the con-
versation about it. [. . . ] It's easier because you listen to how
it's made, you listen to why they did some things the way
they did." [P13]
Twitter allows developers be part of conversations be-
tween the people who work on things developers use. Being
part of these conversations makes learning easier as it lets
them gradually digest new information and better under-
stand the rationale behind decisions. Two interviewees also
mentioned gaining insights into what happens internally by
following high-prole developers in projects and companies.
Impact: Learning As Investment. \I think the learn-
ing aspect is [. . . ] the greatest value I get from it." [P2]
Eight interviewees stressed that Twitter provides access to
diverse resources, and that they value this diversity. They
said that learning diverse things helps them become broader
developers and gives them a competitive advantage. In the
validation survey, we asked participants whether Twitter ex-
poses them to technologies and practices they should learn
in software development: 62% (421) of respondents agreed.
When asked whether Twitter had helped them become a
better programmer, 219 developers (32%) agreed, while 38%
disagreed.
Impact: Learning Serendipitously. \I think on Twitter
there is the possibility for me to learn things I'm not looking
for." [P11]
Twitter allows developers to learn things in an undirected,
serendipitous manner. A software architect (P19) told us
that this learning mode is valuable when he needs to advise
developers on his team: when a colleague approaches him
with a problem, he sometimes does not need to search for an
answer, as he had heard about a suitable approach on Twit-
ter without having looked for it. Social signals such as status
and approval from others helps surface what is valuable, sav-
ing developers time. We talked to six interviewees who told
us about this eect. In the validation survey (cf. Fig. 1), the
majority agreed that Twitter helps them learn things they
were not actively looking for.
4.2.1 Summary
Developers use Twitter to ask and answer questions. They
follow experts, which lets them participate in conversations
that provide them with expertise that would usually be hardto access. They see constant learning as an investment into
their careers and like the serendipitous learning that Twitter
facilitates.
4.3 RQ 3: How does Twitter nurture relation-
ships between developers?
Research question 3 explores how Twitter helps develop-
ers form and maintain relationships. We nd that Twitter
can foster the development of larger communities, but also
support relationships between distant colleagues by helping
create trust and rapport. It can also create collaborations
between random strangers.
Activity: Managing One's Image. \So I guess if I start
talking to someone on Twitter, it lets them know who you
are as well and lets you build a bit of a personality about you
rather than just being like another Twitter handle." [P18]
Four interviewees thought that connecting with others
on Twitter may be inuenced by the image one projects.
They deliberately think about how to create a personality
on Twitter so that people can more easily assess what kind
of person they are communicating with. Two interviewees
strategically searched Twitter for mentions of themselves or
their content, seeing these as opportunities to follow-up with
interested others. Apart from being enjoyable, developers
also said that this would help them build their online image,
possibly improving their career opportunities in the future.
In the validation survey, over half of the respondents agreed
that Twitter helps them manage their image as a developer.
Activity: Building Community. \[. . . ] we need a lot
of people to use it and start sending back patches, feedback,
reporting bugs, testing the whole thing and that's what open
source is all about, it's humanity. [. . . ] I see my role as
being a motivator for this whole thing. [. . . ] People need to
talk in order to get the great ideas." [P1]
Twitter helps build communities around open source projects
and interest groups. Key individuals from these projects use
Twitter to engage existing and new community members.
Some developers also used Twitter for business networking.
Twitter can be an entry point for more isolated developers
and they value it for providing them with a window into the
world.
Hashtags were used for conferences or specic topics of
interest to create connections within a community. One in-
terviewee told us about the #pairwithme hashtag on Twit-
ter: developers use it to nd others who are interested in
pair programming remotely. The goal is for developers to
pair regularly with strangers to learn something new. Three
interviewees told us about Twitter's role in building com-
munities. In the validation survey, 44% agreed that Twitter
helped them in building communities. Only one third of the
respondents (222) found it helpful for business networking.
Impact: Discovery of Interesting Developers. \I iden-
tify with that community and if I nd a Rubyist who is also
like [. . . ] a hacker / maker type of person [. . . ] then that'll
be like a much stronger case that I should follow them as
well." [P5]
Developers use Twitter to nd interesting strangers. They
decide whom to follow based on whether they work in a sim-
ilar niche or seem to have similar technology-related values.
For discovery, interviewees and the initial survey respon-
dents both use Twitter and Google+, preferring Twitter for
nding strangers and Google+ for keeping up with people
they already know. Three interviewees discussed these is-216sues with us. In our validation survey, 69% of professional
developers agreed that Twitter helps them discover interest-
ing software developers.
Impact: Achieving Trust and Rapport. \You wouldn't
have to break the ice and could just be sort of friendly and
could get down to business. Rather than like making small
talk, trying to get to know each other, that kind of thing."
[P8]
Work relationships involve building trust and rapport.
Twitter helps developers connect with remote colleagues, ei-
ther working on the same project or with colleagues \in the
broader open source sense." [P9] Some interviewees noted
that contact through Twitter helped break the ice in meet-
ings. Twitter wasn't the only communications medium they
had used. However, they attributed the change in the rela-
tionships at least partially to the service. Three of our inter-
viewees claimed that the increase in trust improved their col-
laboration: \I think it made collaboration easier because you
could maintain a friendship on Twitter." [P8] In the valida-
tion survey, over half of the respondents|346 developers|
agreed that it was helpful in building trust and rapport.
Impact: Work Validation. \So it meant that people
were actually looking for the information I was providing.
[. . . ] I always got these favorites and these retweets, and
then I got followers on GitHub on the project." [P15]
Some developers see Twitter as a backchannel that pro-
vides them with validation for what they produce. The three
interviewees who mentioned this were excited about positive
feedback received through favorited tweets or retweets. De-
velopers were especially enthusiastic about validation from
well-known developers and projects. They said that it showed
them that what they produced was valuable enough to reach
\important people". In our validation survey, 37% of devel-
opers agreed that Twitter provides validation of their work.
Impact: Feedback on Projects. \It's a very kind of
public \hey, good job." And I think that . . . at least from
my position, I prefer to have someone say hey, I really like
your thing in a public space, because it could encourage other
people to check it out." [P4]
Six interviewees said that Twitter was a good channel to
give public feedback on projects. They regarded public com-
pliments as more valuable than private ones. Even though
blog posts often include a commenting facility, some par-
ticipants were more comfortable with discussing a post on
Twitter. P24 commented that he was more condent com-
menting on Twitter than responding to a blog post, as the
latter may seem like they were \attacking somebody" . In
the validation survey, 45% of the respondents agreed that
Twitter helps get feedback on projects.
Impact: Formation of Communities of Practice.
\Quite literally, every single person I follow is a software de-
veloper and all of my followers are software developers too,
so that's pretty neat. I feel more of a community than I feel
on Facebook." [P6]
Twitter helps developers nd out where a community is
moving and what people are excited about: \Without Twit-
ter, I wouldn't nd out about all this new stu, you know.
That's how I communicate with everybody." [P18] Six in-
terviewees discussed this with us. Some developers found it
challenging to stay connected to a niche community when
their day-to-day work was in another niche. They then fol-
lowed a core group on Twitter, which then relayed what was
going on in the community.Impact: Job Opportunities. \Indirectly, I ended up in
this job through Twitter. By getting to know some of the
other developers in Vancouver and knowing who is hiring
and things like that." [P9]
Three interviewees reported that Twitter let them access
new work opportunities. We saw three dierent ways in
which Twitter was used for this purpose|some of them
reported by multiple interviewees. Firstly, initial contact
was made through short conversations on Twitter, but then
switched to a more private channel. In some cases, such
discussions lead to new collaborations or jobs. The second
kind occurred when retweets carried a message across the
boundaries of a social network. Finally, the third kind of
opportunity were based on business networking. Developers
focused, for example, on a certain technical niche or city.
This allowed them to make connections that later led to
employment. In the validation survey, 28% of respondents
agreed that Twitter is helpful in nding job opportunities.
4.3.1 Summary
Developers on Twitter manage their public images. This
helps them discover interesting developers to connect with,
and for existing relationships, to build trust and rapport.
The service provides some rudimentary validation of one's
work, but we also heard of more elaborate feedback being
exchanged. These activities could also have an impact on job
opportunities. Developers also use Twitter to build commu-
nities around the things that interest them.
4.4 RQ 4: What are challenges faced by soft-
ware developers using Twitter, and how
do they cope with them?
In research question 4, we investigated the challenges of
using Twitter as a developer, and the strategies used to cope
with them. We found two major challenges: building and
maintaining a relevant network, and consuming content ef-
ciently. We now discuss each challenge followed by the
coping strategies our participants used to address them.
Challenge: Maintaining a Relevant Network.
\When you follow 1000 accounts, many things you see are
just not for you." [P16]
Getting value out of Twitter is challenging: users need to
curate their networks. The service might otherwise become
irrelevant to them, especially when their networks get too
big. Issues also occur when a developer moves from one
niche to another: they might need to start over to build a
more relevant network.
Strategy: Following Relevant Developers. Twelve in-
terviewees who were active Twitter users reported that they
nd key developers from the niche they are interested in
and follow them on Twitter. They then try to nd similarly
interesting people mentioned by these key developers. P5
even discussed looking at source code before deciding to fol-
low someone. Others used real-life recommendations from
colleagues and others to nd developers to follow. Finally,
some used location to determine relevance. Developers from
areas with lower Twitter adoption struggled to nd local
peers. Twitter's prole features were also used to assess
others: the \bio"|a short description in user proles|was
used to form rst impressions. The number of followers of
a had as well as the ratio of users someone follows vs. the
number of users following them also inuenced others: the217lower the ratio, the more important a user seemed to be.
Finally, developers assessed a user's tweet volume to decide
whether they'd be able to keep up.
Strategy: Unfollowing Developers on Twitter. Net-
work curation is continuously necessary, as a developer's
interests and those of the people they follow may change.
Thus, the decision to follow someone on Twitter is not -
nal: following someone was often seen as a trial of whether
their content was relevant and whether the volume was man-
ageable. Some interviewees had a routine for purging their
following list: they go through their list once in a while and
remove accounts no longer worth following. We talked to 11
interviewees who told us about this strategy.
Challenge: Consuming Content.
Developers use several strategies to decide whom to follow
and to manage their networks. However, content consump-
tion was also a challenge, as the volume of tweets could be-
come overwhelming. Developers adopted four main strate-
gies for consumption:
Strategy: Filtering. \I'm using TweetDeck with some
lters. I think Twitter could provide that. I lter every post
with [keyword], for example." [P23]
Strategy: Skimming by Prole Pictures. \I just notice
when I skim across their display picture, I go \oh, I wonder
what they're saying" [. . . ] They catch more eyes more than
others." [P18]
Strategy: Skimming Often, Reading Later. \If there's
a link in there that I feel I need to read, I don't read it at
the time, I save it to Pocket. And then I'll read that later."
[P27]
Strategy: Reading Routine. \If I checked it obsessively,
I'd be much less productive. [. . . ] I tend to do all that kind
of stu in batches, like at the end of the day." [P10]
4.4.1 Summary
Developers on Twitter struggle with two main challenges.
Firstly, they have to constantly maintain their networks to
keep it relevant. They use technical niche, status, and lo-
cation to discover potentially interesting users and then use
dierent signals to assess them. Unfollowing others regu-
larly is part of network maintenance. Secondly, consuming
lots of content poses a challenge. While the character limit
helps, developers also use other strategies|ltering, skim-
ming, saving links to read them later|to manage their con-
sumption.
4.5 RQ 5: What are reasons for non-adoption
of Twitter by software developers?
Research question 5 investigated why developers do not
adopt Twitter for their work. We nd they avoid using
Twitter in face of the potential waste of their time and ef-
fort. They value conversations with other developers and
use other tools to fulll this need. We did a quantitative
analysis of non-adoption patterns in the exploratory survey,
as their replies were unambiguous and thus easy to code con-
sistently. We report these numbers as well as quotes from
the interviews (indicated by P#) and the exploratory survey
(E#).
Too Much Noise. Some developers (35 exploratory sur-
vey respondents, 5 interviewees) felt drowning in the noise
caused by too much information on Twitter. They use other
tools to stay updated and build networks. P14 builds his net-work on Google+, with a preference for the circles feature.
Likewise, P4 commented: \On G+ you have that control,
you can say I wanna see more from this person, I wanna see
less from this person."
140-Character Constraint. Whereas many adopters
appreciated the concise tweets, nine respondents from our
exploratory survey mentioned that they did not like this
limitation. This limitation also has many users shorten
Web links|three respondents complained about this prac-
tice: \Twitter messages are too short to contain anything
useful with context." [E29]
Poor Support for Conversations. Twitter was not de-
signed for long conversations. As interviewees told us, mul-
tiple conversation threads quickly become unmanageable.
Additionally, conversations are quite ephemeral, as tweets
may only be accessible for a few days. Some study partic-
ipants reported that they preferred to move conversations
from Twitter to a more suitable medium such as email or
IRC. Three interviewees and six exploratory survey respon-
dents mentioned having had problems with Twitter's lack
of support for conversations . Some mentioned a prefer-
ence for GitHub and Google+, which provide better support
for conversations.
Unsure of Benets. Finally, 22 exploratory survey re-
spondents said they did not use Twitter because they did
not have a reason or did not understand why they should
use it: \I don't understand it and I don't see any purpose for
it." [E43]
4.5.1 Summary
We found several reasons for non-adoption of Twitter by
developers. Too much noise on the service makes it hard to
manage the volume of tweets. Others did not like the 140-
character constraint as it could lead to misunderstandings
more easily. Relatedly, Twitter's poor support for conver-
sations is another reason why some developers said they do
not use Twitter. Finally, some were unsure of the benets
the service could provide them.
5. DISCUSSION
The insights provided by the non-adopters and infrequent
users are valuable for understanding the limitations of Twit-
ter in software engineering. A large number of participants
did not fully understand how Twitter could play a role in
their professional activities. This is not surprising: as we
learned from the adopters, using Twitter successfully re-
quires several strategies. Likewise, many respondents were
concerned that Twitter would be a distraction or would
waste their time. These are noteworthy concerns as some
that had used Twitter previously stopped for these reasons.
Again, adopters used strategies to curate content and reduce
distractions.
Many participants also provided insights on how other
social media tools provide the benets that Twitter brings.
In particular, several participants appreciated that Google+
provides more context and better supports conversations.
Twitter non-adopters use news aggregators such as Hacker
News to curate technology updates. However, Twitter adopt-
ers said that Twitter lets them add yet another layer of con-
tent curation from such sites.
More subtle reasons for both adoption and non-adoption
of Twitter were related to the peculiarities of the tools. Each
social media service supports its own set of such charac-218teristic features: 140 characters per post for Twitter, cir-
cles on Google+, issues on GitHub. Their special roles and
the conicting opinions among our study participants be-
came more apparent as we investigated the interplay be-
tween these tools.
5.1 Contributions
Previous work investigated the role of Twitter in conver-
sations [7, 6, 3] and information dissemination [7]. Others
explored the role of microblogging in increasing awareness
and connectedness among co-workers in organizational set-
tings [20]. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the
rst in-depth investigation with a diverse population of de-
velopers. By including the perspectives of non-adopters, we
contrast the viewpoints from developers who have adopted
Twitter with the ones who have not. We also highlight the
interplay between Twitter and other social media.
Software developers work in a rapidly-evolving eld where
staying current is a requirement and a challenge. They use
social media to form and maintain relationships with co-
workers within the same organizational context, but also to
connect with and stay aware of other developers around the
globe.
5.2 Implications
This section discusses some implications our study might
have on research, software development organizations, and
individual software developers, respectively.
5.2.1 Research
Twitter is used by many to keep up to date and stay con-
nected in software engineering, but is it the best tool for
doing so? Non-adopters mentioned a number of limitations
and barriers. Microblogging is likely to play a more impor-
tant role in software engineering. More research is needed
to understand why it is used, what benets it brings, and
how tools and practices around it can be improved.
Opportunities for future work include an investigation of
how Twitter impacts the diusion of innovations in software
engineering. Social media help disseminate knowledge about
technologies and practices, but too little is known about
how this takes place among software developers. Quantita-
tive studies are needed to determine the prevalence of our
ndings in practice, and future qualitative studies should in-
vestigate alternative populations, such as corporate settings
or non-Western societies.
Software developers use a multitude of channels to com-
municate and collaborate, with both strong and weak ties.
However, our study only considered Twitter as oneof many
channels. Future research should investigate the interplay
of several dierent channels and which developers use which
tools in their work. One study participant told us about his
idea that development tools are generational and that there
are many communities that each uses their own subset of the
available tools and channels. Ideally, we would like to see
a map of the kinds of developers there are today, their val-
ues, the practices they use, and the tools they use to create
software, collaborate with each other, and communicate.
We provided some details about the population we sur-
veyed in our study, but plan to conduct a more in-depth
analysis of our participants' characteristics, demographics,
and work contexts. Relatedly, we are planning to analyze
the validation survey answers in light of such demographicdata|do Web developers tend to agree to dierent state-
ments than low-level systems programmers? Do users of
statically typed languages use social media and microblog-
ging in dierent ways than those of dynamically typed lan-
guages?
In our study, it became clear that Twitter only provides
value with the right network. At the same time, it is cur-
rently the most popular microblogging platform. Thus, thought
leaders and key people from crucial projects can be found
on Twitter instead of alternative platforms. This also means
that Twitter|the company|has control over an important
aspect of software development. Future work should look
into the consequences of this dependency, the relevance of
alternative microblogging platforms, and other crucial ser-
vices with similar monopolies|e.g., Stack Overow for pro-
gramming questions, GitHub for code hosting, or Google for
Web search. Can and should research strive to provide al-
ternative platforms for these services so developers are less
dependent on commercial entities?
5.2.2 Practice
Social media in general and Twitter in particular are not
only interesting for research, but|as our study has shown|
can provide developers and their organizations with strategic
advantages.
Organizations. Twitter lets developers nd out about
technologies and practices that might improve their e-
ciency and eectiveness, as well as software quality. Such
innovations are talked about while they are still being cre-
ated. Organizations could use the availability of such in-
formation to their advantage. However, not every employee
might want to use Twitter themselves. This might not be
necessary, though: the software consultancy Thoughtworks
has a small group of employees that regularly creates a tech-
nology radar and also provides a white paper that may help
others create their own technology radars5.
Employees monitoring Twitter, social media, and poten-
tially other sources to create such a technology radar would
need to be comfortable using social media, and be able to
judge the merit of new, potentially hyped technologies and
practices. Thus, people lling such a role will need to be
innovative and interested in new developments, but at the
same time, will need to be reective, knowledgable about the
past of software development, and possess a healthy skep-
ticism. In addition, explicit engagement with external de-
velopers on Twitter might help an organization shape the
direction of certain practices and technologies that may or
may not become crucial knowledge in the future.
Practitioners. From our study, individual developers
can derive a set of recommendations on how to use Twitter,
and possibly also related tools, to their advantage, improv-
ing their productivity and furthering their careers. In the
following, we summarize what we now believe to be appro-
priate strategies for using Twitter as a software developer.
Follow niche leaders: A few thought leaders in one's tech-
nological niche should be the rst people to follow. These
could be core developers of relevant projects, community or-
ganizers, or standards writers. Where appropriate, engage
these people with questions. As elsewhere on the Internet,
it is good practice to research a problem before asking a
question.
5http://nealford.com/memeagora/2013/05/28/build_
your_own_technology_radar.html219Build a network organically: Consider following some of
the users the above users follow, retweet, and talk to.
Avoid looking like a spammer: Have a prole picture that
is not the default picture. One does not have to reveal one's
identity, but it seems helpful to appear like an authentic
person. Related to this, users should watch the ratio of peo-
ple who follow them vs. those they follow, as this ratio is
usually a good indicator of spam bots and promotional ac-
counts. Ideally, one follows only a few relevant developers
that one can keep up with. Looking like a spammer de-
creases the probability that real people will follow someone,
thus hurting that account's accumulation of weak ties|a
core value of public microblogging.
Following incurs a cost: Every account followed adds more
tweets to one's timeline, which then takes more time to read.
Thus, following should be on a trial basis only, with accounts
being pruned from time to time.
Share what you learn: While we found that consuming
content on Twitter already has several benets, posting and
interacting have advantages as well. On the one hand, post-
ing interesting content will attract followers, which increases
the number of one's weak ties. On the other hand, interac-
tions are a way to strengthen these ties and to learn from
others. As we saw, Twitter can be used as a space for collab-
orative learning|the logical consequence, then, is to tweet
about the things one learns, e.g., by writing short blog posts
about problems one solves in their day-to-day work or side
projects. While some things may seem trivial to post about,
there is a high probability that someone will nd that infor-
mation useful. A low eort variation of this could be to tweet
a single new lesson one learned at the end of the day. This
would have the added benet of having to reect on what
one achieved that day|a habit shown to be motivating [1].
Use Twitter for short conversations: We saw that Twit-
ter's constraints make longer discussions unfeasible. Thus,
one should switch to more suitable channels, such as email or
chat, for more elaborate arguments. The short format also
increases the potential for misunderstandings, so one should
be careful|good manners are important on the Internet,
but much more so in such a constrained format.
For questions, use hashtags: Study participants complained
that they cannot ask questions on Twitter because they do
not have enough followers to receive any answers. As Wang
et al. [19] have shown for the Drupal framework, however,
some development communities actively monitor hashtags
on Twitter to engage new users and contributors. Using a
technology-related hashtag in questions should thus increase
the probability of receiving answers to one's questions.
Finally, we suspect that these same strategies could also
be helpful for software engineering researchers. Twitter|or
an alternative service|might help us learn from and connect
with each other, enable faster iterations on our research, and
provide us with faster access to current tools and practices
in software engineering research. It already helps a sizable
subset of us connect at conferences.
5.3 Limitations
Because of the exploratory nature of this work, we chose
Grounded Theory as our research method, and this has some
implications regarding the limitations of our study. While
we achieved saturation regarding the topics we focused on in
our research, there are other populations that might add new
insights. Findings from our study may not apply for every-one. Concepts and themes that emerged from our analysis
cannot be generalized.
We invited active, but random users of GitHub to our sur-
veys and interviews. In all cases, participants were self se-
lected: the population we collected data from was comprised
of individuals who used GitHub, had time and motivation
to answer our survey questions, and in some cases, to be
interviewed. These were often from Western countries.
Choosing GitHub as a source of participants introduced
a bias towards this population into our study. Other popu-
lations might have dierent characteristics|they might use
Twitter less or other tools more, might not be allowed to use
microblogging in their jobs, or have vastly dierent demo-
graphics. It is currently unknown what kinds of developers
use GitHub exactly, but it seems likely that they are not re-
luctant to use social media. Future work should collect data
about the demographics of GitHub users to better inform
this, as well as past and future studies.
Our quantitative validation survey has similar limitations
regarding its external validity: participants were self-selected,
but randomly chosen users of GitHub. We created the state-
ments in the survey from our ndings and used Likert-type
scales, an accepted instrument to assess agreement.
The majority of our study participants were software deve-
lopers|many of them working professionals. Our valida-
tion survey found high agreement for several of our nd-
ings. Therefore, we believe that even in the light of these
limitations, we have uncovered valuable insights regarding
software developers' use of Twitter.
Yet, how transferrable are our ndings to other microblog-
ging platforms? Our study has shown that the value of Twit-
ter lies in its wide adoption and the network each user can
build for themselves. Since Twitter's adoption|especially
by key developers of important open source projects|seems
to have such a strong impact, we believe our ndings may
not necessarily translate to other microblogging platforms
or even microblogging in general.
6. CONCLUSIONS
We reported on the rst in-depth qualitative study of how
some software developers use Twitter, why some developers
do not use it, and how these non-adopters fulll the needs
that would otherwise be catered to by Twitter.
In our analysis, we extracted themes that allowed us to
explain the value Twitter can provide to software developers
that need to stay current in an accelerating eld. We learned
about the challenges they encounter, the strategies they use
to cope with them, and why some developers do not adopt
Twitter. A survey validated many of our ndings.
These results help us understand how developers keep up
in their eld, learn, and connect with others by taking part in
software development communities, following thought lead-
ers, and seeking encounters with like-minded strangers. The
usage strategies we discovered can now inform individuals
and organizations that need to stay current in and connected
with their professional communities.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Cassandra Petrachenko for her dedicated sup-
port in improving this report. We are deeply grateful to the
participants of our surveys and interviews. We thank our
reviewers for their constructive comments.2208. REFERENCES
[1] T. Amabile and S. Kramer. The progress principle:
Using small wins to ignite joy, engagement, and
creativity at work . Harvard Business Press, 2011.
[2] G. Bougie, J. Starke, M.-A. Storey, and D. M.
German. Towards understanding twitter use in
software engineering: preliminary ndings, ongoing
challenges and future questions. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Web 2.0 for Software
Engineering , Web2SE '11, pages 31{36, New York,
NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[3] D. boyd, S. Golder, and G. Lotan. Tweet, tweet,
retweet: Conversational aspects of retweeting on
twitter. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd
Hawaii International Conference on , pages 1{10, 2010.
[4] J. Corbin and A. Strauss. Basics of qualitative
research: Techniques and procedures for developing
grounded theory . Sage Publications, 3rd edition, 2008.
[5] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall. Developing a
grounded theory to explain the practices of
self-organizing agile teams. Empirical Software
Engineering , 17(6):609{639, 2012.
[6] C. Honey and S. Herring. Beyond microblogging:
Conversation and collaboration via twitter. In System
Sciences, 2009. HICSS '09. 42nd Hawaii International
Conference on , pages 1{10, 2009.
[7] A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, and B. Tseng. Why we
twitter: understanding microblogging usage and
communities. In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and
1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and
social network analysis , WebKDD/SNA-KDD '07,
pages 56{65, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[8] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is
twitter, a social network or a news media? In
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
World wide web , WWW '10, pages 591{600, New
York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[9] L. Mamykina, B. Manoim, M. Mittal, G. Hripcsak,
and B. Hartmann. Design lessons from the fastest q&a
site in the west. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
CHI '11, pages 2857{2866, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
ACM.
[10] A. E. Marwick and d. boyd. I tweet honestly, i tweet
passionately: Twitter users, context collapse, and the
imagined audience. New Media & Society , 2010.
[11] P. McFedries. Technically speaking: All a-twitter.
Spectrum, IEEE , 44(10):84{84, 2007.
[12] D. Pagano and W. Maalej. How do developers blog?:
an exploratory study. In Proceedings of the 8th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
MSR '11, pages 123{132, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
ACM.[13] R. Pham, L. Singer, O. Liskin, F. Figueira Filho, and
K. Schneider. Creating a shared understanding of
testing culture on a social coding site. In Proceedings
of the 2013 International Conference on Software
Engineering , ICSE '13, pages 112{121, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2013. IEEE Press.
[14] P. Prasetyo, D. Lo, P. Achananuparp, Y. Tian, and
E.-P. Lim. Automatic classication of software related
microblogs. In Software Maintenance (ICSM), 2012
28th IEEE International Conference on , pages
596{599, 2012.
[15] P. C. Rigby and M.-A. Storey. Understanding
broadcast based peer review on open source software
projects. In Proceedings of the 33rd International
Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE '11, pages
541{550, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[16] L. Singer, F. Figueira Filho, and M.-A. Storey. How
Developers Stay Current Using Twitter: Supplemental
Materials. Technical Report DCS-353-IR, University
of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, 2014.
[17] L. Singer, F. F. Filho, B. Cleary, C. Treude, M.-A.
Storey, and K. Schneider. Mutual Assessment in the
Social Programmer Ecosystem: An Empirical
Investigation of Developer Prole Aggregators. In
Proceedings of the ACM 2013 conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ,
CSCW '13, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[18] Y. Tian, P. Achananuparp, I. Lubis, D. Lo, and
E. Lim. What does software engineering community
microblog about? In Mining Software Repositories
(MSR), 2012 9th IEEE Working Conference on , pages
247{250, 2012.
[19] X. Wang, I. Kuzmickaja, K. Stol, P. Abrahamsson,
and B. Fitzgerald. Microblogging in open source
software development: The case of drupal using
twitter, 2013.
[20] J. Zhang, Y. Qu, J. Cody, and Y. Wu. A case study of
micro-blogging in the enterprise: use, value, and
related issues. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
CHI '10, pages 123{132, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[21] D. Zhao and M. B. Rosson. How and why people
twitter: the role that micro-blogging plays in informal
communication at work. In Proceedings of the ACM
2009 international conference on Supporting group
work, GROUP '09, pages 243{252, New York, NY,
USA, 2009. ACM.221