A Qualitative Study on User Guidance Capabilities in
Product Conﬁguration Tools
Rick Rabiser
Christian Doppler Lab for ASE
Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria
rabiser@ase.jku.atPaul Grünbacher
Systems Eng. and Automation
Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria
paul.gruenbacher@jku.atMartin Lehofer
Siemens VAI Metals
Technologies
Linz, Austria
martin.lehofer@siemens.com
ABSTRACT
Software systems are nowadays often conﬁgured by sales
people, domain experts, or even customers instead of engi-
neers. Conﬁguration tools communicate the systems’ vari-
ability to these end users and provide guidance for select-
ing and customizing the available features. However, even
if a conﬁguration tool creates technically correct systems,
addressing the speciﬁc needs of business-oriented users re-
mains challenging. We analyze existing conﬁguration tools
to identify key capabilities for guiding end users and discuss
thesecapabilitiesusingthecognitivedimensionsofnotations
framework. We present an implementation of the capabili-
tiesinourconﬁgurationtoolDOPLERCW.Weperformeda
qualitative investigation on the usefulness of the tool’s capa-
bilities for user guidance in product conﬁguration by involv-
ing nine business-oriented experts of two industry partners
from the domain of industrial automation. We present key
results and derive general implications for tool developers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.1 [Requirements/Speciﬁcations ]: Tools
General Terms
Design, Human Factors
Keywords
Conﬁguration tools, end user guidance, qualitative study,
cognitive dimensions of notations.
1. INTRODUCTION
Product conﬁguration tools allow end users like sales peo-
ple, project managers, or customers to tailor a product to
business requirements or market needs [5, 19] by selecting
and customizing product features. A frequent application
area of these tools are software product lines which leverage
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ASE ’12, September 3-7, 2012, Essen, Germany
Copyright 12 ACM 978-1-4503-1204-2/12/09 ...$10.00.extensive reuse to improve quality and development produc-
tivity [26]. During product derivation, systems are conﬁg-
ured by exploiting the variability of the product line (PL).
The scale and complexity of PLs makes the conﬁguration
process challenging and tedious [5, 11, 19]. Numerous tools
have thus been proposed to support product conﬁguration,
e.g., [9, 12, 17]. Typically these tools guide end users by
oﬀering conﬁguration choices presented in tables or trees.
Surprisingly, despite their importance, there is still a lack
of empirical data regarding the usefulness of conﬁguration
tools for end users in real-world settings. A recently pub-
lished survey on conﬁguration challenges [11] conﬁrms the
need for further empirical research. Usefulness regards a
tool’s utility–whether its functionality allows to do what is
needed–and its usability–how well users can exploit the of-
fered functionality [10, 16]. Assessing usefulness requires
involving users and studying their behavior and opinions,
thus qualitative research methods are recommended [23].
Based on an analysis of requirements for supporting prod-
uct derivation in PLs [19] we have been developing the DO-
PLER ConﬁgurationWizard (CW) [9, 18], a conﬁguration
toolwithaspecialfocusonbusiness-orientedendusers. Ear-
lier publications on the DOPLER tools described its under-
lying approaches to variability modeling [6] and role-based
derivation [18]. In this paper we emphasize DOPLER CW’s
capabilities for guiding end users during product conﬁgura-
tion. For the currently ongoing industrial rollout a thorough
refactoring of the research prototype was performed includ-
ing the development of new features and usability improve-
ments.
To this end, no empirical results exist on the usefulness of
conﬁguration tools’ capabilities for guiding users in general
and on the DOPLER CW in particular. We thus carried
out a study of the DOPLER CW involving nine experts
from management, sales, marketing, and product lifecycle
management of two industry partners to assess the tools’
user guidance capabilities.
We investigated two research questions regarding the per-
spective of industrial end users: RQ1 addresses the usability
of user guidance capabilities in conﬁguration tools. RQ2 ad-
dresses the utilityof these capabilities in conﬁguration tools
for deriving products from a PL. The involved subjects used
the DOPLER CW to perform conﬁguration tasks. Their ac-
tions were recorded and we used think aloud protocols [10]
to understand the rationale behind their actions. The ex-
perts completed a usability questionnaire and we performed
structured interviews to understand the utility of the tool
for deriving products.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ASE’12, September 3–7, 2012, Essen, Germany
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1204-2/12/09 ...$15.00
110
The contributions of this paper are (1) the identiﬁcation
of key conﬁguration tool capabilities for guiding users based
on a review of existing literature and tools together with a
discussion of these capabilities using the cognitive dimen-
sions of notations [2], a framework from the area of human-
computer interaction (HCI); (2) an implementation of the
capabilities in the DOPLER CW; and (3) a thorough ana-
lysis of the usefulness of the user guidance capabilities as
perceived by industrial end users to derive general implica-
tions for tool developers.
2. CONFIGURATION TOOLS AND THEIR
USER GUIDANCE CAPABILITIES
Product conﬁguration tools go beyond basic installation
wizards and user preference dialogues. Typically, they use
an enactable deﬁnition of the conﬁguration choices and pro-
vide a textual or graphical representation of these choices
together with guidance for end users in conﬁguration.
Enactable deﬁnitions such as models or conﬁguration lan-
guages deﬁne a set of choices and their dependencies for
obtaining conﬁguration decisions from end users. For in-
stance, choicescanbeoptional, alternative, optionalvariant,
and variant. A choice can also mean to just set a particular
textornumbervalue. Variabilitymodels[4]orconﬁguration
languages such as Kconﬁg [11] are frequently used for that
purpose. Product conﬁgurator tools developed in the artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI) community work on top of knowledge
bases to support conﬁguration [22]. Representations pro-
vided by conﬁguration tools include textual formats such as
lists or tables and graphical representations such as trees
or graphs. Due to the often high number of conﬁguration
options with many dependencies textual formats like a hier-
archically structured list of choices are often used in tools.
Numerous commercial and academic conﬁguration tools
have been developed and it would be beyond the scope of
this paper to discuss them all. We brieﬂy present examples
of feature-oriented, knowledge-based, and workﬂow-oriented
product conﬁguration tools and their basic features.
2.1 Product Conﬁguration Tools
Feature-oriented tools. Several tools developed in the soft-
ware product line community present the conﬁguration op-
tions to users in a feature tree. For instance, the commercial
tool pure::variants ( www.pure-systems.com ) supports tex-
tual and graphical representations and provides guidance
for users by automatically selecting or deselecting related
features after making a choice. The commercial tool Gears
(www.biglever.com ) provides a graphical feature tree allow-
ing selections similar to pure::variants. There exist also
several academic tools of diﬀerent maturity which present
feature choices to users in tree form. Examples are SPLOT
(www.splot-research.org ),theKumbangconﬁgurator[14],
Visit-FC [3], COVAMOF [25], or the FeatureIDE [12]. In
feature-oriented conﬁguration tools user guidance is not a
primary focus – users can start conﬁguring by selecting ar-
bitrary nodes of the tree.
Knowledge-based tools. Tools emphasizing end user sup-
port have also been developed in the AI community. While
PLtoolsexplicitlydescribevariabilityusingfeaturesordeci-
sions, AI product conﬁgurators describe choices using con-
straints [15]. User guidance is essential in web front-ends
and wizards of such conﬁgurators. Typical use cases in-clude sales or installation support. For instance, the Con-
ﬁgWorks Advisor Suite [8] allows users to quickly develop
end user conﬁgurator applications. Conﬁgit oﬀers a Prod-
uct Modeler for deﬁning product properties and the Con-
ﬁgit Runtime that can be used in web front-ends ( www.
configit-software.com ). The enterprise business appli-
cation SAP ( www.sap.com ) also provides conﬁgurators to
adapt SAP/R3 to the users’ needs. Other examples are the
ILOG Conﬁgurator ( www.ilog.com ) and salesPLUS [27].
Workﬂow-oriented tools. Suchtoolsguideusersinproduct
conﬁguration by presenting variability choices in a certain
order. For example, the DOPLER CW presents questions
in tabular form where the questions in the table can be an-
swered row by row [9]. Abbasi et al. present an approach for
feature-based conﬁguration workﬂows [1]. The C2O Conﬁg-
urator [17] guides users by presenting questions in a partic-
ular order that is rearranged automatically to minimize user
input and conﬁguration conﬂicts. Quaestio [13] also guides
users through a set of questions. It displays separate lists
of valid and answered questions and provides an "inspector"
showing guidelines in natural language and dependencies to
other questions. The tool VResolve in the VManage tool
suite [7] visualizes questions as a tree that can be traversed
from top to bottom.
2.2 User Guidance Capabilities
The usability of interactive tools relies on tailoring them
tospeciﬁcneedsofusersandtheirtasks[24]. Thementioned
tools provide diverse capabilities to guide end users in prod-
uct conﬁguration. While many of these capabilities are well-
known in HCI [2, 24], their usefulness for diﬀerent product
conﬁguration tasks as well as their dependencies are not well
understood. The cognitive dimensions of notations frame-
work [2] helps to evaluate and characterize user guidance
capabilities and provides a vocabulary for discussing trade-
oﬀs. Characterizing product conﬁguration tools in terms of
activities deﬁned in the CD framework shows that diﬀer-
ent dimensions are relevant. Conﬁguration tools are about
searching , i.e., seeking for a speciﬁc conﬁguration option;
exploratory understanding , i.e., discovering the conﬁguration
options available in the decision space; modiﬁcation , i.e., set-
ting conﬁguration options when making decisions; as well as
incrementation , i.e., adding annotations and comments to
conﬁguration options.
We deﬁned key tool capabilities for user guidance based on
our analysis of conﬁguration tools in a systematic literature
review [19]. We used the available technical documentation,
usermanuals, publications, andpresentationstoidentifythe
capabilities. We also installed and tested the tools when
availableandusedscreencastsandtutorialsinothercasesto
get a more complete picture. We discussed the resulting list
of capabilities and grouped similar or closely related items.
Finally, we named each group of similar or closely related
capabilities leading to eight capabilities. We assessed each
capability using the cognitive dimensions deﬁned in the CD
framework. Wecannotclaimcompleteness: however,thelist
providesgoodcoverageofuserguidancefeaturesinacademic
and commercial product conﬁguration tools. We describe
each capability and give examples from the tools.
(A)Many conﬁguration tools support hiding and show-
ing conﬁguration options depending on the stage of the con-
ﬁguration. When starting conﬁguration, only the initially
relevant options are selectable while others remain disabled111or hidden. This feature reduces complexity by focusing the
user on options relevant at a certain stage. Depending on
the choices other options become modiﬁable. For example,
it does not make sense to ask a user about details of a fea-
ture unless it has been selected for a product. This capa-
bility is related with CD dimension visibility, the ability of a
system to view components easily, when browsing through
and searching for speciﬁc conﬁguration options. Workﬂow-
oriented tools such as the C2O Conﬁgurator [17] or VRe-
solve [7] and commercial knowledge-based tools like Conﬁgit
support this capability. Feature-oriented conﬁguration tools
often disable some options based on constraints and depen-
dencies; however, they typically still show the full feature
tree. Hiding options is only possible by manually applying
ﬁlters but not done automatically to guide users.
(B)Providing views and ﬁlters on conﬁguration options
helpstokeepthetaskofconﬁguringacomplexproductman-
ageable. Views can be cross-cutting and allow structuring
the decision space during conﬁguration. Filters can be ap-
plied within views and across views to show only conﬁgura-
tion options fulﬁlling a particular criterion (e.g., containing
a particular keyword). Obviously, this capability also has
to do with the CD dimension visibility. However, the dimen-
sionhidden dependencies is equally relevant as links between
conﬁgurationoptionsmaynotbevisibleduetoviewsandﬁl-
ters. Most conﬁguration tools provide basic means to group
and/or ﬁlter the presented conﬁguration options while only
particular tools such as pure::variants or the SAP/R3 con-
ﬁgurator allow displaying diﬀerent views.
(C)Branching and navigation support allows users to
quickly work their way through a large number of conﬁg-
uration options. Tools automatically activate the next rel-
evant option or view, for example, as soon as all options
in a view have been selected or deselected. This capabil-
ity also addresses hidden dependencies as users are guided
to streamline navigating along diverse dependencies. While
most tools allow tracking progress by showing the remaining
conﬁguration options, only few tools actively assist the user
navigating through the conﬁguration space. All workﬂow-
oriented tools provide some kind of navigation support. For
instance, VResolve [7] traverses a tree of options breadth-
ﬁrst or depth-ﬁrst. Also the C2O Conﬁgurator [17] leads the
user to the next relevant question after making a decision.
(D)Conﬁguration tools should give end users freedom in
navigation , i.e., to select an arbitrary conﬁguration option
or view at any time to avoid the ’straitjacket feeling’ well
known from many wizards enforcing strict guidance. This
capability needs to work well with capabilities A and C. For
instance, when a user selects an arbitrary option, branch-
ing and navigation should continue from the selected option.
For this capability the CD dimension premature commitment
comes into play as it allows users to overrule constraints re-
garding the order of conﬁguration options. Feature-oriented
product conﬁguration tools generally provide freedom in
navigation. Knowledge-based tools often enforce a partic-
ular order and do not allow arbitrary selection except for
returningtopreviouslyselectedoptions. Gears, forexample,
allows selecting arbitrary features at any time while ILOG
assumes the options to be selected step-by-step. Workﬂow-
oriented tools [7, 17] deﬁne an order for selecting options
but typically still allow users to navigate freely.
(E)Product conﬁguration tools typically perform on-the-
ﬂy validity checks of user choices. For instance, if only num-bers in a certain range are allowed for a numerical choice,
theusershouldbeinformedwhenprovidinganinputoutside
this range. Tools should at least prevent invalid input but
it is generally desirable to also get explanations and help for
resolving the problem. The CD dimension error-proneness is
relevantinthiscasetoprotecttheuserfrommistakes. Com-
mercial tools like pure::variants and Conﬁgit strictly check
all inputs and guide users in resolving problems. Research
tools typically put less emphasis on checking the validity of
user choices and often only notify users about invalid con-
ﬁgurations without revealing the speciﬁc problem [14].
(F)Anotheruserguidancefeatureis resetandundo . Users
do not want to start again from scratch after an unintended
or wrong selection. They need features to undo their choices
andtokeeptheconﬁgurationprocessconsistent. Thisallows
themtoexploretheeﬀectsofdiﬀerentchoices. Provisionality ,
the degree of commitment to actions, is relevant here as re-
set and undo are fundamental for this purpose. All commer-
cial tools we analyzed provide support for reset and undo.
However, only some research tools like FeatureIDE [12] or
COVAMOF [25] provide such support.
(G)Users need immediate feedback to understand the ef-
fects of their choices. For instance, when selecting a particu-
lar conﬁguration option, the eﬀects on the system to be con-
ﬁgured should be visible (e.g., the selected or parameterized
components). This capability addresses progressive evalua-
tionas the work-to-date can be presented at any time. Sup-
port for immediate feedback can be manifold. For example,
pure::variants displays a ’result model’ that adapts based
on feature selections. The ConﬁgWorks Advisor Suite [8]
displays the resulting product based on the conﬁguration
choices. Many tools provide feedback only after conﬁgura-
tion has been completed or if demanded by the user.
(H)Product conﬁguration tools also provide annotations
and comments capabilities on conﬁguration options. This is
helpful if the presented options do not adequately reﬂect the
requirements or if the phrasing of the options is confusing.
For example, if an option desired by the user is not avail-
able, she can create a comment to request it. The cognitive
dimension secondary notation is relevant for this capability
as users can provide input in their preferred way. Feature-
oriented tools, e.g., pure::variants and Kumbang [14] sup-
port deﬁning arbitrary feature attributes, which can also be
used to create annotations and comments.
3. THE DOPLER CW
The discussed user guidance capabilities have driven the
development of our conﬁguration tool DOPLER CW. DO-
PLER [6] is a decision-oriented [4] PL approach supporting
variability modeling and product derivation [9, 18]. The
DOPLER CW renders variability models as questionnaires
that are used by end users in a workﬂow-oriented fashion.
In DOPLER variability models [6] decisions deﬁne conﬁgu-
ration options for end users. Important attributes of deci-
sions are the question that is asked to a user during product
derivation and the decision type deﬁning how questions can
be answered (Boolean, string, number, or enumeration). A
decision can depend on other decisions hierarchically, if it
needs to be made before other decisions, or logically, if the
answer aﬀects other decisions. The decision type can be fur-
ther constrained with validity conditions. Decisions are re-
lated with assets in DOPLER models: answering questions
allows selecting and parameterizing components [6]. Based112Figure 1: The DOPLER ConﬁgurationWizard provides user guidance capabilities for hiding and displaying
conﬁguration options (A); showing options in diﬀerent views (B); leading the user through the decision
space (C) while still allowing free navigation (D); checking the validity of given answers (E); resetting and
undoing decisions (F); giving immediate feedback (G); and creating comments and annotations (H).
on answers to questions, generators produce arbitrary out-
put, e.g., conﬁguration ﬁles, documentation, or code [9, 20].
The ﬁrst version of the DOPLER CW was developed be-
tween 2006 and 2009. The tool has been used in several case
studies[6,9],whichfocusedonitsutilitytogenerateproduct
conﬁgurations but did not address usability. For industrial
rollout the research prototype was thoroughly refactored in
a project carried out by Siemens VAI (2010-2011) including
the development of new features, tool extensions, and us-
ability improvements. As part of this project we conducted
an empirical study of the revised DOPLER CW to system-
atically study the tool’s usefulness.
The DOPLER CW supports all user guidance capabili-
ties described above. Figure 1 presents a screenshot of the
tool showing conﬁguration options for the Siemens ECS PL
[20]. The letters A-H in the ﬁgure indicate the identiﬁed
capabilities. The DOPLER CW supports hiding and show-
ing conﬁguration options (A) depending on the stage of the
conﬁguration. The tool only shows the initially relevant
questions when starting conﬁguration while others remain
disabled or hidden until they become relevant. The CW
also supports views and ﬁlters (B) on conﬁguration options:
several panes allow switching between diﬀerent views con-
taining questions. Users work with one view at a time only
to ensure focus. Each question can be part of several views
and can be assigned to diﬀerent users with diﬀerent roles
[18, 20]. Questions within one view can further be ﬁltered
based on their type and whether they have already been an-swered. The branching and navigation (C) features of the
DOPLERCWguideusersbyautomaticallysettingthefocus
to the next available question after the user has answered a
question. Further, the tool asks the user whether to switch
to the next relevant view as soon as all answerable questions
in one view have been answered. The tool also gives the end
usersfreedom in navigation (D) . Users can choose any an-
swerable question and switch views at any time. When a
user selects a question, branching and navigation continues
from the selected question. The CW conducts on-the-ﬂy va-
lidity checks (E) of user choices. If the user enters a value
outside the range deﬁned in the variability model, the tool
displays a message and prevents the input. Fine-grained re-
set and undo (F) is also supported. Users can step-by-step
undo and redo their choices. They can also select an arbi-
trary question and reset it (thereby unassigning the value of
the underlying decision variable). The CW gives immediate
feedback (G) to users answering questions. The list of PL
assets included or parameterized [6] as a result of the user
choices can be viewed at any time and it is updated right af-
ter entering a choice. Users can also generate conﬁgurations
[9] or documents [20] to assess progress and to experiment
with partial conﬁgurations. Additional views can be dis-
played, e.g., to show business calculations that dynamically
adapt based on the user’s answers. The CW also allows
creating annotations and comments (H) on questions. Us-
ing this capability, users can phrase a change request or a
requirement related with decisions.1134. INVESTIGATING THE USEFULNESS OF
THE DOPLER CW
Our qualitative study covers the usability and utility of
the DOPLER CW for business-oriented end users. The
study involved industrial experts performing productconﬁg-
uration of an electrode control system (ECS) for electric arc
furnaces in steel production. A variability model has been
developed as part of our ongoing collaboration with Siemens
VAI and Siemens CT. Our tool in this case is used to au-
tomate the generation of customized sales documents like
oﬀers, product descriptions, or commercial conditions [20].
WestructuredourstudybasedontheguidelinesbyRuneson
and Höst [21].
4.1 Research Questions and Approach
We followed the research approach outlined in Figure 2 to
investigate two research questions.
RQ1. What is the usability of user guidance capabilities
in product conﬁguration tools? This research question in-
vestigates the well-known dimensions of usability [16] and
assesses the capabilities as realized in the DOPLER CW
from the perspective of industrial end users. For instance,
learnability means that a user can rapidly start getting her
work done with the system. Eﬃciency refers to the prop-
erty that once a user has learned to use a system, she can
reach a high level of productivity. Memorability denotes
that if users return to the system after some period, they
can still use it without having to learn everything all over
again. The errors (accuracy) attribute refers to errors made
by users and general tool errors as well as recovery capabili-
ties. Finally, subjective satisfaction denotes that the system
should be pleasant to use, such that users are subjectively
satisﬁed and like the system.
RQ2. What is the utility of user guidance capabilities in
product conﬁguration tools for deriving products from a prod-
uct line? This research question investigates whether users
can successfully derive a product using the DOPLER CW
tool. For the ECS PL the conﬁguration tasks involve gener-
ating sales documents for the conﬁgured product that fulﬁll
the expectations of stakeholders [20]. Utility further ad-
dresses the perceived opportunities and risks of using the
tool in daily business.
4.2 Study System and Subjects
The study system is a Siemens PL of software-intensive
electrode control systems (ECS) for electric arc furnaces in
steel production [20]. Sales has to provide a large number
of oﬀers per year to prospective customers. When creat-
ing these documents sales people need to parse and process
the documents manually for each quote. We used the ECS
variability model [20] which allows generating customized
MS Word documents such as sales oﬀers, product descrip-
tions, return-on-investment (ROI) estimations, and com-
mercial conditions. Please note that the user interface of the
tool does not diﬀer at all if software conﬁguration ﬁles would
be generated instead. The ECS variability model comprises
122 decisions with 61 hierarchical dependencies, 27 assets
representing documents, 22 part-of dependencies between
assets, and 21 dependencies between assets and decisions.
Nine business-oriented stakeholders of our industry part-
ners participated in the study covering diverse roles. Sub-
jects involved a sales manager (SM), two product owners
Figure 2: Research Approach.
(PO), a marketing manager (MM), a product lifecycle man-
ager (PLM), a team manager (TM), a developer (D), a
project manager (PM), and a sales person (S).
4.3 Study Phases
Based on the ECS variability model the following steps
were performed individually by each subject:
(1) Brieﬁng. We started each session with a short brief-
ing of the goal and process of the investigation, the main
capabilities of the tool, and the conﬁguration tasks to be
performed. The study system was known to all subjects
and was therefore not explained. (2) Preparation of model
and tool. We initialized the logger, loaded the ECS vari-
ability model in the CW and started the screen cast tool.
(3) Product conﬁguration. Participants performed the tasks
and were observed by a scribe. A person from Siemens VAI
assumed the role as the customer while the subjects took
over the role of a sales person asking questions about the
ECS system. (4) Interviews. After completion of the tasks
we performed a semi-structured interview on the utility of
the CW. (5) Usability Questionnaire. Finally, the subjects
were asked to complete the usability questionnaire.
4.4 Product Conﬁguration Tasks
Participants performed seven tasks:
Task 1–Check and review ECS Customer Details and ROI
Requirements. ConﬁguringECSstartswithcheckingandre-
vising customer details and ROI requirements of customers.
These are part of the model and presented by the CW as
questions in two diﬀerent panes (cf. Figure 1).
Task 2–Conﬁgure ECS Basic System and Spare Parts.
The subjects answered questions displayed in four diﬀerent
panes regarding basic ECS properties, power supply inte-
gration, additional options, and spare parts (cf. Figure 1).
Task 3–Conﬁgure HMI. Questions in this pane regard the
human-machine interface of the ECS.
Task 4–Capture customer-speciﬁc requirements. We addi-
tionally asked participants to capture new customer require-
ments that could not be fulﬁlled with the available options
by creating annotations.
Task 5–Conﬁgure Commercial Conditions. Participants
made choices regarding the commercial conditions needed
in contracts in a separate pane (cf. Figure 1).
Task 6–View and check Calculated Values and Price List.
We asked users to check the calculated ROI and price list
displayed in separate panes (cf. Figure 1 and [20]). These114values are re-calculated after answering questions to provide
immediate feedback in conﬁguration. Checking these values
for plausibility helps assessing utility (RQ2), because utility
depends on the correctness of the calculated values.
Task 7–Generate Documents. The ﬁnal task was to gener-
ate sales documents based on the given answers. Reviewing
these documents also helps evaluating the CW’s utility.
4.5 Data Collection Methods and Sources
We used the following methods and sources:
Think aloud. Weinstructedparticipantstospeakoutloud
and explain their actions while working with the tool [10].
We recorded the statements of participants during all tasks.
Observer protocols. A scribe observed the participants
performing the tasks and documented additional observa-
tions not explicitly stated by the participants.
Tool instrumentation. We instrumented the CW tool to
loguseractionslikequestionsanswered, answersreset, views
selected, comments created, generator started, etc. The
logger also recorded a time stamp of user actions to allow
chronological analyses.
Screen cast tool. We used Jing ( www.jingproject.com )
to record the screen including all mouse movements while
users performed their tasks.
Usability questionnaire. We used four of Nielsen’s ﬁve us-
ability attributes [16] as shown together with the results in
Table 2. We did not consider memorability as users were all
novices in using the CW and assessing this attribute would
havebeendiﬃcultinthisstudygiventhatsubjectswereonly
available for a single session. Regarding learnability partic-
ipants rated how easy they perceived learning to carry out
the given conﬁguration tasks (very easy, easy, hard, very
hard). Eﬃciency means the perception of subjects regard-
ing the potential productivity of the tool for their daily work
(very eﬃcient, eﬃcient, ineﬃcient, very ineﬃcient). The ac-
curacy attribute according to Nielsen addresses the number
of errors that occurred (no, some, many, too many errors).
’Too many errors’ means that users could not ﬁnish the as-
signed task while ’no errors’ means that not a single er-
ror occurred. Subjective satisfaction regards to what degree
users liked the system (very good, good, bad, very bad). We
phrased the attributes as questions, e.g., ’How easy was it
to learn performing the given tasks?’
Semi-structured interviews on utility. After all tasks had
been carried out a researcher asked the following four open
questions to the participants and documented their answers.
What did you like? What did you dislike/What should be
improved? What are the opportunities when using this tool
in daily business? What are the risks when using this tool
in daily business?
4.6 Data Analysis and Reporting
After completing all sessions with the subjects we aggre-
gated the results. A researcher carefully transcribed the
think aloud protocols and observer notes using a coding
technique [23] and related all statements to the user guid-
ance capabilities in a spreadsheet (cf. Table 1). A total of 88
think aloud statements and 73 observations were recorded.
Two researchers checked the interpretation of the think
aloudanswersandobservernotes. Theygroupedstatements
by task and role of the subjects and merged duplicate or
highly similar statements. They also grouped all answers
to the questions in the utility interview by roles and againTable 1: Transcribed think aloud statements with
related roles, observations, and coded capabilities.
Task#.
Obser-
vation#Transcribed
StatementRoles(s) Observation(s) Capa-
bility
T1.O1Top-down
approach for
answering
questions
provides good
guidanceSM, PO
(2),
MM,
PLM,
TM, D,
PM, SUsers sometimes
unnecessarily
selected next
decision although
already done by
the toolC, D,
G
... ... ... ... ...
T4.O2I wonder how
to capture
the risk?SM This is possible
but probably too
hidden in current
GUIH
Tn.Om... ... ... ...
merged duplicate or closely related answers. They addi-
tionally analyzed the CW logs and created a spreadsheet
capturing basic descriptive statistics. They used the screen
casts in case they did not understand the user actions only
by looking at a log. Furthermore, the authors discussed the
reported beneﬁts and drawbacks and the comments made
by study participants in the utility interviews to derive im-
plications for conﬁguration tool developers (cf. Table 3).
The auhors also explored trade-oﬀs among CD dimensions
as suggested by the CD framework [2].
5. RESULTS
We present the results with regard to the research ques-
tions on usability and utility. We derive implications for
product conﬁguration tool developers as well as trade-oﬀs
among capabilities based on the CD framework dimensions.
Finally, we discuss threats to validity.
5.1 RQ1: Usability
Table 2 shows the results of the usability questionnaire.
All subjects were novices with 0-5 hours of CW usage. Over-
all, the results regarding the usability attributes are quite
positive. Four subjects said there were some errors, e.g., the
toolthrewanexceptionwhentypingspecialcharactersasan
answer to a question or as a ﬁlename. However, the results
of the tool log and the screen casts show that all subjects
were able to complete the assigned tasks. The average time
was 39 minutes and the median time was 38 minutes (this is
higher than usual because of the think aloud statements of
participants). There were no critical errors or other serious
issues. For each tool capability we report key results derived
from the think aloud statements and recorded observations.
(A) Hiding and showing conﬁguration options. Decisions
that become available later during conﬁguration can be ei-
ther hidden or shown grayed out in the CW. In task 2 a PO
wondered why some questions are not answerable . The tool
log and the screen cast shows that he was stuck for some
time. Also in task 5 the SM was wondering why some ques-
tions were grayed out. The overall feedback on this feature
was rather diverse: some users preferred showing decisions
as grayed out while others suggested hiding them. It is pos-
sible in the CW to switch between these two settings but
apparently this was unclear to the users.
(B) Views and ﬁlters. The idea to show related ques-
tions in diﬀerent views was generally well understood. For115instance, for conﬁguration task 2 we recorded think aloud
statements of the MM and the PLM: I switch through panes
to get to additional questions . However, a user commented
that it is sometimes hard to understand how questions are
related with each other across diﬀerent views. The tool logs
and screen casts show that some users switched between two
panes several times to understand the eﬀects of their actions
and the dependencies between decisions. While views are
useful for models with many decisions, overusing them may
also lead to unwanted eﬀects.
(C) Branching and navigation. All subjects reported for
several conﬁguration tasks that they liked the top-down ap-
proach for answering questions by going through decisions.
The tool logs and screen casts show that the typical ap-
proach of users was to go through the questions from top-
to-bottom and pane-by-pane. We observed that users some-
times manually selected the next question although this was
already done by the tool immediately after answering a de-
cision. No negative comments or suggestions were recorded
regarding the feature for automatically moving to the next
view. In conﬁguration task 5 the SM said that the order
of questions is sometimes confusing . It seems that the user
was unaware of CW’s features for sorting and ﬁltering.
(D) Freedom in navigation. The results clearly show the
importance of this feature. For instance, seven out of nine
users selected questions not directly following the last ques-
tion at least once, one user even twelve times. Six of these
sevenparticipantsnavigatedtoaquestioninadiﬀerentpane
at least once. There are however also drawbacks regarding
this feature. The TM and the PM both commented that
they did not understand initially in task 1 how an arbi-
trary question can be answered. When taking a look at the
screen cast we noticed that the subjects selected a pane but
did not select the question to display the possible answers,
which seems trivial but nevertheless led to problems.
(E) On-the-ﬂy validity checks. The cardinalities of enu-
meration questions (e.g., 0:3; 1:1; 2:4) were perceived as
hard to comprehend. In addition, the PLM, a PO, and the
sales person reported issues regarding entering ﬂoat values.
The tool logs and screen casts show the confusion of users
in these cases and the importance of undo and reset.
(F) Reset and undo. The tool log showed that on average
only four answers to questions were changed using reset or
undo after setting them initially. The minimum was zero
while in the maximum case 15 questions were reset. There
were no user suggestions regarding this capability.
(G) Immediate feedback. The possibility to immediately
generate product artifacts (i.e., documents) was well re-
ceived. After generating documents in task 7 users reported
that nothing unexpected happened, documents were prop-
erly generated, and that they liked this capability. The DO-
PLER CW computes a total price and the estimated ROI
based on the selected features. In task 6 the MM and the
POs asked how the price is calculated. This shows that dis-
playing formulae in addition to results should be possible.
(H) Annotations and comments. In task 2 the PLM com-
mented that when answering a question with no it might
sometimes make sense to also document the why not . Al-
though capturing the rationale of a decision is possible in
the tool using the commenting feature this was not imme-
diately obvious to the user. Also in task 3 think aloud
comments by several subjects indicated that a particular
question did not provide the required conﬁguration options.Table 2: Usability questionnaire results.
Subject Learn-
abilityEﬃciency Accuracy
(Errors)Satisfac-
tion
SM very easy eﬃcient some good
PO (1) easy very
eﬃcientno good
MM hard very
eﬃcientno very good
PLM very easy very
eﬃcientsome very good
PO (2) very easy very
eﬃcientno very good
TM very easy very
eﬃcientsome very good
D easy eﬃcient no very good
PM easy eﬃcient some very good
S easy eﬃcient some good
The commenting feature provided by the CW was devel-
oped for that purpose. In task 4 the sales manager said:
I wonder whether there is a relation [of my comments] to
questions? This suggests that questions with attached com-
mentsshouldbehighlightedbetterintheGUI.Alsointask4
a PO stated: ok, I deﬁne what I want or what the customer
wants and can enter diverse additional attributes. This is
kind of a semi-formal requirements management approach,
isn’t it? We noticed that it was unclear to users what will
happen after creating a comment. Compared to all other
tasks the creation of comments took users quite a long time.
Furtherthinkaloudstatementsandobservationssuggested
six new tool features, many of which have now already been
implemented. Forexample, intask1theMMsaidthatques-
tions related with customer details and ROI requirements
should be preﬁlled with default answers to accelerate the
process. In task 3 a sales person suggested copy/paste sup-
port for entering answers. In task 4 the sales manager asked
whether it would be possible to deﬁne a price when specify-
ing a new requirement in a comment. Support for deﬁning
arbitrary additional attributes for comments would hence
be desirable. In task 4 the PLM asked How can I save my
work? I’m afraid I’ll lose the valuable information I entered .
Similarly in task 6 the MM and the PLM requested a feature
to save, export, or print the entered information. While sav-
ing can be done with a simple click, these comments suggest
an auto-save capability. Furthermore, a feature showing the
formulae in addition to the results of calculations is useful.
Finally, questions with attached comments should be high-
lighted even better in the user interface.
5.2 RQ2: Utility
Observingsubjectsandanalyzingtherecordeddatashowed
that subjects were able to conﬁgure products using the CW.
According to the participants the generated sales documents
fulﬁlled their expectations. The semi-structured interviews
regarding utility led to interesting additional comments.
What did you like? The TM, the SM, two POs, and the
PLM commented that one of the most important aspects of
the CW regarding utility is its integrated, consistent, easy to
learn, intuitive graphical user interface . Oneparticipantalso
saidthatitispossibletostartgeneratingdocumentswithout
muchtrainingsothetoolitselfmightbeusedtotrainpeople-116especially non-technical experts-on a particular system and
its variability. The price list and value calculation views
were also regarded as very important for the tool’s utility
by the SM and the MM.
What did you dislike/What should be improved? Accord-
ing to the SM and the MM, while this does not aﬀect usabi-
lity, limiting the total number of decisions is very important
for the tool’s utility. This can for instance be achieved by
pre-answering certain questions and thereby focusing on the
most important questions to reduce the size of the models.
One participant disliked the pre-deﬁned order of views and
decisions. While the freedom in navigation capability of the
DOPLER CW would have allowed this participant to ar-
bitrarily jump to any view or decision, the branching and
navigation capability was perceived as disturbing. The TM
and the MM commented that while there have been some
small UI issues , thesedid not hinder me in achieving my
goals. One participant doubted the utility of the annotation
and commenting capability in practice and perceived it as
too abstract andhard to understand . Allotherusershowever
liked this feature and two (PO and PLM) even regarded it
as very important for practice.
What are the opportunities when using this tool in daily
business? Six participants (PM, TM, PO, PLM, MM, and
SM) said that the tool saves time and improves eﬃciency.
The D, MM, and a PO also commented that the tool helps
to avoid making errors in the conﬁguration process. The
PM and the SM also regarded the tool as an important step
towards standardization. Again, the possibility to use the
CW for training new users–especially regional sales people–
was considered as an additional opportunity. The TM com-
mented that using the CW avoids redundant data entry by
diverse users involved in the process. A PO recognized that
using the CW avoids that customers get access to critical
dataasithidesthemodelunderneathandjustdisplaysques-
tions. The marketing manager further commented that the
CW avoids or at least minimizes non-conformance costs.
What are the risks when using this tool in daily business?
PM and TM commented that using the CW might increase
the maintenance costs as variability models need to be kept
up-to-date. The MM and a PO were afraid that using the
CW might lead to knowledge drain, i.e., that while now
people are experts in conﬁguration, with the CW also a
non-expert can perform conﬁguration. The developer and
the team manager commented that integrating the tool in
the tool landscape of the company might not be so easy.
The PLM said that there is the danger that wrong answers
are given due to misinterpreting what the customer wants or
even due to typos and that it is very hard to identify such
wronganswers . TheMMpointedoutthatpreventionofdata
leakage and protection of know-how included in the tool is
essential. He suggested encrypting models and calculations.
The SM further commented that there is the danger that
immature PLs are modeled which might increase the eﬀort
for treating speciﬁc customer wishes .
5.3 Implications and Trade-offs
The results of the usability and utility assessment involv-
ing nine experienced industrial experts overall conﬁrm the
usefulness of the DOPLER CW and the importance of the
identiﬁed user guidance capabilities. We derived implica-
tions for tool developers based on participants’ comments
and our analyses. To strengthen our interpretations withexisting HCI knowledge, we discuss trade-oﬀs among the
CD framework dimensions [2] based on our initial mapping
in Section 2.2.
(A) The capability for hiding and showing conﬁguration
options led to controversial results. While some participants
of the study really liked it, others were pretty confused. Ac-
cording to the CD framework poor visibility (=hidden op-
tions) inhibits scanning, a fact which can explain the con-
fusion. We conclude that it is important to provide a set-
ting for deactivating this capability if desired. Also, there
clearly exists a trade-oﬀ between the dimensions hidden de-
pendencies andvisibility in this context because of hidden
conﬁguration options.
(B) Our results indicate that views and ﬁlters are very im-
portant to guide users. This is not surprising given the size
and complexity of today’s systems. However, the number
of views and the number of elements need to be balanced.
There is a trade-oﬀ between few views containing many el-
ements and many views with only few elements that stems
from the relation to the CD dimensions visibility andhid-
den dependencies . Hidden dependencies are problematic for
modiﬁcation activities, in our case setting conﬁguration op-
tions. Integrating an option for displaying dependencies on
demand, e.g., in a separate view, may thus be advisable.
(C) Branching and navigation was well received by most
subjects, however, welearnedthatdiﬀerentparticipantspre-
fer diﬀerent ways of navigating through the decision space.
In this case developers need to be aware of the trade-oﬀ be-
tweenhidden dependencies andpremature commitment (see
capability D).
(D)Freedominnavigationwasregardedasveryimportant
by the subjects. We conclude that despite their diﬀerent
aims both capabilities C and D should be provided in an
integrated way to address the trade-oﬀ just mentioned. An
important lesson here is that experts highly familar with the
product line want to navigate their own way, while novices
need guidance.
(E) On-the-ﬂy validity checks are certainly important,
however, this capability was not recognized very much by
users but rather expected to be present. Regarding the CD
dimension error-proneness we could not identify trade-oﬀs to
other dimensions. Reasons for errors need to be explained
while otherwise the checks should be as hidden from users
as much as possible. Nevertheless, not all product conﬁgu-
ration tools provide such capabilities.
(F) Interestingly, when developing the CW, we assumed
high priority of reset and undo and devoted a lot of eﬀort
to develop these features. The results of the study though
show that this capability was the least used and commented
on. Partly this can be explained by the nature of the study
of sequentially performing conﬁguration tasks. We assume,
however, that end users nowadays simply expect reset and
undo, eveniftheyuseditveryinfrequentlyduringourstudy.
There exists a trade-oﬀ between provisionality andpremature
commitment inthiscontextbecauseundo/redonavigatesthe
user through conﬁguration options, similar to branching and
navigation (cf. capability D).
(G) Immediate feedback was regarded as essential by par-
ticipantsofthestudyforboththetool’susabilityandutility.
Usersbeneﬁtfrominstantlyseeingtheeﬀectsoftheiractions
and can check their work-to-date frequently (CD dimension
progressive evaluation ). Our results conﬁrm that it is impor-
tant to support a highly interactive and incremental work117Table 3: Summary of implications and trade-oﬀs for conﬁguration tool developers.
Capabilities – CD dimensions [2] Beneﬁts (+) & Drawbacks (–) Implications & Trade-oﬀs
(A) Hiding and showing
conﬁguration options – visibility(+) Hiding reduces complexity
(+) Provides immediate feedback
(–) Graying out unanswerable questions can
cause confusionAllow users to turn-oﬀ this capability
↑hidden dependencies
↓visibility
(B) Views and ﬁlters – visibility&hidden
dependencies(+) Essential to work with large and complex
models
(–) Dependencies between questions in
diﬀerent views not obviousBalance the number of views and elements
Visualize dependencies on demand
Provide branching and navigation together
with freedom in navigation
↑visibility
↓hidden dependencies
(C) Branching and navigation – hidden
dependencies(+) Improves guidance of users
(–) Order of questions might not be intuitive
for all usersCombine with freedom in navigation
Provide user-speciﬁc navigation paths
↑premature commitment
(D) Freedom in navigation – premature
commitment(+) User-speciﬁc traversal of models
(–) Potential lack of guidance if not combined
with other capabilitiesCombine with branching and navigation
↓premature commitment
(E) On-the-ﬂy validity checks –
error-proneness(+) Essential to avoid inconsistent input
(–) Complex checks are diﬃcult to understand
(e.g., cardinalities)Hide as much as possible
Explain the reasons of errors
Foster the use of annotations to record
diﬃculties with understanding checks
(F) Reset and undo – provisionality (+) Allows to experiment rapidly with
diﬀerent choicesCombine with branching and navigation
↑premature commitment
(G) Immediate feedback – progressive
evaluation(+) Supports ’Prototyping’ and
experimentation (e.g., by quickly creating
products)
(–) Hard to comprehend how results have
been derivedSupport a highly iterative and incremental
work mode
Explain how automated processes work
(H) Annotations and comments –
secondary notation(+) Allows dealing with deviations and
exceptions
(–) Purpose of collected annotations and
comments unclearExplain how annotations and comments are
processed
↓provisionality
mode as otherwise it is hard for users to comprehend how
results have been derived. However, automated processes
such as generating documents or conﬁgurations need to be
explained to users to avoid confusion.
(H) The annotations and comments feature (CD dimen-
sionsecondary notation ) was also regarded as important,
however, it was also commented as being hard to perceive.
Here, a trade-oﬀ among secondary notation andprovisionality
became evident as the conﬁguration process is interupted
whenever users start adding comments. We conclude that
while a capability is needed for adding comments in an easy-
to-use and informal way, it is important to explain to users
how annotations and comments are processed, e.g., by illus-
trating the workﬂow.
5.4 Threats to Validity
A threat to construct validity is the potential bias caused
by the system selected for the study. However, our study
does not focus on model details but on the usefulness of the
tool utilizing the model. We selected the ECS model as it
was known to all industry participants and allows working
with all CW capabilities described in Section 3. According
toSiemensexperts, thesystemisrepresentativeofothersys-
tems in industry. A further threat is that our study assumes
the ECS variability model to be complete and correct, a fact
thathasbeenconﬁrmedbytheindustryexpertscreatingthe
model but is hard to verify.
There are also threats to internal validity meaning that
theresultsmighthavebeeninﬂuencedbyourtreatment. We
had no direct inﬂuence on the selection of subjects as they
were nominated by our industry partners. Also, the numberof subjects may seem relatively small. However, they cover
a wide range of diﬀerent roles of business-oriented end users
and are well-qualiﬁed for the study.
Regarding conclusion validity, there is a threat that the
results are not based on statistical relationships but on qual-
itative data [23]. However, given that a main aim of the
study was to study the behavior and opinions of users of a
tool qualitative research methods are well suited. The anal-
ysis of the collected data still depends on our interpretation.
Theworkwasperformedbyasingleresearcherbuttheresult
was carefully checked by two other researchers.
With respect to external validity we selected a system
representativeregardingsizeandcomplexityfortheautoma-
tion software domain and asked experienced industry people
covering diverse roles. Although the derived implications
depend on our experiences of using and implementing the
DOPLER CW and especially its GUI, the capabilities are
common in other conﬁguration tools, as discussed in Sec-
tion 2. The mapping to the CD framework relates our re-
sults to HCI knowledge.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The conﬁguration of software products is more and more
performed by end users such as sales people, project man-
agers, domain experts, or customers. Tool capabilities are
thus required for guiding such end users in product conﬁgu-
ration. Usability issues are often underestimated in current
product conﬁguration tools. In particular, the dependen-
cies among diﬀerent guidance capabilities are not well un-
derstood. The key contributions of this paper are (1) the
identiﬁcation of key product conﬁguration tool capabilities118for guiding users based on a review of existing literature
and tools including a mapping to the CD framework; (2) an
implementation of these capabilities in the DOPLER CW;
and (3) a thorough analysis of the usefulness (usability and
utility) of the user guidance capabilities with industrial end
users together with general implications and trade-oﬀs for
conﬁguration tool developers. We will further improve the
DOPLER CW and hope that the study results will con-
tribute to the development of conﬁguration tools in software
engineering.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThisworkhasbeenconductedincooperationwithSiemens
VAI Metals Technologies and Siemens CT and has been
supported by the Christian Doppler Forschungsgesellschaft,
Austria. We thank all participants of the study. The au-
thors would further like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their valuable comments and suggestions.
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. K. Abbasi, A. Hubaux, and P. Heymans. A toolset
for feature-based conﬁguration workﬂows. In Int’l Soft-
ware Product Line Conf. , pages 65–69. IEEE, 2011.
[2] A. Blackwell and T. Green. Notational systems – the
cognitive dimensions of notations framework. In J. Car-
roll, editor, HCI Models, Theories, and Frameworks:
Toward a Multidisciplinary Science , pages 103–134.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2003.
[3] G. Botterweck, S. Thiel, D. Nestor, S. bin Abid, and
C. Cawley. Visual tool support for conﬁguring and un-
derstanding software product lines. In Int’l Software
Product Line Conf. , pages 77–86. IEEE, 2008.
[4] K. Czarnecki, P. Grünbacher, R. Rabiser, K. Schmid,
and A. Wasowski. Cool features and tough decisions:
A comparison of variability modeling approaches. In
Int’l Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-
Intensive Systems , pages 173–182. ACM, 2012.
[5] S. Deelstra, M. Sinnema, and J. Bosch. Product deriva-
tion in software product families: a case study. J. Syst.
Softw., 74(2):173–194, 2005.
[6] D. Dhungana, P. Grünbacher, and R. Rabiser. The DO-
PLER meta-tool for decision-oriented variability mod-
eling: a multiple case study. Automated Software Engi-
neering, 18(1):77–114, 2011.
[7] ESI and IKV++. Model-driven architecture instrumen-
tation, enhancement and reﬁnement. Technical Report
MASTER-D1.1-V1-PUBLIC, 2002.
[8] A. Felfernig, G. Friedrich, D. Jannach, and M. Zanker.
Intelligentsupportforinteractiveconﬁgurationofmass-
customized products. In 14th Int’l Conf. on Industrial
& engineering applications of artiﬁcial intelligence and
expert systems , pages 746–756. Springer, 2001.
[9] P. Grünbacher, R. Rabiser, D. Dhungana, and
M. Lehofer. Model-based customization and deploy-
ment of Eclipse-based tools: Industrial experiences. In
24th Int’l Conf. on Automated Software Engineering ,
pages 247–256. IEEE/ACM, 2009.
[10] A. Holzinger. Usability engineering methods for soft-
ware developers. CACM, 48(1):71–74, 2005.[11] A. Hubaux, Y. Xiong, and K. Czarnecki. A user sur-
vey of conﬁguration challenges in Linux and eCos. In
Int’l Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-
Intensive Systems , pages 149–155. ACM, 2012.
[12] C. Kästner, T. Thüm, G. Saake, J. Feigenspan, T. Le-
ich, F. Wielgorz, and S. Apel. FeatureIDE: Tool frame-
work for feature-oriented software development. In Int’l
Conf. on Software Engineering , pages 611–614, 2009.
[13] M. La Rosa, W. van der Aalst, M. Dumas, and A. ter
Hofstede. Questionnaire-based variability modeling for
system conﬁguration. Software and Systems Modeling ,
8(2):251–274, 2009.
[14] V. Myllärniemi, M. Raatikainen, and T. Männistö.
Kumbang tools. In Int’l Software Product Line Conf.
(vol. 2), pages 135–136. Kindai Kagaku Sha, 2007.
[15] A. Nareyek, E. C. Freuder, R. Fourer, E. Giunchiglia,
R. P. Goldman, H. Kautz, J. Rintanen, and A. Tate.
ConstraintsandAIplanning. IEEE Intelligent Systems ,
20(2):62–72, 2005.
[16] J. Nielsen. Usability engineering . Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, 1994.
[17] A. Nöhrer and A. Egyed. Optimizing user guidance
during decision-making. In Int’l Software Product Line
Conf., pages 25–34. IEEE, 2011.
[18] R. Rabiser, P. Grünbacher, and D. Dhungana. Sup-
porting product derivation by adapting and augment-
ing variability models. In Int’l Software Product Line
Conf., pages 141–150. IEEE, 2007.
[19] R. Rabiser, P. Grünbacher, and D. Dhungana. Require-
ments for product derivation support: Results from a
systematic literature review and an expert survey. In-
formation & Software Technology , 52(3):324–346, 2010.
[20] R. Rabiser, W. Heider, C. Elsner, M. Lehofer, P. Grün-
bacher, and C. Schwanninger. A ﬂexible approach for
generating product-speciﬁc documents in product lines.
InInt’l Software Product Line Conf. , pages 47–61.
Springer, 2010.
[21] P. Runeson and M. Höst. Guidelines for conducting and
reporting case study research in software engineering.
Empirical Softw. Eng. , 14(2):131–164, April 2009.
[22] D. Sabin and R. Weigel. Product conﬁguration
frameworks-a survey. IEEE Intelligent Systems ,
13(4):42–49, 1998.
[23] C. B. Seaman. Qualitative methods in empirical stud-
ies of software engineering. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. ,
25(4):557–572, 1999.
[24] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant. Designing the User
Interface: Strategies for Eﬀective Human-Computer In-
teraction . Pearson Addison-Wesley, 2009.
[25] M. Sinnema and S. Deelstra. Industrial validation of
COVAMOF. J. Syst. Softw. , 81(4):584–600, 2008.
[26] F. J. van der Linden, K. Schmid, and E. Rommes.
Software Product Lines in Action: The Best Industrial
Practice in Product Line Engineering . Springer, 2007.
[27] B. Yu and H. J. Skovgaard. A conﬁguration tool to in-
crease product competitiveness. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 13(4):34–41, 1998.119