TradeMaker:
Automated Dynamic Analysis of Synthesized Tradespaces
Hamid Bagheri*x
hb2j@virginia.eduChong Tangx
ctang@virginia.eduKevin Sullivanx
sullivan@virginia.edu
*Computer Science Dept.xComputer Science Dept.
George Mason University University of Virginia
Fairfax, VA 22030 USA Charlottesville, VA 22903 USA
ABSTRACT
System designers today are focusing less on point solutions
for complex systems and more on design spaces , often with
a focus on understanding tradeos among non-functional
properties across such spaces. This shift places a premium
on the ecient comparative evaluation of non-functional
properties of designs in such spaces. While static analysis
of designs will sometimes suce, often one must rundesigns
dynamically, under comparable loads, to determine proper-
ties and tradeos. Yet variant designs often present vari-
ant interfaces, requiring that common loads be specialized
to many interfaces. The main contributions of this paper
are a mathematical framework, architecture, and tool for
specication-driven synthesis of design spaces and common
loads specialized to individual designs for dynamic tradeo
analysis of non-functional properties in large design spaces.
To test our approach we used it to run an experiment to test
the validity of static metrics for object-relational database
mappings, requiring design space and load synthesis for, and
dynamic analysis of, hundreds of database designs.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.2 [ Software Engineering ]: Design Tools and Tech-
niques
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Performance
Keywords
Specication-driven Synthesis, Tradeo Space, ORM, Static
Analysis, Dynamic Analysis
1. INTRODUCTION
Producing systems that achieve acceptable tradeos among
non-functional properties remains a major engineering prob-
lem. To address it, engineers are now focusing less on point
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ICSE ’14, May 31–June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05 ...$15.00.solutions and more on specifying, populating, and analyz-
ing points and regions in design spaces. The contribution
of this work is an approach to specication-driven synthe-
sis of both design spaces and common loads for fair, com-
parative, dynamic analysis of non-functional properties of
variant designs across such spaces. A key challenge is to
synthesize test loads for fair comparative analysis, because
doing so generally requires specialization of common loads
to the variant interfaces of variant designs. Our goal is to
synthesize both design spaces and such loads automatically
from common, formal, design-space specications, to enable
specication-driven automated dynamic analysis of tradeos
among non-functional properties across large design spaces.
This paper provides one solution to this problem, par-
ticularly for design space models expressible within a rela-
tional logic [20]. Section 2 presents object-relational map-
ping (ORM) as a concrete driving problem. Section 3 presents
a mathematical and solution framework. Section 4 details
an implementation architecture using a relational constraint
language (Alloy) and solver (Alloy Analyzer) for expression
and synthesis of design spaces and loads. Section 5 presents
an experiment using our dynamic analysis approach to test
the validity of static predictors of non-functional properties
of database applications. The rest of the paper presents our
evaluation of this work, related work, and conclusions and
thoughts about future work.
2. DRIVING PROBLEM
While our long-term aim is to improve engineering produc-
tivity and quality through advances in design space science
and technology, our short-term research strategy is to use
the analysis of spaces of object-relation mappings (ORM)
as a tractable and useful driving problem .
In this domain, one starts with an object model as in Fig-
ure 1 and eventually selects one of many possible strategies
for mapping such a model to a relational database, with
tradeos in response time, space usage, and evolvability.
Figure 2 illustrates two such strategies; and Listing 1, a
database set-up script derived from one of these solutions.
Simple ORM solutions, many in everyday use, lock one
into either point solutions or highly constrained solution
spaces. To address this problem, our earlier work [6] pre-
sented a capability to synthesize comprehensive ORM de-
sign spaces from formal object model specications. Given
such a space, the challenge is to develop, validate, and ap-
ply non-functional property prediction ( analysis ) functions
to designs in the space to predict properties of designs in,
and tradeos across, the space.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568291
106
Figure 1: A simple object model with three classes,
Order ,Customer , and PreferredCustomer , a one-to-many
association between Customer and Order , and with Pre-
ferredCustomer inheriting from Customer .
Figure 2: Two mapping strategies. White boxes repre-
sent classes; gray titles, corresponding tables, and black
and white arrows, mapping and inheritance relation-
ships. Foreign keys are marked as fKeys .
Ideally, one has a vector of easily computed, well vali-
dated analysis functions. In that case, mapping this vector
of functions (or, equivalently, this vector-valued function)
across the points in the space yields a multi-dimensional,
non-functional property image of the design space. Trade-
os, Pareto-optimal solutions, and other critical information
can then be read from the results.
Static analysis functions predict properties from the struc-
tures of design representations. Such functions are often ef-
cient, but might not be available, validated, or predictive.
This point is clear in our earlier work. Cognizant of the is-
sues, we applied published but not well validated static met-
rics [7,18] to our synthesized ORM spaces. The results were
interesting and promising and allowed us to make progress
in our research, but it was clear that questions remained.
Can design decision makers believe such metrics? What are
the actual properties and tradeos?
1C R E A T E TABLE `Order ` (
2` orderID ` int(11) N O T NULL ,
3` orderValue ` int(11) ,
4` customerID ` int(11) ,
5K E Y ` FK customerID idx ` ( ` customerID ` ) ,
6P R I M A R Y K E Y ( ` orderID ` )
7) ;
8
9C R E A T E TABLE ` Customer ` (
10`DType ` varchar (31) ,
11` discount ` int(11) ,
12` customerID ` int(11) N O T NULL ,
13` customerName ` varchar (31) ,
14P R I M A R Y K E Y ( ` customerID ` )
15) ;
Listing 1: Synthesized MySQL database creation
script elided for space and readability.
Figure 3: A view of our tool to provide decision-makers
with Pareto-optimal OR mapping solutions based on
static analysis results; columns and rows represent met-
rics and solution alternatives, respectively.
These questions took on added urgency with our produc-
tion, reported here for the rst time, of a web-accessible tool
that implements our ORM synthesis and analysis approach.
We call it Trademaker-ORM1(T-ORM). It supports auto-
mated, specication-driven synthesis of ORM design spaces
and static analysis using the aforementioned metrics. It pro-
vides a web interface, user account and job management (job
submission, asynchronous execution, status reporting, per-
sistence), computation and presentation of Pareto-optimal
subsets of synthesized designs under the given metrics, and
synthesis of SQL databases for selected designs. Figure 3
presents a screen shot of a T-ORM run. Rows present
Pareto-optimal designs, and columns, analysis results. List-
ing 1 presents an SQL database creation script obtained by
selecting a design from the table.
To test the validity of the results that T-ORM reports,
we turned to dynamic analysis. The combination of ample
computing capacity and our ability to synthesize many run-
ning databases for given object models suggested that we
measure properties and tradeos of actual running systems,
in the spirit of what Cadar et al. call multiplicity comput-
ing[11]. Doing so could at least validate the static metrics
through statistical analysis of the power of these metrics to
predict dynamically measured results. If we could validate
the static metrics, we could use them for ecient analysis. If
not, we could fall back on less ecient but more trustworthy
dynamic analysis.
The problem was now to gure out how to automate fair
comparative dynamic analysis of diverse database designs.
There are of course many commercial tools for generating
database testing loads from schemas. In our case, however,
many variant schemas implement a common object model.
An application that operates against an object model will
create what we will call an abstract load that any implemen-
tations would have to handle. The translation from abstract
load to concrete operations on a database would be imple-
mented by an application based on a single choice of map-
ping strategy. We faced the need to synthesize hundreds or
thousands of such load specialization functions.
3. ALGEBRAIC MODEL
The insight that enabled such synthesis was that we could
recover, from synthesized database designs, abstraction func-
tions relating designs back to the object model specica-
tions from which they were derived, and that from these
abstraction functions we could derive functions for concretiz-
ing abstract loads synthesized from the same object models.
The commutative diagram in Figure 4 presents the resulting
1www.jazz.cs.virginia.edu:8080/Trademaker107mathematical structure. Design abstis a set of formal design
space specications in a particular domain, inductively de-
ned by the grammar and semantics of the language in which
the models are specied. In work to date, we represent de-
sign space specications as expressions in a domain specic
language embedded in a relational logic.
Design abst Load abst
Design conc Load concl
t
clcompute ac
Figure 4: Algebraic structure of the Trademaker ap-
proach.
To an abstract model, m2Design abst, we apply a de-
sign space synthesis (concretization) function, c, to compute
c(m)Design conc;the space of concrete design variants
from which we want to choose a design to achieve desirable
tradeos. Relation ccan be seen as mapping abstract, in-
tensional models of design spaces to extensional representa-
tions, namely sets of concrete design variants. We represent
the design space synthesis function, c, as a semantic map-
ping predicate in our relational logic, taking expressions in
the abstract modeling language to corresponding concrete
design spaces. Relation a, an abstraction relation, explains
how any given concrete design, d2c(m);instantiates (i.e.,
is a logical model of) its abstract model, m. Function cis
specied once for any given abstract modeling language, as
a semantic mapping predicate in our relational logic.
Relation l;an abstract load generation relation, similarly
maps an abstract model, m2Design abst;to a set of ab-
stract loads l(m)Load abst.
To dynamically analyze a concrete design, d2c(m), an
abstract load, ld2l(m) has to be specialized for the partic-
ular design. The function t, a load concretization function,
serves this purpose. We compute tfrom a:As long as c(m)
preserves a representation of ain its output, then from any
single design space model, m;we can synthesize a concrete
design space, and both abstract and concretized loads.
The derivation of tfrom ainduces a mapping, cl, from
concrete designs to concrete loads parameterized by a choice
of abstract load. This function completes the commutative
diagram. We do not actually implement this mapping. The
next section describes instantiation of our approach for the
particular domain of object-oriented relational database per-
sistence mappings.
4. MODEL IMPLEMENTATION
This section presents an implementation architecture for
our approach (for ORM). Figure 5 gives a high-level overview.
Boxes represent processing modules, and ovals, module in-
puts and outputs. Abstract models are given as expressions
in Alloy-OM, a domain-specic language embedded in Al-
loy's relational logic language. Roughly speaking, we specify
Figure 5: High-level overview of the TradeMaker imple-
mentation for the particular domain of ORM.
candlas predicates in Alloy. Conjoining these predicates to
an Alloy-OM model yields a specication of the desired out-
put space. The Alloy analyzer computes the results, encoded
as Alloy models, which we then unparse into useful forms.
From concrete design models we extract SQL database cre-
ation scripts. From abstract load models combined with
choices of concrete databases, we derive concrete loads rep-
resented as sequences of SQL insert and select queries.
The rest of this section details how we implement the main
components of the approach, corresponding to functions c,l,
andt:Subsection 4.1 explains how we implement c, for syn-
thesizing concrete models from abstract design space speci-
cations; 4.2, how we implement l, for synthesizing abstract
loads from the same specications; and 4.3, how we imple-
ment t, for concretization abstract loads.
4.1 Design Space Synthesis
Mapping abstract object models to concrete designs was
the subject of earlier work [6]. Novel results since that work
include substantial renement and validation of mapping
rules and the production of functions that unparse concrete
designs representations, encoded as Alloy objects, into SQL
database creation scripts. This translation is important for
tool users as a key to automating dynamic analysis.
To make this paper self-contained, this subsection briey
reviews the approach. We then briey describe relevant new
work. Inspired by a bottom-up model-driven approach [5],
we start by expressing object models in a domain-specic
language embedded in Alloy, called Alloy-OM. We then use
Alloy's constraint solver to synthesize concrete OR map-
ping strategies, realizing the function, c. The synthesizer
uses our Alloy-encoded formalizations of best practices for
object-relational mapping, described informally in the liter-
ature [10,21,25].
Alloy-OM supports three main constructs: Class, Attribute
andAssociation . Each class in an (e.g., UML) object model
appears as a Class signature in Alloy-OM. Each attribute
of a given class appears as an Alloy-OM Attribute in the at-
tribute set of the corresponding Alloy-OM Class signature.
Each association in the object model appears as an Alloy-
OMAssociation signature.
Listing 2 presents a fragment of an Alloy-OM model for
our customer-order example. The Order class has two at-
tributes, \orderID" and \orderValue", assigned to the \at-
trSet" eld of the Order class. The id eld species the
orderID as the identier of this class. The last two lines of
the Order signature specication denote that Order is not1081one sig Order extends Class fgf
2 attrSet = orderID + orderValue
3 id=orderID
4 isAbstract = No
5 noparent
6g
7one sig CustomerOrderAssociation extends
Association fgf
8 src = Customer
9 dst = Order
10 s r c m u l t i p l i c i t y = ONE
11 d s t m u l t i p l i c i t y = M A N Y
12 g
Listing 2: Order class in Alloy-OM.
an abstract class and has no parent. Lines 7{12 then spec-
ify the CustomerOrderAssociation , along with the number
of object instances that can be at each end of the associa-
tion, denoted as srcand dstmultiplicity . Alloy-OM is not
a sophisticated modeling language. The salient point is that
embedding it in Alloy allows us to use Alloy relations to
encode, and the Alloy analyzer to compute, formally speci-
ed semantic mapping rules to other domains: here concrete
database designs and abstract loads for those designs.
Figure 6: OR mapping for customer-order example
Figure 6 presents a graphical depiction of an Alloy object
encoding a synthesized OR mapping solution. This solution
is one of ve Pareto-optimal solutions in the design space
for our customer-order object model. The diagram is accu-
rate but edited to omit some details for readability. In this
diagram, Table1 is associated to Customer and Preferred-
Customer classes, and Table0 is associated to both Order
and CustomerOrderAssociation.
From this Alloy solution, our tools generate the SQL script
of Listing 1. The script sets up a database with the two
tables: Order , with attributes orderID ,customerID and or-
derValue ; and Customer , with attributes, customerID ,cus-
tomerName ,discount , and DType . Both Customer andPre-
ferredCustomer objects are stored in this table under this
particular mapping strategy, with the DType eld distin-
guishing the type of record stored.
4.2 Abstract Load Synthesis
Our approach to synthesizing abstract loads starts with
the automated transformation of a given Alloy-OM model
into a related Alloy specication that we call a load model.
We then use the Alloy Analyzer to synthesize abstract loads1fact f
2 all o1 , o2 : CustomerOrderAssociation jo1 . orderID =
o2 . orderID and o1 . customerID = o2 . customerID
=>o1=o2
3g
4
5fact f
6 all o : CustomerOrderAssociation jone c : Order jo .
orderID = c . orderID
7 all o : CustomerOrderAssociation jone c : Customer j
o . customerID = c . customerID
8g
Listing 3: Part of the load model specication generated
for customer-order association.
from this load model. Alloy solutions to the load model en-
code abstract object model data instances ( OM-instances ),
which are what we take as synthesized loads with which to
test synthesized designs. This section describes this func-
tionality in more detail.
For each instance of Class andAssociation in the Alloy-
OM model, our model transformer synthesizes a signature
denition. When the class under consideration inherits from
another class, the synthesized signature denition extends
its parent signature denition. Given the specication of
Order represented in Listing 2, the following code snippet
represents its counterpart in a synthesized load model.
sig Order f
orderValue : one Int ,
orderID : one Int
g
The onemultiplicity constraints used in the declaration
of elements' signatures within the Alloy-OM model (List-
ing 2) specify them as singleton signatures. While these
constraints are required by the tradeo space generator (e.g.
to not generate multiple tables for a class in the model), they
are unneeded for load generation, and thus omitted in the
load model. The element attributes in the object model are
also declared as elds of the corresponding load signature
denition representing relations from the signature to the
attribute type.
Finally, two sets of constraints are synthesized as fact
paragraphs in the load model to guarantee both referential
integrity of generated data as well as uniqueness of element
identiers with reference to the set of element instances to
be generated. Referential constraints require every value of
a particular attribute of an element instance to exist as a
value of another attribute in a dierent element.
Consider the association relationship between Customer
and Order classes from our running example (Figure 2). The
code snippet of Listing 3 represents synthesized constraints
in the load model for the customer-order association.
The expression of lines 1{3 states that if any two elements
of type CustomerOrderAssociation have the same orderID
andcustomerID , the elements are identical. This constraint
rules out duplicate elements. The fact constraint of lines
5{8 states that for any orderID and customerID elds of
aCustomerOrderAssociation , there are Order andCustomer
instances with the same orderID and customerID .
Applying the Alloy Analyzer to the derived load model
yields the desired load in the form of object model data in-
stances (OM-instances). Figure 7 depicts a generated OM-
instance, an Alloy solution object. This solution represents
two customers with customerID of 64 and 225, the latter
a preferred customer with 10 percent discount, along with109Figure 7: An example of OM-instance.
their orders. From many such solutions we derive an ab-
stract (application-object-model-level, rather than concrete-
database-schema-level) load with which to test the perfor-
mance of many database instances.
Improving the eciency of the load generator. One of the
challenges we faced involved the scalability of this approach
to load synthesis. A large number of solutions generated by
the Alloy Analyzer were symmetric to previously generated
instances, and thus did not contribute usefully to the load
being generated. We explored a number of ways to improve
eciency of the load generator. The one that we found
worked best is the iterative renement of the load model
by adding constraints that eliminate permutations of the al-
ready generated OM-instances. Without this improvement,
it took 21 hours for Trademaker-ORM to generate test loads
for one of our experiments. Given this approach, the time
was reduced to about 2 hours|an order of magnitude speed
up in the synthesis of test loads.
4.3 Abstract Load Concretization
The next challenge we discuss is to convert abstract load
OM-instance objects into concrete SQL queries on a per-
database basis. This is the task of specializing abstract load
elements to the variant schemas presented by dierent so-
lutions in the design space. Our Alloy-to-SQL transformer
handles this task. To create SQL statements for a given
database, Alloy-to-SQL transformer requires an OR map-
ping, the abstraction function describing how that concrete
database schema implements the abstract object model.
Algorithm 1 outlines this transformation. For brevity, and
because it suces to make our point, this section focuses
oninsert queries. The approach supports the generation of
select and update queries as well, which are important, of
course, for comprehensive dynamic analysis.
The logic of the algorithm is as follows. Iterate over all
elements in a given OM-instance (e.g., classes and associa-
tions) whose values can be populated into databases through
insert statements. Looks up the mapping to determine the
table in which the element values should be stored. For each
relational eld in the associated table, if the OM-instance
contains a value corresponding to that eld, insert the value
into the eld. Otherwise, in the case that the eld is a
DType , insert the name of element into the eld. Finally, if
the eld is a foreignKey, nd the associated attribute from
a relevant association in the given OM-instance, and insert
its value into the eld.
Consider the database alternative for our running exam-
ple, in which we store the customer-order association data
into the order table (Figure 2b). In that case, the eld
ofcustomerID in the Order table is a foreignKey, and its
values come from the associated customerOrderAssociation
element.Algorithm 1: Generate SQL Insert Statements
Input : omi: OM-instance, map: OR mapping
Output : A set of SQL insert statements
1forelement in omi do
2 T = map.TableAssociat(element);
3 F = T.elds;
4 foreld in F do
5 value = getValueFromOMI(eld);
6 ifvalue != null then
7 add \eld = value" into statements
8 end
9 else
10 ifeld == \DType" then
11 value = element.name;
12 end
13 ifisForeignKey(eld) then
14 attr = ndAttributeFromAssociation(eld);
15 value = getValueFromOMI(attr);
16 end
17 add \eld = value" into statements
18 end
19 end
20end
1INSERT INTO ` Customer ` ( ` customerID ` , `DTYPE` )
VALUES (64 , ' Customer ' ) ;
2INSERT INTO ` Customer ` ( ` customerID ` , `DTYPE` )
VALUES (225 , ' PreferredCustomer ' ) ;
3INSERT INTO `Order ` ( ` orderID ` , ` orderValue ` , `
customerID ` ) VALUES (184 ,511 ,64) ;
4INSERT INTO `Order ` ( ` orderID ` , ` orderValue ` , `
customerID ` ) VALUES (366 ,510 ,225) ;
Listing 4: Generated SQL insert statements from OM-
instance of Figure 7 for implementation mapping of
Figure 6.
Listings 4 represents the set of SQL insert statements gen-
erated from the OM-instance of Figure 7 according to the
mapping of Figure 6. The rst two generated statements
dene insert queries to store instances of Customer and Pre-
ferredCustomer into the Customer table along with appro-
priate DType values for each one. The next two statements
then store instances of Order and CustomerOrderAssocia-
tion into the Order table.
5. DYNAMIC ANALYSIS EXPERIMENT
As an experimental test of our approach to specication-
driven, automated dynamic analysis of non-functional prop-
erty tradeos across design spaces, we apply the approach to
test the validity of the static predictors of database perfor-
mance. We formulate, test, and provide experimental data
in support of three driving hypotheses:
H1: The ordering of alternatives predicted by the static
metrics predicts that of the dynamic analysis results110H2: The relative magnitudes of static measures of al-
ternatives predict those of the dynamic analysis results
H3: Dynamic analysis using scale-limited synthesized
loads predicts performance under much larger loads
This section summarizes the design and execution of our
experiment, the data we collected, its interpretation, and our
results, which include novel ndings regarding these metrics.
5.1 Static Metrics Suite
The choice of mapping strategy impacts key non-functional
system properties. Response time performance, storage space
and maintainability are among the set of quality attributes
dened by the ISO/IEC 9126-1 standard that are inuenced
by the choice of OR mappings. To statically measure these
attributes in an ORM design space, we use a set of metrics
suggested by Holder et al. [18] and Baroni et al. [7]. The met-
rics are called Table Access for Type Identication (TATI ),
Number of Corresponding Table (NCT), Number of Corre-
sponding Relational Fields (NCRF), Additional Null Value
(ANV), Number of Involved Classes (NIC) and Referential
Integrity Metric (RIM). In this work, we focus on three of
these metrics for time and space performance. Maintainabil-
ity is out of scope as we cannot measure it using dynamic
analysis technique.
5.1.1 Table Accesses for Type Identiﬁcation (TATI)
Table Accesses for Type Identication (TATI) is a perfor-
mance metric for polymorphic queries [18]. According to the
denition, given a class C, TATI(C) denes the number of
dierent tables that correspond to C and all its subclasses.
Our tools total up TATI values for each class as the overall
TATI measure for each solution alternative.
5.1.2 Number of Corresponding Tables (NCT)
Number of Corresponding Tables (NCT) is a performance
metric for insert and update queries. This metric species
the number of tables that contain data necessary to assem-
ble objects of a given class [18]. According to the denition,
given a class C, NCT(C) equals to NCT of its direct super
class, if C is mapped to the same table as its super class.
Otherwise, if C is mapped to its own table, NCT(C) equals
to NCT of its direct super class plus one. Finally, if C is
a root class, NCT(C) equals to 1. Our tool computes to-
taled NCT values over classes as the NCT measure for each
solution alternative.
5.1.3 Additional Null Value (ANV)
The Additional Null Value (ANV) metric species the
storage space for null values when dierent classes are stored
in a common table [18]. According to the denition, given
a class C, ANV(C) equals to the number of non-inherited
attributes of C multiplied by the number of other classes
that are being mapped to the particular table to which C is
mapped. Our tools present totals for ANV values over all
classes as the ANV measures for each solution alternative.
5.2 Static Analysis of Synthesized Designs
To apply these metrics to synthesized solutions, we de-
signed specic Alloy queries. Here we describe one for mea-
suring the TATI metric. The others are evaluated similarly.
TATI(C) = #(C.*( parent).tAssociate)
Figure 8: Multi-dimensional quality measures for pareto-
optimal solutions.
Here the dot operator denotes a relational join. The Alloy
operator represents the transpose operation over a binary
relation, which reverses the order of atoms within the rela-
tion. Given the tAssociate (abstraction) relation that maps
tables to their associated elements (i.e. Class or Associa-
tion) within the object model, its transpose is the relation
that maps each element to its associated table within the
relational structure. The Alloy *operator represents the
reexive-transitive closure operation of a relation. Accord-
ingly, the expression of \ C.*(parent) " states a set of classes
that have the class \C" as their ancestor in their inheritance
hierarchy. The query expressions then, by using the Alloy
set cardinality operator #, computes the TATI metric.
Our static metrics suite comprises six such static mea-
sures. The vector of these functions denes a 6-dimensional
static analysis function applicable to Alloy-synthesized con-
crete designs (e.g., Figure 6). Our tools map this function
over all elements of a synthesized design space to produce
a tradeo surface. The spider diagram, shown in Figure 8,
illustrates one Pareto-optimal point on that surface for our
example customer-order system. To display quality mea-
sures in one diagram, we normalized the values. Such dia-
grams can assist in conducting tradeo analyses by making
it easier to visualize and compare alternatives. According to
the diagram, if the designer opts for performance, she may
decide to use Sol. 5 instead of Sol. 4, as the latter has worse
values for the TATI and NCT performance metrics.
Of course none of this theory or machinery is very use-
ful if the metrics themselves are not predictive of the ac-
tual non-functional (performance) properties of candidate
designs. The rest of this section presents our experiment in
automated dynamic analysis, the goal of which was to help
us answer this question.
5.3 Four Subject Systems
We synthesized design spaces and compared static predic-
tions with dynamic results for four subject systems. The
rst is the object model of an E-commerce system adopted
from Lau and Czarnecki [24]. It represents a common ar-
chitecture for open source and commercial E-commerce sys-
tems. It has 15 classes connected by 9 associations with 7
inheritance relationships. The second and third object mod-
els are for systems we are developing in our lab. Decider is
another system to support design space exploration. Its ob-
ject model has 10 Classes, 11 Associations, and 5 inheritance
relationships. The third object model is for a system, CSOS,111a kind of cyber-social operating system meant to help coor-
dinate people and tasks. In scale, it has 14 Classes, 4 Asso-
ciations, and 6 inheritance relationships. We also analyzed
an extended version of our customer-order example.
5.4 Planning and Execution
Our experimental procedure involved the synthesis of both
design spaces of database alternatives and several abstract
loads in a variety of sizes for each subject system. Given the
synthesized schemas, we created a database for each alterna-
tive. We then populated generated data into databases, and
ran concrete queries over those databases. We measured and
collected the numbers of concrete queries generated from ab-
stract loads for each database alternative, query execution
time, as well as the size of each database.
We used an ordinary PC with an Intel Core i7 3.40 Ghz
processor and 6 GB of main memory, with SAT4J as our
SAT solver. Database queries were performed on a MySQL
database management system (DBMS) installed on a ma-
chine equipped with an AMD Opteron 6134 800 Mhz proces-
sor and 64GB memory. Data and statistical information are
available at http://jazz.cs.virginia.edu:8080/Trademaker/data.
Table 1: Design space sizes for subject systems.
Subj. Sys. Solutions Eq.Classes Pareto Sols.
Decider 386 154 12
E-commerce 846 360 16
CSOS 278 121 21
Cust-order (ext) 28 14 10
Table 1 summarizes generated solution space for each sub-
ject system. There is one row for each system. The columns
indicate the total number of solutions, the number of static
equivalence classes where equivalence is determined by equal-
ity of static analysis results, and the number of Pareto-
optimal solutions under the given static metrics.
We investigated and compared two dierent methods for
generation of data sets. The rst method generated data
using our formal synthesis methods. For the second, we
hand-developed a load generator for generating large loads
that nevertheless respect the constraints in our object mod-
els (e.g., referential constraints between elements).
Three data sets were developed for each subject system
to support the task of evaluating the static metrics.
Dataset 1 . This data set is generated using the Alloy-
based data generator, where the maximum bit-width for in-
tegers is restricted to 5. This leads to the generation of small
data set for our experiments.
Dataset 2 . This data set is generated using our Alloy-
based data generator. The maximum bit-width for integers
is restricted to 10, which leads to the generation a larger
data set compared with the former data set.
Dataset 3 . As with many formal techniques, the complex-
ity of constraint satisfaction restricts the size of models that
can practically be analyzed and synthesized [15, 22]. For
experimental purposes, we hand-implemented a more scal-
able data generator. It does not generate queries directly,
but rather replaces the constraint solver for synthesis of ab-
stract loads. Having synthesized larger abstract loads in the
form of OM-instances, using the mechanisms already used
in the Alloy-based data generator (cf. 4.3), the generatorthen transforms abstract loads into sets of concrete queries
targeting diverse implementation alternatives.
Table 2: Part of the generated data sets for the E-
commerce experiment; the rst row shows abstract loads
generated for the E-commerce system within each data
set; each cell in the other rows corresponds to the size
of generated concrete load for the database alternative
and data set given on the axes.
E-commerce Dataset 1 Dataset 2 Dataset 3
abstract load 862 2,576 164,813
Sol.19 (conc. load) 456 13,698 2,471,700
Sol.121 (conc. load) 320 9,770 1,647,800
Sol.264 (conc. load) 397 12,073 2,142,140
Sol.348 (conc. load) 379 11,395 1,977,360
Table 2 presents the sizes of generated data sets for some
of the solution alternatives for the E-commerce system. The
number of concrete queries rened from a common abstract
load is dierent in various solution alternatives, depending
on the way that each implementation mapping alternative
renes the abstract object model into the concrete represen-
tation in relational structure (cf. 4.3).
5.5 Results for Hypothesis H1 (Order)
To test the predictive power of our static metrics, we com-
pared its predictions against the results of our dynamic anal-
ysis. To evaluate our rst hypothesis|whether the relative
order of implementation alternatives is predicted by static
metrics|we compute Spearman correlation coecients, an
appropriate correlation statistic for order-based consistency
analysis. It measures the degree of consistency between
two ordinal variables [27]. A correlation of 1 indicates per-
fect correlation, while 0 indicates no meaningful correlation.
Negative numbers indicate negative correlations.
Table 3: Correlation coecients between the relative or-
der of solution alternatives predicted by static metrics
and those observed from actual runtime measures.
TATI NCT ANV
DeciderDataset1 0.93 0.93 -0.98
Dataset2 0.96 0.96 -0.92
Dataset3 0.95 0.92 -0.91
E-commerceDataset1 0.97 0.96 -0.95
Dataset2 0.98 0.95 -0.95
Dataset3 0.97 0.94 -0.95
CSOSDataset1 0.83 0.76 -0.97
Dataset2 0.57 0.62 -0.79
Dataset3 0.58 0.74 -0.55
Cust-order(ext)Dataset1 0.89 0.92 -0.51
Dataset2 0.74 0.53 -0.44
Dataset3 0.66 0.82 -0.56
Table 3 summarizes correlation coecients between static
metrics and dynamic measures. The data show reasonably
strong but somewhat inconsistent positive correlations be-
tween statically predicted and actual run-time performance
for TATI (average correlation of 0.84) and NCT (average
correlation of 0.84). These metrics appear moderately to
strongly predictive of the relative ordering databases run-
time performance, at least for the kinds of loads employed
in our experiments.112The performance of the ANV predictor varies across the
subject systems. ANV predicts well in the E-commerce and
Decider experiments and moderately in the CSOS data, but
weakly in the customer-order-extended set. Moreover, the
results show negative correlation between the ANV metric
and database size. As number of null values increases, size
decreases. This observation for the ANV metric is in direct
contrast to what is predicted. One possible reason is that
when the ANV metric increases, the number of tables for the
database solution under consideration decreases. Assuming
that the database system eciently stores null values, the
database size would reduce.
To further evaluate predictiveness of static metrics, we
consider the case in which designers use each static metric
as a two-class classier. We, thus, measure precision, recall
and F-measure as follows:
Precision is the percentage of those alternatives predicted
by a given metric as more preferable in terms of a given
quality attribute that were also classied as more preferable
by the actual analysis:TP
TP+FP
Recall is the percentage of alternatives classied more prefer-
able by the actual analysis that were also predicted as more
preferable by the a given metric:TP
TP+FN
F-measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall:
2PrecisionRecall
Precision +Recall
where TP (true positive), FP (false positive), and FN (false
negative) represent the number of solution alternatives that
are truly predicted as preferable, falsely predicted as prefer-
able, and missed, respectively.
While static metrics output predictions of quality charac-
teristics as natural numbers, actual analysis of query execu-
tion performance and required storage space are in terms of
Seconds and Bytes, respectively. To classify an alternative
aspreferable , we thus use median for each set of result val-
ues as a threshold. We measure evaluation metrics for each
subject system with respect to three data sets.
Table 4: Experimental results of evaluating OR metrics
as two-class classiers.
TATI NCT ANVPrecision
Recall
F-measure
Precision
Recall
F-measure
Precision
Recall
F-measure
DeciderDS1 1 0.75 0.86 0.83 0.83 0.83 0 0 0
DS2 0.83 0.83 0.83 1 1 1 0.17 0.17 0.17
DS3 1 1 1 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.17 0.17 0.17
E-commerceDS1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
DS2 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
DS3 0.9 0.9 0.9 1 1 1 0 0 0
CSOSDS1 0.75 0.82 0.78 0.75 0.82 0.78 0.36 0.33 0.35
DS2 0.83 1 0.91 0.67 0.80 0.73 0.36 0.33 0.35
DS3 0.83 1 0.91 0.83 1 0.91 0.36 0.33 0.35
Cust-orderDS1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.43 0.60 0.50
(ext)DS2 0.83 1 0.91 0.67 0.80 0.73 0.57 0.67 0.62
DS3 0.83 1 0.91 0.83 1 0.91 0.43 0.60 0.50
Table 4 summarizes the results of our experiments to eval-
uate the accuracy of static metric predictors as two-class
classiers. The average precision, recall and F-measure are
depicted in Figure 9. The results show the accuracy of the
TATI and NCT metrics in classifying implementation alter-
natives in terms of their run-time performance. The average
precision and recall for all four experiments are about 90%,
showing a low rate of both false positives and false negatives.
The ANV metric, however, achieves the average under 30%
in all evaluation metrics.
The experimental data thus suggests that, under the gen-
erated abstract loads, the relative order of implementation
alternatives predicted by static metrics of TATI and NCT is
Figure 9: Bar plot of the average precision, recall and F-
measure for considering static metrics as two-class clas-
siers.
indicative of their comparative preference in actual runtime
performance, but this is not the case for ANV as a static
predictor of storage space.
5.6 Results for Hypothesis H2 (Magnitudes)
To address the second hypothesis|relative magnitude of
static predictions matter|we employ a coecient of deter-
mination denoted R2, as a metric for how well actual out-
comes are predicted by the static metrics. Figure 10 plots
the results. For brevity, only results from Dataset 3 are
presented; other data sets give similar results.
The performance of the predictors varies widely across
systems and predictors. TATI and NCT are predictive of
performance for the E-commerce and Decider systems, but
relatively poor predictors for CSOS. TATI performs poorly
in the customer-order-extended data. ANV predicts size in
the E-commerce experiment, and moderately in the Decider
data, but inconsistently and weakly in the CSOS data and
not at all in the customer-order-extended set.
We interpret this data as suggesting that the relative mag-
nitudes of static metrics for various solution alternatives are
not reliably indicative of the relative magnitudes of actual
performance, and that ANV is a poor indicator of the stor-
age space. One is advised to use such static metrics with
caution. While TATI and NCT metrics predict the relative
order of solution alternatives with high condence, the dif-
ference in predicted values of two alternatives is not a good
indicator of their actual run-time dierence.
5.7 Results for H3 (Small vs. Large Loads)
To address the third hypothesis|that small, formally syn-
thesized loads predict the outcomes of much larger loads|
we employ the Pearson product-moment correlation statis-
tic. Pearson measures the degree of linear dependence be-
tween two variables, not necessarily ordinal, as opposed to
the Spearman test. A correlation of 1 represents perfect
correlation, and 0, no meaningful correlation.
We summarize correlation coecients between experimen-
tal results obtained from smaller data sets of 1 and 2 and
that of the large Dataset 3 in Figure 11. The average Pear-
son correlation coecient between Dataset 3 and the rst
and second data sets are 88% and 94%, respectively. These
data lend support to the proposition that smaller-scale test
sets produced by specication-driven synthesis can provide
valid predictions of performance under larger, more realistic
loads.113Figure 10: Correlation between static metrics and actual run-time measure; rows represent scatter plots of observed
values versus predicted values by TATI, NCT and ANV metrics from top to bottom, respectively; R2correlation
coecient is shown at the bottom of each plot.
Figure 11: Summary of Pearson correlation coecients
between experimental results obtained from smaller data
sets and that of the large Dataset 3.
6. OUR EVALUATION OF THIS WORK
The overarching problem this work addresses is interest-
ing and important: the need for improved science to sup-
port decision making in complex and poorly understood
tradeo spaces, particularly involving tradeos among non-
functional properties, also sometimes called ilities . We need
languages in which to specify design spaces, techniques for
synthesizing and analyzing design spaces, mechanisms for
mapping static and dynamic analysis functions across de-
sign spaces, techniques for validating such metrics, and tools
that enable engineers use the science to improve real engi-
neering practice [3,4]. We also need measures for ilities that
are important but hard to measure today: for evolvability,
some dependability properties, aordability of construction,
and more.This paper contributes some new results to the science
and engineering of tradeo analysis of non-functional prop-
erties. It suggests the possibility of useful formal languages
for specifying design spaces in support of formal synthesis
of both designs and comparative analysis loads. We showed
that specialization of common loads is enabled by access
to abstraction functions from concrete to abstract designs,
which can be embedded in the results of design synthesis.
Concretization functions proved useful not only for scale-
limited, formally synthesized loads, but for concretizing ab-
stract loads produced by other means. We also presented
an experiment using our tool to test the validity of static
predictors of database performance based on published but
not validated metrics. Two of the metrics appear to pro-
duce meaningful signals, while the third appears not useful.
The data also indicate a need for caution in relying on the
static metrics. Their predictive power, even in the \good"
cases, varied across application models. That said, we can
now provide automated dynamic analysis as a fall-back. We
are integrating support for invoking such automated analy-
sis into our Trademaker-ORM tool. Trademaker-ORM itself
has real potential utility for object-relational mapping and
partial application synthesis; but its greater signicance is
as a demonstration of our research results and a testbed for
further research on formal tradespace modeling and analysis.
There are of course limitations in our approach and in this
work. We mention those most relevant to a proper evalu-
ation of this eort. First, the static metrics we evaluated
sum the values of published metrics over the elements of
each design alternative. We thus extended the original met-114rics and our statistical results should technically be read as
pertaining to these extensions of the original measures.
Second, while our synthesis mechanisms are implemented
and working, our infrastructure for running synthesized con-
crete loads against synthesized designs still relies on some
manual processing. Our statistical data were thus derived
by dynamic analyses of certain subsets of our synthesized
designs. We selected the subsets deemed Pareto-optimal
by the static metrics. As our infrastructure matures, we
will conduct whole-space dynamic analyses, which we ex-
pect to produce results consistent the basic result presented
here. We are on a path to support automated whole-space
dynamic analysis through Trademaker-ORM. The work re-
ported in this paper did nevertheless involve the synthesis
and dynamic analysis of over 300 database alternatives.
Third, our experiments to date tested our hypotheses for
\random"loads of varying sizes. Real applications will gener-
ally produce non-random loads. Whether the static metrics
we tested are predictive for large, real applications remains
unclear. On the other hand, we oer dynamic analysis at
scale as an alternative. We envision a future in which some
systems run many design variants in parallel, perhaps with
small but representative loads abstracted from real loads on
live systems, to detect conditions in which dynamic switch-
ing to new implementation strategies should be considered.
Finally, there is the issue of scalability. Using Alloy as a
constraint solver entails scalability constraints. We can han-
dle object models with tens of classes. Industrial databases
often involve thousands of classes. It is unlikely that our
current implementation technology will work at that scale.
For now, it does have real potential as an aid to smaller-
scale system development. That we can present an object
model for a realistic web service, synthesize a broad space of
ORM strategies, select one based on tradeo analysis, au-
tomatically obtain an SQL-database setup script, provide it
Java EE, and have much of an enterprise-type application
up and running with little eort is exciting, even if it does
not address (yet) the most demanding needs of industry.
7. RELATED WORK
Much work is related to this research. Numerous tech-
niques have been developed for database test generation [8,
9,22,26], including the generation of realistic loads for TPC
benchmarks [1]. While some use constraint solvers [22, 26],
none generate common loads over spaces of alternative schemas.
Doing this requires enforcement of abstract design constraints
as well as constraints implied by concretization mappings for
each alternative. Trademaker, to our knowledge, is the rst
tool with this capability.
Others have derived databases from specications. Krish-
namurthi et al. [23] mapped Alloy specications into Scheme
implementations with a focus on databases. Cunha and
Pacheco [12] translated a subset of Alloy into corresponding
relational operations. These research eorts share with ours
the emphasis on using formal methods. Our work diers
fundamentally in its emphasis on the generation of spaces of
implementation alternatives, not just point solutions.
Much work has focused on object-relational mapping ap-
proaches to the object-relational impedance mismatch prob-
lem [10, 19, 21, 25]. Philippi [25] categorized the mapping
strategies in a set of pre-dened quality trade-o levels,
which are used to develop a model driven approach for the
generation of OR mappings. Cabibbo and Carosi [10] dis-cussed more complex mapping strategies for inheritance hi-
erarchies, in which various strategies can be applied inde-
pendently to parts of a multi-level hierarchy. Our approach
is novel in having formalized ORM strategies previously in-
formally described in some of these research eorts, thereby
enabling automatic generation of OR mappings for each ap-
plication object model.
Drago et al. [14] considered OR mapping strategies as
a variation points in their work on feedback provisioning.
They extended the QVT-relations language with annota-
tions for describing design variation points, and provided
a feedback-driven backtracking capability to enable engi-
neers to explore the design space. While this work is con-
cerned with the performance implications of choices of per-
inheritance-hierarchy OR mapping strategies, it does not
attack the problem that we address, the automation of dy-
namic analysis through synthesis of design spaces and fair
loads for comparative dynamic analysis.
The other relevant thrust of research has focused on map-
ping UML models enriched with OCL invariants into re-
lational structures and constraints. Heidenreich et al. [17]
developed a model-driven framework to map object models
represented in UML/OCL into declarative query languages,
such as SQL and XQuery. Badawy and Richta [2] provided
some rules guiding derivation of declarative constraints and
triggers from OCL specications. Extending the same line,
Al-Jumaily et al. [16] developed a model-driven tool trans-
forming the OCL constraints into SQL triggers. Demuth
et al. [13] also discussed a number of dierent approaches
to implement OCL-to-SQL mapping, and developed a tool
that transforms each OCL invariant into a separate SQL
view denition. Dierent from these research eorts trans-
forming an object model to a single counterpart in relational
structures, Trademaker generates tradeo spaces of object-
relational mappings with focus on structural mapping alter-
natives, rather than transformation of integrity constraints.
8. CONCLUSION
This paper makes several contributions to the science and
engineering of software-intensive systems: a mathematical
and implementation architecture for formal, automated dy-
namic analysis of tradeo spaces ; a principled approach to
load concretization for specializing common loads to large
numbers of variant implementations; experimental valida-
tion of (simple derivatives of) published ORM metrics|to
our knowledge the rst experimental evaluation of ORM
metrics; and TradeMaker-ORM, an accessible and functional
tool enabling tradeo analysis in large design spaces for
the particular domain of object-relational mapping, and a
testbed for ongoing research of the kind reported in this pa-
per. This paper also contributes to our broader research
program, which is increasingly focused on specifying, vali-
dating, realizing, and certifying acceptable tradeos among
non-functional properties, which remains a research chal-
lenge of the rst order.
9. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Michele Claibourn and Clay Ford of UVa Stat-
Lab for their consulting and statistical assistance. Kevin
Sullivan gratefully acknowledges support from the Systems
Engineering Research Center (SERC) under Contract H98230-
08-D-0171. SERC is a federally funded University Aliated
Research Center managed by Stevens Institute of Technol-
ogy.11510. REFERENCES
[1] TPC benchmarks. http://www.tpc.org.
[2] M. Badawy and K. Richta. Deriving triggers from
UML/OCL specication. In Information Systems
Development , pages 305{315. Springer US, Jan. 2002.
[3] H. Bagheri and K. Sullivan. Monarch: Model-based
development of software architectures. In Proceedings
of the 13th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems
(MODELS'10) , pages 376{390, 2010.
[4] H. Bagheri and K. Sullivan. Pol: Specication-driven
synthesis of architectural code frameworks for
platform-based applications. In Proceedings of the 11th
ACM International Conference on Generative
Programming and Component Engineering
(GPCE'12) , pages 93{102, Dresden, Germany, 2012.
[5] H. Bagheri and K. Sullivan. Bottom-up model-driven
development. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE'13) , pages
1237{1240, 2013.
[6] H. Bagheri, K. Sullivan, and S. Son. Spacemaker:
Practical formal synthesis of tradeo spaces for
object-relational mapping. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on Software Engineering and
Knowledge Engineering , pages 688{693, San Francisco
Bay, USA, 2012.
[7] A. L. Baroni, C. Calero, M. Piattini, and O. B. E.
Abreu. A formal denition for object-relational
database metrics. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Enterprise Information
System , pages 334{339, 2005.
[8] C. Binnig, D. Kossmann, E. Lo, and M. T. Ozsu.
QAGen: generating query-aware test databases. In
Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMOD international
conference on Management of data , SIGMOD '07,
pages 341{352, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[9] N. Bruno, S. Chaudhuri, and D. Thomas. Generating
queries with cardinality constraints for DBMS testing.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering , 18(12):1721{1725, 2006.
[10] L. Cabibbo and A. Carosi. Managing inheritance
hierarchies in Object/Relational mapping tools. In
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Advanced Information Systems Engineering
(CAiSE'05) , pages 135{150, 2005.
[11] C. Cadar, P. Pietzuch, and A. L. Wolf. Multiplicity
computing: a vision of software engineering for
next-generation computing platform applications. In
Proceedings of the FSE/SDP workshop on Future of
software engineering research , FoSER '10, pages
81{86, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[12] A. Cunha and H. Pacheco. Mapping between alloy
specications and database implementations. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Software Engineering and Formal Methods
(SEFM'09) , pages 285{294, 2009.
[13] B. Demuth, H. Hussmann, and S. Loecher. OCL as a
specication language for business rules in database
applications. In Proceedings of the UML 2001{TheUnied Modeling Language. Modeling Languages,
Concepts, and Tools , pages 104{117, 2001.
[14] M. L. Drago, C. Ghezzi, and R. Mirandola. A quality
driven extension to the QVT-relations transformation
language. Computer Science - Research and
Development , pages 1{20, 2011.
[15] Ethan K. Jackson, Eunsuk Kang, Markus Dahlweid,
Dirk Seifert, and Thomas Santen. Components,
platforms and possibilities: Towards generic
automation for MDA. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Embedded Software , pages 39{48, 2010.
[16] Harith T. Al-Jumaily, Dolores Cuadra, and Paloma
Mart nez. OCL2Trigger: deriving active mechanisms
for relational databases using model-driven
architecture. Journal of Systems and Software ,
18(12):2299{2314, 2008.
[17] F. Heidenreich, C. Wende, and B. Demuth. A
framework for generating query language code from
OCL invariants. Electronic Communications of the
EASST , 9, Nov. 2007.
[18] S. Holder, J. Buchan, and S. G. MacDonell. Towards a
metrics suite for Object-Relational mappings.
Model-Based Software and Data Integration , CCIC
8:43{54, 2008.
[19] C. Ireland, D. Bowers, M. Newton, and K. Waugh.
Understanding object-relational mapping: A
framework based approach. International Journal on
Advances in software , 2:202{216, 2009.
[20] D. Jackson. Alloy: a lightweight object modelling
notation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology (TOSEM) , 11(2):256{290, 2002.
[21] W. Keller. Mapping objects to tables - a pattern
language. In Proc. of the European Pattern Languages
of Programming Conference , page 207, 1997.
[22] S. A. Khalek, B. Elkarablieh, Y. O. Laleye, and
S. Khurshid. Query-aware test generation using a
relational constraint solver. In Proceedings of the 2008
23rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering , pages 238{247.
IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
[23] S. Krishnamurthi, K. Fisler, D. J. Dougherty, and
D. Yoo. Alchemy: transmuting base alloy
specications into implementations. In Proceedings of
FSE'08 , pages 158{169, 2008.
[24] S. Q. Lau. Domain Analysis of E-Commerce Systems
Using Feature-Based Model Templates . Master's thesis,
University of Waterloo, Canada, 2006.
[25] S. Philippi. Model driven generation and testing of
object-relational mappings. Journal of Systems and
Software , 77(2):193{207, 2005.
[26] C. Riva, M. J. Su arez-Cabal, and J. Tuya.
Constraint-based test database generation for SQL
queries. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
Automation of Software Test , pages 67{74, Cape
Town, South Africa, 2010. ACM.
[27] S. E. Stemler. A comparison of consensus, consistency,
and measurement approaches to estimating interrater
reliability. Practical Assessment, Research and
Evaluation , 9(4), 2004.116