A Dynamic Analysis to Support Object-Sharing Code
Refactorings
Girish Maskeri Rama
Infosys Limited
girish_rama@infosys.comRaghavan Komondoor
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
raghavan@csa.iisc.ernet.in
ABSTRACT
Creation of large numbers of co-existing long-lived isomor-
phic objects increases the memory footprint of applications
signicantly. In this paper we propose a dynamic-analysis
based approach that detects allocation sites that create large
numbers of long-lived isomorphic objects, estimates quan-
titatively the memory savings to be obtained by sharing
isomorphic objects created at these sites, and also checks
whether certain necessary conditions for safely employing
object sharing hold. We have implemented our approach as
a tool, and have conducted experiments on several real-life
Java benchmarks. The results from our experiments indicate
that in real benchmarks a signicant amount of heap mem-
ory, ranging up to 37% in some benchmarks, can be saved by
employing object sharing. We have also validated the pre-
cision of estimates from our tool by comparing these with
actual savings obtained upon introducing object-sharing at
selected sites in the real benchmarks.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.7 [ Software Engineering ]: Distribution, Maintenance,
and Enhancement; D.3.4 [ Programming Languages ]: Pro-
cessors
Keywords
Memory optimization; object caching
1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of large system memories has not vetted the
appetite for memory optimization tools for software. For
instance, various researchers have noted [15, 16, 25, 24] that
software commonly consumes unexpectedly high amounts
of memory, frequently due to programming idioms that are
used to make software more reliable, maintainable and un-
derstandable. In the case of modern object-oriented systems
Currently pursuing part-time PhD in Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE’14, September 15-19, 2014, Vasteras, Sweden.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3013-8/14/09 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642937.2642992 .public CommonFont getFontProps ( ) f
. . .
CommonFont commonFont =
new CommonFont(
fontFamily , f o n t S e l e c t i o n S t r a t e g y ,
fontStretch , fontStyle , fontVariant ,
fontWeight , fontSize , fontSizeAdjust ) ;
return commonFont ;
g
Listing 1: Creation of isomorphic objects
this problem is partly due creation of large numbers of co-
existing isomorphic objects. Intuitively, two objects are iso-
morphic if they are of the same type, have identical values in
corresponding primitive elds, and are such that correspond-
ing reference elds themselves point to isomorphic objects.
In other words, the portions of memory rooted at the two
objects are isomorphic shape-wise as well as values-wise.
1.1 Motivation
To illustrate this problem consider the example code in
Listing 1, adapted from the real program Apache FOP. This
code has been substantially simplied for ease of presenta-
tion. The getFontProps method in the code is used to cre-
ate a CommonFont object (to encode display properties) for
each FO (Formatting Objects) node in the input FO docu-
ment. Each CommonFont object (which we simply call font
object from here on) occupies 64 bytes in memory. For large
documents the number of such font objects created is very
large. However, in practice, because the elds of the Com-
monFont class can take on only a small number of distinct
values, e.g., Arial orTimesRoman forfontFamily and 10pt
or 12pt for fontSize , many of the font objects created are
isomorphic to each other. For instance, with a 104-page real
input document that we supplied as input, although the pro-
gram created 9079 font objects, 8943 (i.e., 98.5%) of these
objects belonged to only four distinct equivalence classes by
isomorphism. Furthermore, all font objects are long lived
(i.e., are live nearly until the end of execution of the pro-
gram). A signicant reduction in heap usage can therefore
be achieved if the code is refactored to de-duplicate orshare
common font objects whenever possible instead of always
creating distinct but possibly isomorphic objects. Such a
refactoring, which employs a cache to keep track of objects
created so far and to share them, is shown in Listing 2. We
have elided the equals and hashCode methods of the Com-
monFont class from the listing, which ensure that a cache
713
p r i v a t e Map<CommonFont , CommonFont >map =
new WeakHashMap <CommonFont , CommonFont >() ;
public CommonFont getFontProps ( ) f
. . .
CommonFont commonFont =
new CommonFont(
fontFamily , f o n t S e l e c t i o n S t r a t e g y ,
fontStretch , fontStyle , fontVariant ,
fontWeight , fontSize , fontSizeAdjust ) ;
i f (map . get (commonFont) != n u l l )
commonFont = map . get (commonFont) ;
// return cached isomorphic object
e l s e
map . put (commonFont , commonFont) ;
// i n s e r t new object into cache
return commonFont ;
g
Listing 2: Caching isomorphic objects
lookup using a newly created object as key is guaranteed to
return either null or an object that is isomorphic with the
new object. Note that whenever a cached object is found,
the newly created object implicitly becomes garbage and will
be collected by the GC, thus not occupying space in memory
that it otherwise would. Also, a WeakHashMap (rather than a
normal hash-map) is appropriate, because any ( key, value )
pair gets automatically deleted from a weak hash-map when
there are no references to the key object from any other
location in memory. This ensures that any originally non-
long-living objects that might happen to get introduced into
the cache are not kept there any longer than they are needed,
hence avoiding inadvertent increases in heap usage.
As a result of the above-mentioned refactoring, of the 9079
font objects, only 4 will be long living. This could potentially
result in a reduction of memory consumption of 567 KB
((9079 - 4) * 64 bytes) by the time all the font objects have
been created (ignoring space overheads due to the internal
structures of the cache).
We have observed that in several open-source projects, for
instance, Apache FOP, PDFBox , and GanttProject , there
were several allocation sites that create long-living objects
where sharing was not employed initially, but that were
refactored subsequently by programmers to employ sharing
by using a cache of some form. This is presumably in re-
sponse to memory bottlenecks that were observed after de-
ployment or usage of the initial (unoptimized) versions of
the applications. In fact, in the case of FOP, we have mea-
sured that sharing that has been introduced at 14 dierent
allocation sites by developers yields up to 11% reduction
in heap footprint on real inputs. Correspondingly, a limit
study on object duplication [15] has found that if an oracle
could be used to eliminate all instances of isomorphic co-
existing objects by resorting to object-sharing, then up to
60% reduction in peak heap usage can be achieved.
1.2 Challenges in introducing object sharing
However, once it has been recognized that an application
suers from high heap memory usage, there are many chal-
lenges in identifying object allocation sites that are good
candidates for employing object sharing. A good alloca-
tion site is one that would give good memory reduction after
a cache is introduced, and where it is safe to introduce acache. Good memory reduction occurs if the site creates
a reasonably large number of objects, with relatively few
equivalence classes among these objects wrt isomorphism
(thus increasing the scope for sharing), and with most of
these objects being long-living objects. The need for the
last condition mentioned above is as follows: If a site cre-
ates mostly short-lived (aka temporary) objects, then the
portion of heap memory occupied by objects from this site
will in general be low, because the garbage collector will col-
lect most of the extant objects that were created at this site
whenever it runs. Therefore, the savings in memory usage
due to a cache at this site will also be low.
We now discuss the safety aspect. Introducing object
sharing at a site is safe, intuitively, only if objects created
at the site or reachable from these objects right after they
are created are never modied in the rest of the program's
execution (in any execution), and if the rest of execution
is behaviorally independent of the actual addresses of these
objects. Safety is a real concern. For instance, in the open-
source project PDFBox (version 0.73) developers had em-
ployed a cache for object-sharing at the allocation site in
line 106 in le PDFFontFactory.java. However, a user de-
tected and reported a bug (Bug ID 610) on version 0.8.0 of
the software, which was subsequently xed in version 1.7.0.
The bug x involved disabling the cache, with the x de-
scription mentioning that unsafe sharing was the cause of
the bug.
Since real applications can have thousands of object al-
location sites, locating good candidate sites among these is
proverbially like looking for needles in a haystack.
Related research in the area of refactoring programs by
leveraging isomorphism opportunities is primarily focused
onreusing short-lived data structures after they are dead
rather than re-create new instances of these data structures
repeatedly [3, 21, 17]. The objective of such a refactoring
is primarily to reduce the GC overhead, and also to reduce
the running time required to re-create and re-initialize data
structures repeatedly. At an intuitive level these approaches
look for sites such that (1) they create many short-lived ob-
jects with disjoint lifetimes, and (2) there is much isomor-
phism among these objects, so that a few representative ob-
jects can be saved in a cache and reused whenever required.
While we share requirement (2) above, we actually have the
converse of requirement (1): We need to nd sites that cre-
ate mostly long-lived objects, so that sharing can be intro-
duced among these objects to reduce memory consumption.
Another key dierence is that reuse of a dead object does
not introduce any risk of changing the program's behavior.
In contrast, since we are looking to share live objects, we
face the additional challenge of somehow checking whether
a proposed refactoring to introduce sharing is safe or not.
1.3 Our approach and contributions
Our main contribution is a dynamic analysis technique for
estimating for the allocation sites in a program, for a given
input, the reduction in heap memory usage (in bytes, or as
a percentage) to be obtained by employing object sharing at
this site, as well as the safety of doing so. The quantitative
estimates produced by our technique of a user-observable
benet (i.e., actual memory savings) make it easier for de-
velopers to select sites to refactor. In contrast, previous ap-
proaches [21, 17] compute a metric between 0 and 1 for each
site, indicating the extent of isomorphism at the site. This
714metric can be used to rank sites heuristically, but does not
directly indicate the extent of observable run-time benet
to be expected from eliminating isomorphism.
Computing a precise memory savings estimate for every
allocation site in a program can be prohibitively expensive.
Checking the safety of employing object-sharing at each site
is also very expensive. At the same time, if imprecision in
the estimates is high or if safety is not checked carefully then
the utility of the approach will become compromised. The
solution that we propose, therefore, is a two-phase analysis,
both of which involve an instrumented run of the program
on the given input (with dierent instrumentation in the two
phases). The responsibility of the rst phase is to identify
unsafe sites and remove them from consideration as soon as
possible during the run, and also to remove sites that are
possibly unprotable as early as possible. The protability
of each site is approximately encoded by a metric that is
similar to the one used by Xu et al. [21]. The metric for
each site is updated each time the site is visited. Once a
site is removed from consideration during the run, visits to
the site in the remaining part of the run are not analyzed
in any way. In this way, the set of sites under consideration
shrinks monotonically over the run.
The allocation sites that remain under consideration at
the end of the rst phase are the sites to be tracked in the
second phase. The responsibility of this phase is to precisely
partition the objects created at each of these tracked sites
into equivalence classes wrt isomorphism. At the end of the
run, for each tracked site, its equivalence classes are used to
calculate a memory-savings estimate, as illustrated earlier in
Section 1.1. A heuristic is employed during this calculation
to eliminate from consideration non-long-lived objects in the
equivalence classes. In our approach we estimate savings at
the end of the run only, and not at other preceding points.
We discuss why this is justied in Section 5 of the paper.
Reverting to the notion of safety of introducing object-
sharing at a site, it is noteworthy that although our safety
characterization for refactoring a site (as discussed in Sec-
tion 1.2) basically insists on behavior preservation in all
runs of the program, our current dynamic analysis approach
checks for safety only in the given run of the program.
We have implemented our approach as a tool, Object
Caching Advisor (OCA). A key aspect of our tools is that
it is based purely on running an instrumented version of the
program, with no modications required to the underlying
JVM. This increases the applicability of our approach in
practice. We have experimented with our tool on a range of
real Java programs, including the DaCapo 2006 benchmarks.
Some of the key ndings of our experiments include:
Nearly all applications have potential for reduction of
memory usage by object sharing, with up to 37% esti-
mated reduction in heap footprint in the best case.
Our tool was able to detect that the unsafe site in
PDFBox that the developers had originally introduced
sharing at is indeed an unsafe site.
We considered an application, FOP, where develop-
ers had manually introduced object-sharing caches at
14 allocation sites, and ran our analysis on modied
versions of these applications wherein we disabled the
caching. We found that our tool placed 10 of these
14 sites within the top 27 ranks in its report of sitesvoid m( ) f
. . .
T v =
new C( a1 , a2 )
;
. . .
g=)private Map <T,T> cache=
new WeakHashMap <T,T>();
void m( ) f
. . .
T v = new C( a1 , a2 ) ;
T w = cache.get(v) ;
if (w != null)
v = w;
else
cache.put(v,v);
. . .
g
Figure 1: Caching using hash consing.
sorted by descending order of the estimated saving.
Furthermore, we found that developers had not em-
ployed sharing at several sites that the tool reported
and that would give good savings if sharing were to be
employed at them.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces the object-sharing refactoring in generic terms.
Section 3 introduces key notation and terminology that we
use. The sucient conditions for safely introducing caching
at a site are presented in Section 4. Section 5 discusses some
conceptual issues about when to estimate heap savings in a
run. We describe our actual dynamic analysis approach,
as well as our implementation of the approach, in Section
6. In Section 7 we discuss empirical results from our tool.
Section 8 discusses certain limitations of our approach and
experiments. Related work is presented in Section 9, while
Section 10 concludes the paper.
2. THE REFACTORING PROBLEM
Given an allocation site sof the form \ v = new
C(a1; : : : ; a i)" in a method `m' of a program, the problem
that we address is to refactor the code around the allocation
site to employ object sharing via the use of an object cache.
In the rest of this paper we will use the phrase introduce a
cache atsto denote this refactoring.
We spell out the code refactoring that our approach pri-
marily supports using the templates shown in Figure 1, with
the left side showing original code and the right side show-
ing refactored code. This style of object sharing has been
called hash consing in the literature. With hash-consing,
after a new object is allocated, the cache of existing objects
is searched for an object that is isomorphic to the new one.
If an existing one is found a reference to it is used in place
of the new one, thus allowing the new object to be garbage
collected. Hash consing has been employed in compilers or
run-time environments to save memory, in the context of
languages such as Lisp [10] and ML [2], and even with Java
(in the form of string interning ). However, we are addressing
the scenario of introducing hash-consing at the source-code
level as a refactoring.
There is another style of object sharing, called memoiza-
tion, in which an attempt is made to discover before each
object is created whether an existing object is available in
the cache that would be isomorphic to the new object if it
were to be created. If such an object is found the new object
need not be created at all. This style of object sharing puts
715less pressure on the GC than the hash-consing style. How-
ever, it is less generally applicable than the hash-consing
style. In particular, the key to be used for the cache lookup
needs to be in terms of the parameters to the constructor
corresponding to the allocation site where the object is to be
created. Also, this constructor needs to be side-eect free,
else the behavior of the program can change if calls to it
are elided. While our memory savings estimation approach
for a given allocation site is as precise for the memoization
style as it is for the hash-consing style, we currently have
not implemented the check for the side-eect freedom of the
constructor. Therefore, the total savings estimates across all
sites that we report in Section 7 include savings from sites
that are potentially amenable only to hash-consing but not
to memoization.
3. NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY
In this section we present some notation and terminology
that we will use throughout this paper. We say that two
objects orandosareisomorphic at an instant of time tin
a run, if the values of all corresponding primitive elds of
orandosare equal at that instant, and the objects referred
to by the corresponding reference elds of orandosare
themselves isomorphic at the instant t. We say that an
object ojisreachable from an object oiat some instant in
a run, denoted as oj2Reach (oi), if either ojisoiitself or
ojis reachable from oiat that instant by following one or
more reference elds. We omit the instant tin the notation
above as it will be obvious from the context of usage.
We say that an object ois avalue object at an instant t
in a run if object oas well as each object in the heap that
is reachable from it at the instant thas the following two
properties: (1) the object is not mutated in the rest of the
run, and (2) the object's identity , in particular, its address,
is not used in any computations or conditionals in the rest of
the run (the notion of an object's identity aecting compu-
tations or conditionals is dened fully in previous work [15]).
Intuitively, an object is a value object at an instant tif it
itself and all objects reachable from it behave like true val-
ues from that instant onward, in the sense that they do not
mutate and do not have any identity. Whenever we refer
to a instant in a run just \after" an object ois created, we
mean the instant when control has returned from the con-
structor corresponding to o's creation site. We will refer to
an object oas a value object (without reference to an instant
of time) if ois a value object at the instant right after its
creation. We dene an allocation site sin a program as a
value-object site, or VO site, if in all runs of the program all
objects created at the site are value objects.
Along-lived object is one that survives multiple rounds
of garbage collection and is still extant (i.e., not garbage
collected) at the end of the run. A temporary orshort-
lived object is one that dies soon after it is created. In a
Generational GC scheme, which is used by default in the
primary reference JVM implementation HotSpot [18], long-
lived objects are the ones that are in the tenured generation
at the end of the run, while short-lived objects are ones that
never migrate to the tenured generation.
4. SAFETY
In this section we discuss our sucient condition for safely
introducing a cache at an allocation site s. The introductionof a cache at an allocation site (to implement hash-consing
style object-sharing) can be said to be safeif the refactoring
causes no change in the observable behavior of the program.
That is, whenever a newly created object oris replaced by
another object osthat is in the cache, the rest of the run
is identical to the rest of the run had the replacement not
occurred, in terms of both the sequence of instructions ex-
ecuted, as well as the updates to the state of the program
performed by corresponding pairs of instructions in the two
runs.
Our sucient condition is derived from the sucient con-
dition that was postulated by Marinov and O'Callahan [15]
for safely replacing an object orin the heap of a program at
an arbitrary instant of time tin an execution with another
object osthat also exists in the heap at that instant. Due
to space limitations we are not able to present their su-
cient condition. Our sucient condition diers from theirs
in two ways: (1) It is simplied and instantiated to the set-
ting where a freshly created object is replaced immediately
after creation by another object that is taken from a cache,
and (2) it is stated in terms of isomorphism and value ob-
jects, which are notions that they did not use, and which
are useful in our setting. The following theorem captures
our sucient condition for the safety of the hash-consing
style refactoring.
Theorem 1.Introducing a cache at an allocation site s
to employ hash-consing style object-sharing is safe if (1) the
allocation site sis a VO site, and (2) if the method equals
of the class whose instances are being created at the site is
such that it returns true only if the two objects given to it
are isomorphic.
It can be shown in a straightforward manner that if two
objects orandosare isomorphic at an instant tand are both
value objects at that instant then they necessarily satisfy
Marinov and O'Callahan's sucient condition. Using this
argument as the basis it is easy to show the correctness of
our theorem above.
5. ESTIMATION OF HEAP SIZE SA VINGS
In this section we discuss some basic intuitions about how
and when (in a run) to estimate heap savings. We present
our actual dynamic analysis approach that is based on these
intuitions in Section 6. A key prerequisite activity to doing
memory-savings estimation is to determine what exactly to
measure, and at what point or points of time in the run of
the program to measure. A naive approach to estimating
savings at any instant of time tin the run due to object
sharing would be to take into account all the objects cre-
ated so far from the allocation site sthat are extant (i.e.,
not yet garbage collected) at this instant, and to calculate
the extra memory occupied by objects that are isomorphic
with other objects from this site. However, there are some
problems with this suggestion. If at instant ta lot of tempo-
rary objects from site sare present in the heap, then these
would skew the estimation and make it non-representative.
The reason for this is that if hypothetically the GC had
done a cycle of collection just before this instant then most
of these temporary objects that are present could have as
such gotten collected and would thus not have been present
in the heap. In other words, estimates become dependent
on (non-deterministic) GC timing, which is undesirable.
716A possible x to this problem is to somehow identify tem-
porary objects that are present in the heap and exclude them
from the calculation, or choose the instant tsuch that it
is right after a GC collection cycle. However, these ideas
are impractical to implement in a setting where we sim-
ply run an instrumented program on a stock JVM, with no
help or support from a (modied) GC. Furthermore, even if
savings could somehow be estimated by discounting tempo-
rary objects, in order to express this savings as a percentage
(rather than simply in bytes) we would need to know the
total amount of memory occupied by allnon-temporary ob-
jects (from all allocation sites) at that instant. Again, this
information is dicult to obtain without a modied JVM.
Therefore, the approach we take is to estimate the reduc-
tion in the size of the heap at the end of the run of the
program only. This approach has the following merits:
For the class of allocation sites that create predomi-
nantly long-lived objects, the space occupied in mem-
ory by objects from this site is likely to grow monoton-
ically over the course of the program's run. Therefore,
total memory requirement, and hence the savings po-
tential due to sharing, peaks at the end of the run.
Therefore, the end of the run is a natural point to es-
timate savings at.
There exists a technique which can be applied at the
end of the run to infer the likely fraction of objects
allocated at each site that were not long-lived, with-
out depending on JVM modications. This informa-
tion can be used to produce a memory-savings estimate
that is not skewed by these non long-lived objects. We
describe this technique in Section 6.
The total amount of memory occupied by all long-lived
objects (from all sites) at the end of the run, to be
used as the denominator while calculating savings as
a percentage, can be identied readily using logs from
Generational GCs, without needing any modications
to the JVM.
The eciency of our approach is improved, since we
do not need to calculate the estimate (which is an ex-
pensive operation) repeatedly for any site.
6. OBJECT CACHING ADVISOR: DESIGN
AND IMPLEMENTATION
As mentioned in Section 1, we propose a two-phase ap-
proach. That is, given a program Pand an input I, we run
two dierent instrumented versions of Pon the same input
Isequentially. We now discuss these two phases in detail.
6.1 Phase 1: Filtering out unsafe and
unprof- itable allocation sites
Th
e objective of this run of the program is to identify un-
safe allocation sites as well as each possibly unprotable al-
location sites, and to emit the remaining sites for processing
by Phase 2 (which actually calculates estimated savings).
The following are the key data structures that are em-
ployed in the instrumented program. Tracked is the set of
IDs of allocation sites in the program that are under consid-
eration (by \allocation site ID" we mean the static location
of an allocation site). This set is initialized to contain allswitch (current event )
case (object ojis created at site si):
if(si2Tracked )
foreach ok2Reach (oj): Add sitoO2Sites [ok]
fp='(oj)
F2Counts [si;fp] =F2Counts [si;fp] + 1;
endif
if(calc prot now(si))
if(poor prot (si)):Tracked =Tracked -si
endif
case (object ojis written to):
foreach sk2O2Sites [oj]:Tracked =Tracked -sk
case (addresses of objects oiandojare compared):
foreach sk2O2Sites [oi][O2Sites [oj]:
Tracked =Tracked -sk
end-switch
Figure 2: Event-processing pseudo-code for Phase 1
the allocation sites in the program; as the run proceeds al-
location sites are subsequently removed from this set as and
when they are found unsafe or potentially unprotable.
O2Sites is a map from objects to sets of allocation site
IDs. Intuitively, if okis an object and siis an allocation
site,sineeds to be added to O2Sites [ok] if at some point
during the run an object ojis created at site siandokis
reachable from ojright after oj's creation.
F2Counts is a map from (allocation site ID, ngerprint)
pairs to frequencies. A ngerprint of an object is a number
that encodes the shape of the region of heap reachable from
the object, as well as values in primitive elds of the objects
in this region. Fingerprints are such that two isomorphic
objects will have the same ngerprint (but not necessarily
vice versa). F2Counts [si][fp] indicates the number of objects
that have ngerprint fpthat were created by instances of the
allocation site siup to the current point in the run.
The run-time events of interest that are instrumented in
this run of the program are object creations, writes to ob-
jects, as well as identity-based operations.
Object allocations: When an object ojis created at an
allocation site si, this event is processed by the instrumen-
tation code as shown in the rst \case" block in Figure 2.
If site siis still in under consideration (i.e., is in the set
Tracked ) then the following actions are taken: (1) The site
siis added to the sets of all objects reachable from ojin the
O2Sites map. (2) The ngerprint fpofojis computed, and
then the count F2Counts [si;fp] is incremented by 1. We use
the function 'proposed by Xu [21] to compute ngerprints;
this function basically involves a recursive descent from the
given root object, and an aggregation of the values in the
primitive elds of all objects encountered using additions
and multiplications.
The activities mentioned above are illustrated in Figure 3.
The call to the constructor at site siis shown to the right
in the middle, while the returned `root' object ojas well as
objects reachable from it are shown to the left. Objects o1
ando2have been passed to the constructor, and are referred
to by the new objects (shown shaded). Note that object o4
would have been created at an allocation site that is inside
the constructor corresponding to site si. Sample pre-existing
maps O2Sites and F2Counts [si] before siis executed are
shown at the top of the gure. The bottom part of the
717O2Sites
o1 fsb; : : :g
o2 fsc; : : :g
o3 fsd; : : :g
: : : : : :
o6 fsh; : : :gF2Counts [si]
d568f3 12
87cf34 8
830ce4 32
o2
o1
o3'(o)=
87cf34o4) ,o2o1
o3si: new( oj
O2Sites
oj fsig
o4 fsig
o1 fsb; si; : : :g
o2 fsc; si; : : :g
o3 fsd; si; : : :g
: : : : : :
o6 fsh; : : :gF2Counts [si]
d568f3 12
87cf34 9
830ce4 32
Figure 3: Handing of allocation events
gure shows these same maps after they get updated due
to the creation of oj. The underlined entries are the newly
added or updated entries.
We now come back to the pseudo-code in Figure 2. The
predicate calc prot now(si) indicates whether it is time to
check heuristically whether siis a potentially unprotable
allocation site. In our current implementation this predicate
returns true every 100th time site siis reached in the run.
The predicate poor prot (si) checks whether site sihas poor
potential prot by checking whether there is not much iso-
morphism among the objects created so far at site si. This
predicate is modeled after the reusability metric of Xu [21],
although they use their metric as a nal output rather than
simply to lter away sites from further processing. We cur-
rently use the following denition of poor prot (si):
((max fp2FF2Counts [si][fp]=P
fp2FF2Counts [si][fp])<0:1)_
((jFj=P
fp2FF2Counts [si][fp])>0:2)
where is Fisdom(F2Counts [si]), or in other words, the
set of ngerprints in F2Counts [si]. If poor prot (si) is true
we remove si(once for all) from the set of sites under con-
sideration. This saves run-time expense in the rest of the
run, because during future visits to this site siall objects
reachable from the root object that was just created need
not be traversed.
Write operations: When a eld of an object ojis writ-
ten to, this event is processed by the instrumentation as
shown in the second \case" block in Figure 2. Basically, all
objects okfrom which ojwas reachable just after okwas cre-
ated become non value objects. Therefore, the sites at which
such objects okwere created are inferred to be unsafe, and
are hence removed from consideration (once for all).
Identity-based operations: In our current implemen-
tation we check only for address comparisons (which are the
most common form of identity-based operations). Objects
whose addresses are compared become non value objects,
and cause allocation sites to be considered unsafe, as shown
in the pseudo-code in the third \case" block in Figure 2.6.2 Phase 2: Calculating estimated savings
In this instrumented run only the allocation sites that
remain in the Tracked set at the end of the rst phase are
tracked. These sites are known to create only value objects
(when the program is run on the input I); therefore, in this
phase, write operations and identity-based operations need
not be instrumented.
The main data structure maintained in this phase is a
map O2Info , which is a map from (allocation site ID, ob-
ject) pairs to pairs of natural numbers. freq(O2Info [si][oj])
is the rst of the two numbers that ( si; oj) is mapped to, and
indicates the number of objects that have been allocated so
far in the run from site sithat are isomorphic to object oj.
An object ojis used as an index in the map in conjunction
with sii (1) ojis a root object that was returned from
sitesi, and (2) ojis the rst element in its equivalence class
of objects (wrt isomorphism) to have been created at si.
In other words, corresponding to each equivalence class of
objects from site sithere is only one entry in O2Info [si].
size(O2Info [si][oj]) is the second of the two numbers that
(si; oj) is mapped to, and indicates the number of bytes in
memory that would have been saved had ojbeen garbage
collected right after it was created. We count this as the sum
of the sizes of the objects that are reachable from ojright
after it was created, excluding the sizes of the objects that
were pre-existing before ojwas created. In our implementa-
tion, we treat all objects reachable from the parameters to
the constructor invoked at site sias pre-existing objects. In
Figure 3 the objects to be counted towards the size of ojare
shown shaded.
Actions during object allocations: When an object
ojis created at an allocation site si, the key activity is to see
if there is any object that has already been created at this
site that is isomorphic to oj. That is, we look for an entry
O2Info [si][ok] such that ojandokare isomorphic. This is
inherently an expensive operation, but is optimized to some
extent by using the ngerprint of ojand the ngerprints
of the objects that are used as indexes in the map O2Info
as a lter to reduce unnecessary isomorphism checking. If
such an entry O2Info [si][ok] is found, then we simply incre-
ment freq(O2Info [si][ok]). Otherwise, we create a new entry
O2Info [si][oj], set its freqcomponent to 1, and set its size
component to the total sizes of fresh objects reachable from
ojas discussed earlier.
Emitting estimates at the end of the run: For any
allocation site si, letRirepresent the set of root objects allo-
cated at site sithat are the rst elements of their respective
equivalence classes. At the end of the run, the instrumen-
tation code calculates the estimated savings (in bytes) for
each tracked allocation site sias follows:
X
ok2Ri(freq(O2Info [si][ok]) 1)
ratioLL isize(O2Info [si][ok])
ratioLL i(read as \ratio of long-lived objects") is an esti-
mate of the ratio of objects created at sithat are long-lived.
This information can be readily obtained at the end of (an
uninstrumented version of) the program using prolers such
ashprof . The calculation that was presented above can be
summarized as follows. For each equivalence class of objects
(wrt isomorphism) that were created at si, the savings due
to sharing of long-lived objects in this class is the product of
(1) the number of objects in the class except its representa-
718tive element times the proportion of these objects that are
estimated to be long-lived, and (2) the amount of memory
to be saved if these objects were to be collected soon after
it is created.
The estimate for a site can also be expressed as a percent-
age of the total size of the tenured generation at the end of
the run. The tenured generation at the end of the run is
expected to consist mostly of long-lived objects.
6.3 Implementation details
Our implementation is based on the JavaAssist [12] byte-
code instrumentation framework. We instrument the ap-
plication code as well as third-party libraries (i.e., jars) on
which the application is dependent. Therefore, we compute
estimates for allocation sites in the application as well as
in third-party libraries. For the sake of eciency we do
not instrument the JDK core libraries. This could cause
some writes or identity operations on application-level ob-
jects to be missed, and hence could potentially introduce
unsoundness. To mitigate this partially we use a manually
constructed list of JDK core library methods that can cause
safety issues, and treat any object that is being passed to any
of these methods as a non value object. We use the Redis
in-memory key-value store to maintain the data structures
used by the instrumented run eciently. For the data struc-
tures that are indexed by objects (i.e., O2Sites andO2Info ),
we use object IDs to represent objects. We construct an ID
for an object by combining the values returned by the iden-
tityHashCode() method when applied on this object as well
as on the corresponding \class" object.
While we generally treat address comparisons as causes of
unsafeness, we ignore address comparisons in user-dened
equals methods. In our observation most of these address
comparisons turn out to be benign.
Another common idiom that we treat specially is the one
wherein certain elds of newly-allocated objects are initial-
ized in statements that follow the allocation site that cre-
ates the object. This idiom causes many benign allocation
sites to be called non VO sites (due to the mutation in the
above-mentioned statements). In order to partially oset
this limitation we ignore mutations to any object that are
carried out in the method that contains the allocation site
that created the object. These mutations are frequently not
a hindrance to introducing a cache, for the following reason:
in the refactored code one could check whether the newly
allocated object is in the cache at the point after the state-
ments that set these elds, rather than at the point after the
allocation site. Finally for the sake of eciency we do not
do deep isomorphic check for objects of type belonging to
thejava.lang package. Instead we rely on the equals method
which we assume is implemented correctly for the classes in
this core package.
7. EVALUATION
In this section we evaluate our tool on a number of soft-
ware benchmarks, as shown in Table 1, and answer several
research questions.
In Table 1 the rst column indicates the name of the
benchmark, the second column indicates the total number
of allocation sites in the benchmark, including ones in the
third-party libraries (excluding the JDK core libraries), the
third column indicates the subset of these allocation sites
that are in the third-party libraries, while the fourth col-System Name Total
allocation
sitesAllocation
sites in
librariesBytecode
instruc-
tions
antlr 2496 0 105596
chart 5355 4395 451719
bloat 2958 0 121912
fop 17897 14591 184699
luindex 1298 0 77816
pmd 11201 9476 545766
hsqldb 4590 443 197981
xalan 7110 5250 151134
Apache fop (ver-
sion 1.1)14293 0 537711
pdfbox (version
0.73)2265 89 76002
Table 1: Benchmarks considered for evaluation.
umn indicates the total number of bytecode instructions in
the application code as well as third-party libraries. We dis-
tinguish the application code from the third-party library
code using simple patterns on the package names, which
may not be fully accurate.
The rst eight benchmarks (i.e., upto xalan) belong to the
DaCapo 2006 [4] benchmark suite. There are two reasons
why did not use the more recent 2009 version of this suite:
(1) A previous related approach [21] used this version, and
we wanted to compare our results with theirs. (2) We had
technical diculties in instrumenting and running the 2009
benchmarks. We have omitted eclipse , which is a part of the
DaCapo suite, from our studies as we could not instrument
and run it successfully.
In order to test whether our tool nds allocation sites
that developers consider important, we searched the check-
in commit comments of various open-source projects using
Krugle [14] to identify employment of caches by developers.
We then manually identied allocation sites in these systems
that use caching to share long-lived objects. Following this
process we found two relevant benchmarks, fop (version 1.1)
and pdfbox (version 0.73). There are 14 sites where develop-
ers have employed (hash-consing style) caching for sharing
objects in fop (version 1.1), and one site in pdfbox. Note
that this version of fop is dierent from the one that is part
of the DaCapo suite, which is the version 0.20.5. Since we
use both these versions in our evaluation, for convenience
we refer to the DaCapo version simply as \fop" and version
1.1 as \Apache fop".
For the DaCapo benchmarks we used the \default" test
input provided for each benchmark. We did not use the
\large"inputs, because in some of the benchmarks the\large"
run turns out to be nothing but a sequence of separate runs
over smaller inputs. Since at the end of each of the smaller
runs all long-lived objects become dead, for our purposes
the \large" run is not appropriate.
For each of the two non-DaCapo systems we needed to
select a test input. For Apache fop we used a real 104-page
document [9]. For pdfbox we used cweb.pdf , which is a 28-
page document provided along with the pdfbox distribution,
as the test input. We ran pdfbox in the \text extraction"
mode.
We ran our experiments on a Linux desktop with an Intel
Core 2 2.4 GHz Quad Core processor and 4 GB of RAM.
We use the standard Oracle HotSpot JVM with the default
options. Detailed artifacts corresponding to all our experi-
719System H EbE% To T1 T2
(KB) (KB) (sec) (min) (min)
antlr 7093 1035 16% 11 13 5
chart 12199 986 8% 27 31 14
bloat 8197 530 6% 14 580 8
fop 7215 2658 37% 3 6 4
luindex 9437 1248 13% 39 300 21
pmd 15979 2167 14% 19 517 18
hsqldb 76970 6762 9% 9 52 4
xalan 16523 1503 9% 8 40 4
Apache
fop75680 5102 7% 6 73 5
pdfbox 5119 1667 33% 2 18 3
Table 2: Estimated savings in tenured heap for top-
20 sites
ments are available from the home page of the second author
of this paper.
7.1 RQ 1: What is the estimated total savings in heap by
introducing caches in real benchmarks?
Table 2 shows the total estimated savings produced by
our tool considering the top-20 sites (ranked by estimated
savings per site) for each benchmark. The second column
(H) of the table indicates the size of the tenured generation
at the end of the run, the third column Ebshows the total
estimated savings for the top 20 sites (which we calculate as
the sum of the estimates for the individual sites), while the
fourth column E%expresses the value in the third column
as a percentage of the value in the second column. It can be
observed that all systems present signicant opportunities
for memory reduction, ranging from 6% of the tenured heap
(bloat) to 37% (fop).
An interesting observation we made is that of the top-20
sites in each benchmark, the number of sites inside third-
party libraries varies from zero in several benchmarks to 19
sites in the case of pmd.
7.2 RQ 2: What is the overhead of the analysis?
The fth column ( To) of Table 2 indicates the running
time (in seconds) of the benchmark without any instrumen-
tation, the sixth column ( T1) indicates the running time (in
minutes) of Phase 1 of our analysis, while the seventh col-
umn ( T2) indicates the running time (in minutes) of Phase 2
of our analysis.
The running time overhead of the analysis is very high,
ranging from approximately 98x for antlr and chart to ap-
proximately 2520x for bloat. Part of the overhead is due
the need to recursively visit all reachable objects from the
\root" object at allocation sites; however, the overhead due
to this reduces as sites get removed from the Tracked set.
However, there is instrumentation overhead at all write op-
erations, and this, unfortunately, does not reduce as the run
progresses.
We feel that the overall running time, which in the worst
case corresponds to an overnight run (e.g., for bloat and
pmd), is tolerable. We also feel it is commensurate with
the benet provided, namely, an actionable report that con-
tains estimates of user-observable memory savings potential
at highly protable allocation sites. Isomorphism analysis
is inherently expensive; for instance, the Cachetor tool [17],
which measures isomorphism (among temporary objects),
incurs overhead of 567x on antlr, 317x on pmd, and 287x onSite manually cached Rank
CommonBorderPaddingBackground.java:351 1
CommonHyphenation.java:114 3
CommonFont.java:123 4
EnumNumber.java:54 5
EnumProperty.java:97 8
StringProperty.java:107 9
FixedLength.java:84 13
FontFamilyProperty.java:55 14
NumberProperty.java:158 26
LengthProperty.java:56 27
NumberProperty.java:178 NP
NumberProperty.java:148 NP
ColorProperty.java:84 NP
CharacterProperty.java:72 NP
PDFontFactory.java:106 Non-VO
Table 3: Positions of developer-cached sites in tool
output
luindex. Their overheads are on average lower than ours as
they don't actually construct precise equivalence classes for
all objects from a site, which is required to produce direct
quantitative estimates of memory savings.
We also evaluated our tool in a dierent mode, wherein
the developer would like to estimate savings for a specic
allocation site that they suspect might give good memory
reduction upon caching. In this mode, in Phase 1 of the
tool's run, the set Tracked is initialized to contain only the
site selected by the developer. If a developer happens to
select a site that is either unsafe or not protable, Phase 1
takes between 5 to 70 times less time than when all sites
are being tracked (depending on the benchmark). This is
because such sites get removed early from the set Tracked ,
leading to immediate termination. However, if the selected
site happens to be a protable VO site, our observation was
that the running time was not much less than when all sites
are being tracked.
7.3 RQ 3: Does the approach detect sites that developers
want to cache?
Table 3 shows information about the 14 sites in Apache
fop where developers have introduced caches to share long-
lived objects (the rst 14 rows in the table), and the one
site in pdfbox where the same was done (the nal row). For
each site we rst indicate in the table the le name and line
number at which it is located.
In order to determine whether our tool identies these
very sites in its output we made code changes to disable all
the caches mentioned in Table 3, and than ran our analysis
on the thus modied versions of the two benchmarks. The
second column of Table 3 shows the rank of each of these
sites in our tool's output (when sorted in descending order
of estimated savings).
We discuss the sites in Apache fop rst. Ten of the 14 sites
(the ones in the rst Ten rows of the table) were determined
to be protable by Phase 1 of our tool, and were computed
an estimate for by Phase 2. Four other sites were removed
from consideration in the Phase 1 itself. These ve sites are
marked \NP" in the table. This indicates that our tool has
high\recall"of sites that developers think are worth caching.
Interestingly, the developers have not employed caches at
the sites that occupy ranks 2, 6, and 10 in our tool's output.
These sites have estimated savings of 1.7%, 0.7%, and 0.5%,
720respectively. This is evidence that developers can potentially
miss protable sites in the absence of good tool support for
identifying such sites.
Coming to pdfbox, the only site that was cached by the
pdfbox developers (see the last row in Table 3) was identi-
ed as a non-VO by our tool. The objects created at this
site were being mutated during the run. As we noted in
Section 1 developers subsequently removed this caching (in
the subsequent version 1.7.0 of the project) in response to a
user's bug report. This instance illustrates clearly the im-
portance of ensuring safety while introducing caches, and
also the diculty of doing so without good tool support.
7.4 RQ 4: What is the estimation accuracy of our tool?
For this study, we considered 19 sites from four bench-
marks. Fourteen of these sites are in Apache fop, and are
the ones in the rst fourteen rows in Table 3. The caches
at these sites already exist (were introduced by the devel-
oper). Therefore, we (1) ran the tool with caches disabled
at all sites to produce an estimate for each site, and (2) for
each site ran the original (uninstrumented) program, with
the cache disabled rst and then enabled, to determine the
actual savings in nal tenured heap due to the cache at that
site. Of the remaining ve sites, two are from antlr, two
are from pdfbox, and one is from chart. At these sites there
were no developer-introduced caches. Therefore we had to
introduce caches ourselves at these sites.
Due to space constraints we do not show the estimated
savings and actual savings at all these sites. At one extreme
there was a site where the estimated savings was less than
the actual savings by as much as 2.8% of the nal tenured
heap. On 16 out of the 19 sites the estimate was either less
than the actual savings, or was above the actual savings by
up to 0.1% of tenured heap. On the remaining three sites,
the largest deviation was on a site where the estimate was
above the actual savings by 1.53% of tenured heap. The
root mean square (RMS) of these deviations when they are
expressed as percentages of the tenured heap works out to
1.08%. We feel that expressing these deviations as a per-
centage of nal tenured heap is more useful than expressing
them as a percentage of actual savings, because developers
ultimately care about savings in the nal tenured heap.
We investigated more closely the two extreme sites men-
tioned above. The site where the estimate was less than the
actual savings by 2.8% of the nal tenured heap is the site
CommonFont.java:123 in Apache fop, which we happened
to show in Listing 1. The nal tenured heap size in the run
of the original code with caches at all fourteen sites disabled
is 78269 KB. After introducing the cache at the above site,
the heap size reduced to 75507 KB, which is a reduction of
3.5% in tenured heap. As illustrated in Section 1.1, the esti-
mated savings for this site is 567 KB (0.7% of tenured heap).
The estimate is low because, as discussed in Section 6.2, ob-
jects that were passed in as parameters to the constructor
and that are reachable from the root object returned from
the site are not included in the estimate. However, in this
particular case the parameter objects are not referred to by
any other object or variable after the root object gets con-
structed. Therefore, if this site is cached, these parameter
objects would also get garbage collected whenever a root
object is thrown away (due to a cache hit).
The other extreme case is the site FontFamilyprop-
erty.java:55 in Apache fop, where the estimated savings isInput Estimated Actual
savings savings
104 page 5.6% 11.1%
10 page 3.9% 7.5%
3 page 8.5% 6.5%
Table 4: Variation of savings across dierent inputs
System #
Inter-
section# Unsafe
sitesEstimated
savings due
to safe sites
(KB)Estimated
savings
(%)
antlr 0 11 8 0%
bloat 0 10 0 0%
luindex 3 5 0.5 0%
pmd 2 9 175.7 1%
xalan 0 3 0 0%
fop 0 4 3.7 0%
Table 5: Comparison with Xu's[21] approach
above the actual savings by 1.53% of the tenured heap. On
this site the estimated savings was 92.6 KB, while the ac-
tual savings was -1107 KB, indicating an increase in memory
requirement due to the overhead of caching.
7.5 RQ 5: What is the sensitivity of estimated and actual
savings to program input?
The objective of this RQ is to measure the sensitivity of
the estimated as well as actual savings from a selected set
of sites to the test input that is used. For the 14 sites in
Apache fop that are listed in Table 3, Table 4 shows both the
sum of the estimated savings from these sites (with caches
at all these sites disabled) as well as actual savings when
the caches are enabled (simultaneously) at all these sites,
on three dierent test inputs. The rst input happens to
be the input that was used to answer all other RQs above.
This table indicates that both the estimated and the actual
savings for a given set of sites can vary across dierent test
inputs. The estimation error (i.e., estimate compared to
actual) also varies across inputs. As part of future work we
intend to explore how to select a suitable set of test inputs
for each program and produce aggregated estimates from
these inputs.
On a related note, we also measured the running time of
Apache fop with all the caches disabled and enabled, respec-
tively. On the 104-page document the running time with the
caches enabled decreased by about 1%, while on the other
two documents it increased by about 5%.
7.6 RQ 6: How does our tool compare with a previous
tool?
We requested the authors of the previous work [21, 17] on
nding allocation sites that create a lot of isomorphic ob-
jects, but predominantly temporary objects, to share their
tool output with us. Our objective was to see if our top-
20 lists diered signicantly from their top-20 lists for the
DaCapo 2006 benchmarks. We are thankful to the authors
for sharing with us the lists from their rst approach [21].
We provide a summary of this comparison in Table 5. The
second column of this table shows the sites that are in the
intersection of their list and our list. It is notable that these
numbers are very low. The third column indicates the num-
ber of sites in their top-20 list which our approach detects
721as unsafe (for sharing). It is notable, though, that since
most of these sites create temporary objects, which any-
way don't give savings upon sharing, the inability to employ
sharing here is not a concern in practice. The fourth col-
umn indicates the total estimated savings calculated by our
tool if sharing were to be employed at the safe sites in their
list. Note that these estimates are very low, indicating these
sites indeed create mostly temporary objects. The last col-
umn shows the same total estimate as a percentage of the
tenured heap size.
In summary these results show clearly that our technique
fully complements previous techniques that aim predomi-
nantly at nding sites that create isomorphic temporary ob-
jects.
8. LIMITATIONS
One of the threats to validity of our empirical studies is
that our estimates could include savings from potentially
unsafe sites that were not found unsafe under the test in-
puts that were considered. To mitigate this partially, for
the DaCapo benchmarks, we did check if any of the top-
20 sites in any of the benchmarks that was found safe in
the \default" run was found unsafe under the corresponding
\small" or \large" runs. This turned out to be not the case.
Some related statistics about the coverage of these runs are
as follows: chart was the benchmark that had the least cov-
erage, with 7%, 7%, and 10% line coverage on the small,
default, and large inputs, respectively, while antlr had the
highest coverage at 24%, 46%, and 46%, respectively. Nev-
ertheless, to mitigate this threat, as part of future work we
plan to employ static analysis to verify safety of sites across
allruns.
The total estimated savings that we show in Table 2 could
be biased or inaccurate, for the following reasons: (1) These
are obtained using a single test run per benchmark, (2) Total
actual savings when a set of sites are cached simultaneously
could be less than the sum of individually estimated sav-
ings for these sites, and (3) The various assumptions made
in Sections 5 and 6 potentially impact the accuracy of the
estimates produced by our tool.
The scalability of the tool needs to be improved; as part
of this, static analysis could potentially be used to reduce
instrumentation overhead wherever feasible.
9. RELATED WORK
The previous literature that is most closely related to our
work is that by Marinov and O'Callahan [15]. Marinov
and O'Callahan recognized the problem of excessive usage
of memory by co-existing isomorphic objects. They intro-
duced the notion of safely replacing one object by another at
run time (i.e., object sharing), and gave a dynamic analysis
approach to nd the maximum extent of co-existing isomor-
phic objects during a run. Their results are in eect a limit
study, because it is in general not possible to refactor code
to remove all the isomorphism redundancy that they detect.
Our work is a logical extension of their work, in that our
analysis identies the extent of redundancy that is practi-
cally remediable by introducing caches at allocation sites.
In other words, we provide actionable reports to develop-
ers. Our empirical results also give a feel for the extent of
remediable isomorphism redundancy in real benchmarks.Xu et al. [21, 17] focus on reducing running time of pro-
grams by enabling reuse of (dead) temporary objects. For
each allocation site they calculate a metric that represents
the proportion of all objects allocated at that site that be-
long to its single largest equivalence class (wrt isomorphism).
This metric indicates the potential for reuse at the site.
(They also compute reuse metrics at instruction level and at
method level.) Our objective, in contrast, is to save memory
bysharing (live) existing objects. Our outputs are estimates
of a user-observable benet, namely, quantitative memory
savings, and are hence readily actionable by developers. Fi-
nally, our analysis approach is quite dierent from theirs,
and specically does not required a modied JVM.
In addition to the work of Marinov and O'Callahan [15],
there are other previous approaches about optimizing mem-
ory usage of programs. Mitchell et al. [16] and Chis et al. [7]
propose approaches to help developers identify uses of data
structures that are overly memory intensive, and that could
possibly be remediated using idiomatic code improvements.
On the same topic of memory ineciency, there is a large
body of work on using modied JVMs during nal deploy-
ment of code to compress the heap or reduce the space over-
head of objects [6, 1, 5, 19]. Kawachiya et al. [13] propose
a scheme to use a modied JVM at deployment time to
de-duplicate co-existing string literals. A recent approach
by Infante [11] addresses the problem of identifying memory
savings opportunities by employing object caches in the con-
text of the Smalltalk programming language. However, this
approach is described only at a high-level, making it hard
to be compared and contrasted with our approach. The
approach does not produce quantitative estimates. Finally,
it has been evaluated only in the context of a limited case
study.
Finally, there is a rich body of literature on analyses for
detecting as well as remediating performance ineciencies
due to factors such as creation of too many temporary ob-
jects [8, 20, 3, 21], creation and use of low utility data struc-
tures [26, 23], chains of pure copies [22], and use of only a
small subset of objects created [27]. In contrast to these ap-
proaches the problem we address is to remediate excessive
use of memory.
10. CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented an approach to identify oppor-
tunities to reduce the memory requirement of Java programs
by introducing object sharing. The approach addresses the
challenges in identifying suitable opportunities, namely, de-
termining the safety of introducing sharing at an allocation
site, identifying sites that potentially create large numbers
of isomorphic long-lived objects, and estimating the mem-
ory saving without actually having to introduce caches. We
have empirically validated the approach and answered sev-
eral research questions pertaining to it by applying an im-
plementation of the approach on a set of real benchmarks.
11. REFERENCES
[1] C. S. Ananian and M. Rinard. Data size optimizations
for Java programs. In Proc. ACM Conference on
Language, Compiler, and Tool for Embedded Systems
(LCTES) , pages 59{68, 2003.
[2] A. W. Appel and M. J. R. Con calves. Hash-consing
garbage collection. Technical Report CS-TR-412-93,
Princeton University, 1993.
722[3] S. Bhattacharya, M. G. Nanda, K. Gopinath, and
M. Gupta. Reuse, recycle to de-bloat software. In
European Conf. on Object-Oriented Programming
(ECOOP) , pages 408{432, 2011.
[4] S. M. Blackburn, R. Garner, C. Homan, A. M. Khan,
K. S. McKinley, R. Bentzur, A. Diwan, D. Feinberg,
D. Frampton, S. Z. Guyer, M. Hirzel, A. Hosking,
M. Jump, H. Lee, J. E. B. Moss, A. Phansalkar,
D. Stefanovi c, T. VanDrunen, D. von Dincklage, and
B. Wiedermann. The DaCapo benchmarks: Java
benchmarking development and analysis. In Proc.
Conf, on Object-Oriented Programing, Systems,
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
169{190, 2006.
[5] G. Chen, M. Kandemir, and M. J. Irwin. Exploiting
frequent eld values in java objects for reducing heap
memory requirements. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Virtual
Execution Environments (VEE), pages 68{78, 2005.
[6] G. Chen, M. Kandemir, N. Vijaykrishnan, M. Irwin,
B. Mathiske, and M. Wolczko. Heap compression for
memory-constrained Java environments. In Proc.
Conf. on Object-oriented Programing, Systems,
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
282{301, 2003.
[7] A. E. Chis, N. Mitchell, E. Schonberg, G. Sevitsky,
P. O'Sullivan, T. Parsons, and J. Murphy. Patterns of
memory ineciency. In European Conf. on
Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP), pages
383{407, 2011.
[8] B. Dufour, B. G. Ryder, and G. Sevitsky. A scalable
technique for characterizing the usage of temporaries
in framework-intensive Java applications. In Proc. Int.
Symp. on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE) ,
pages 59{70, 2008.
[9] P. Friere. Test document.
www.arvindguptatoys.com/arvindgupta/oppressed.doc,
July 2014.
[10] E. Goto. Monocopy and associative algorithms in
extended Lisp. Technical Report TR 74-03, University
of Tokyo, 1974.
[11] A. Infante. Identifying caching opportunities,
eortlessly. In Companion Proc. Int. Conf. on
Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 730{732, 2014.
[12] Javassist, www.javaassist.org.
[13] K. Kawachiya, K. Ogata, and T. Onodera. Analysis
and reduction of memory ineciencies in java strings.
InProc. Conf. on Object-oriented Programming
Systems Languages and Applications (OOPSLA) ,
pages 385{402, 2008.
[14] Krugle. http://www.krugle.com/.
[15] D. Marinov and R. O'Callahan. Object equality
proling. In Proc. Conf. on Object-Oriented
programing, Systems, languages, and applications ,
2003.[16] N. Mitchell and G. Sevitsky. The causes of bloat, the
limits of health. In Proc. Conf. on Object-oriented
programing, Systems, languages, and applications
(OOPSLA) , pages 245{260. ACM, 2007.
[17] K. Nguyen and G. Xu. Cachetor: detecting cacheable
data to remove bloat. In Proc. Foundations of
Software Engineering (FSE) , pages 268{278, 2013.
[18] Oracle. Java SE 6 Hotspot Virtual Machine Garbage
Collection tuning.
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/gc-
tuning-6-140523.html, March
2014.
[19] J. B. Sartor, M. Hirzel, and K. S. McKinley. No bit
left behind: the limits of heap data compression. In
Proc. International Symposium on Memory
management , pages 111{120. ACM, 2008.
[20] A. Shankar, M. Arnold, and R. Bodik. Jolt:
lightweight dynamic analysis and removal of object
churn. In Proc. Conf. on Object-oriented Programming
Systems Languages and Applications (OOPSLA) ,
pages 127{142, 2008.
[21] G. Xu. Finding reusable data structures. In Proc. Int.
Conf. on Object oriented Programming Systems
Languages and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages
1017{1034, 2012.
[22] G. Xu, M. Arnold, N. Mitchell, A. Rountev, and
G. Sevitsky. Go with the ow: proling copies to nd
runtime bloat. In Proc. Conf. on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (OOPSLA),
pages 419{430, 2009.
[23] G. Xu, N. Mitchell, M. Arnold, A. Rountev,
E. Schonberg, and G. Sevitsky. Finding low-utility
data structures. In Proc. Conf. on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (OOPSLA),
pages 174{186, 2010.
[24] G. Xu, N. Mitchell, M. Arnold, A. Rountev, and
G. Sevitsky. Software bloat analysis: nding,
removing, and preventing performance problems in
modern large-scale object-oriented applications. In
Proc. FSE/SDP Workshop on Future of Software
Engineering Research , pages 421{426, 2010.
[25] G. Xu and A. Rountev. Precise memory leak detection
for java software using container proling. In Int.
Conf. on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages
151{160, 2008.
[26] G. Xu and A. Rountev. Detecting ineciently-used
containers to avoid bloat. In Proc. Conf. on
Programming Language Design and Implementation
(OOPSLA) , pages 160{173, 2010.
[27] D. Yan, G. Xu, and A. Rountev. Uncovering
performance problems in Java applications with
reference propagation proling. In Proc. Int. Conf. on
Software Engineering (ICSE , pages 134{144, 2012.
723