Semistructured Merge:
Rethinking Merge in Revision Control Systems
Sven Apel, Jörg Liebig,
Benjamin Brandl, Christian Lengauer
University of Passau, GermanyChristian Kästner
Philipps University Marburg, Germany
ABSTRACT
An ongoing problem in revision control systems is how to resolve
conﬂicts in a merge of independently developed revisions. Un-
structured revision control systems are purely text-based and solve
conﬂicts based on textual similarity. Structured revision control
systems are tailored to speciﬁc languages and use language-speciﬁc
knowledge for conﬂict resolution. We propose semistructured revi-
sion control systems that inherit the strengths of both: the generality
of unstructured systems and the expressiveness of structured sys-
tems. The idea is to provide structural information of the underlying
software artifacts — declaratively, in the form of annotated gram-
mars. This way, a wide variety of languages can be supported and
the information provided can assist in the automatic resolution of
two classes of conﬂicts: ordering conﬂicts and semantic conﬂicts.
The former can be resolved independently of the language and the
latter using speciﬁc conﬂict handlers. We have been developing a
tool that supports semistructured merge and conducted an empirical
study on 24 software projects developed in Java, C#, and Python
comprising 180 merge scenarios. We found that semistructured
merge reduces the number of conﬂicts in 60 % of the sample merge
scenarios by, on average, 34 %, compared to unstructured merge.
We found also that renaming is challenging in that it can increase the
number of conﬂicts during semistructured merge, and that a combi-
nation of unstructured and semistructured merge is a pragmatic way
to go.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.8 [ Software Engineering ]: Distribution, Maintenance, and En-
hancement— Version control ; D.2.9 [ Software Engineering ]: Man-
agement— Software conﬁguration management
General Terms
Management, Measurement, Experimentation
Keywords
Revision Control, Version Control, Software Merging, Semistruc-
tured Merge, FSTM ERGE , FEATURE HOUSE
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ESEC/FSE’11, September 5–9, 2011, Szeged, Hungary.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0443-6/11/09 ...$10.00.1. INTRODUCTION
Revision control systems (a.k.a. version control systems) have a
long tradition in software engineering and are a major means for
managing revisions and variants of today’s software systems [12,
14, 19]. A programmer creates a revision of a software system by
deriving it from the base system or from another revision; a revision
can be developed and evolve in isolation; and it can be merged
again with the base system or another revision. A major problem
of revision control is how to resolve merge conﬂicts that are caused
by concurrent changes (e.g., when two developers independently
change the same method) [17]. Zimmermann found in an empirical
study of four large projects that 23 % to 46 % of all merge scenarios
exhibit conﬂicts [22].
In recent years, two classes of revision control systems have
emerged: (1) revision control systems that operate on plain text
and (2) revision control systems that operate on more abstract and
structured document representations. The ﬁrst class is being used
widely in practice because such systems are typically language-
independent. Popular systems of this class are CVS, Subversion,
and Git. Henceforth, we call them unstructured revision control
systems . A problem of unstructured revision control systems is
that, when conﬂicts occur, no knowledge of the structure of the
underlying software artifacts is available. This makes it difﬁcult to
resolve certain kinds of conﬂicts, as we will illustrate.
The second class of revision control systems is explored mainly in
academia with the goal of solving the conﬂict-resolution problems
of unstructured revision control systems [11, 21]. The idea is to use
the structure and semantics of the software artifacts being processed
to resolve merge conﬂicts automatically [17]. These systems operate
on abstract syntax trees or similar representations, rather than on
plain program text, and incorporate all kinds of information on the
underlying language. A drawback is that, relying on a particular lan-
guage’s syntax or semantics, they sacriﬁce language independence.
Henceforth, we call them structured revision control systems .
There is a trade-off between generality and expressiveness of
revision control systems [14]. A revision control system is general
if it works with many different kinds of software artifacts. It is
expressive if it is able to handle many merge conﬂicts automatically.
Inspired by this trade-off, we propose a new class of revision con-
trol systems, called semistructured revision control systems , which
inherit the strengths but not the weaknesses of unstructured and struc-
tured revision control systems. The idea is to increase the amount
of information that a revision control system has at its disposal to
resolve conﬂicts, while maintaining generality by supporting many
languages. In particular, we concentrate on the merge process, so
we speak of semistructured merge .
We developed a generic engine, called FSTM ERGE , that merges
different revisions of a software system based on the structure ofthe software artifacts involved. Users can plug a new language
intoFSTM ERGE by providing a declarative speciﬁcation of their
language’s syntax (i.e., a grammar) enriched with information for
conﬂict resolution. While this approach is not entirely language-
independent, it is still quite general. First, it enables to resolve
conﬂicts that are caused by differing orderings of program elements
independently of the language. Second, it allows the user to plug
in dedicated conﬂict handlers in order to deﬁne further (possibly
language-dependent) resolution strategies. If, for whatever reason,
there is no grammar available for a certain language, FSTM ERGE
can use a fallback solution to parse software artifacts line by line,
which makes it equivalent to the unstructured approach.
Overall, we make the following contributions:
Based on an analysis of the trade-off between generality and
expressiveness, we propose the concept of semistructured
merge, which combines the strengths of unstructured and
structured merge. It is able to resolve ordering conﬂicts inde-
pendently of the language, and it can be extended by conﬂict
resolution handlers to deﬁne additional (language-dependent)
conﬂict resolution strategies.
We provide the tool FSTM ERGE for semistructured merge as
an extension of the FEATURE HOUSE tool infrastructure for
software composition [4].
By using FSTM ERGE on artifacts written in Java, C#, and
Python, we demonstrate its applicability and generality.
We report on an empirical study on 24 software projects to
quantify the beneﬁts of semistructured merge and to identify
open issues. In a nutshell, we found that semistructured
merge can reduce the number of conﬂicts in 60 % of the
sample merge scenarios by 34 21 %.1Furthermore, our
study reveals that renaming is a challenge for semistructured
merge that can increase the number of conﬂicts (in 26 % of the
sample merge scenarios by 109 170 %), which we discuss.
A combination of unstructured and semistructured merge re-
duces the number of conﬂicts in our study by 35 % compared
to pure unstructured merge.
The latter three contributions are novel compared to an earlier work-
shop paper [6]. The key contribution is the empirical study whose
goal has been to explore how far we can get with an approach that
is centered around ordering conﬂicts and conﬂict handlers — the
results are encouraging, as we will discuss. The prototypical tool
FSTM ERGE is under ongoing development; in particular, it was a
means to conduct the study.
2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
There is a large body of work on revision control systems [12, 14,
19] and conﬂict resolution in software merging [17]. The purpose
of a revision control system is to manage different revisions of a
software system. Usually, revisions are derived from a base program
or from other revisions. Users can check out revisions from the
repository, make asynchronous changes, and check them in again.
By branching the main development line (or trunk), a programmer
can create independent revisions, which can be changed and evolve
independently (e.g., to add and test new features). Independent
revisions can be merged back with the base program or with other
revisions, which may have been changed in the meantime.
The key issue we address in our work is merge conﬂict resolution .
Conﬂicts may occur while merging independent changes. A major
goal of research on this problem is to empower revision control
systems to resolve merge conﬂicts automatically, that is, to reduce
1We write msas an abbreviation for the mean value mof a data
set and its standard deviation s.the number of conﬂicts that otherwise have to be resolved manually
by the user [17]. First, we illustrate the problem of conﬂict resolution
in unstructured merge. Then, we illustrate the ability of structured
merge to resolve conﬂicts better than unstructured merge.
2.1 Unstructured Merge
To illustrate the conﬂict resolution problem, we use the running
example of a simple stack implementation, as shown in Figure 1
(top). Henceforth, we call this program the base program or simply
STACK . It contains a class Stack that implements interface Cloneable
and that contains a ﬁeld items and the two methods push andpop.
Now, suppose a programmer would like to add a new method top
toStack , but would like to develop this feature in its own branch,
independently of the main branch (i.e., the base program). To this
end, the programmer creates a branch with a new revision TOP.
Furthermore, suppose another programmer adds subsequently a
method sizedirectly to the main branch by creating revision SIZE
of the base program. Figure 1 (middle) presents code for the two
revisions, each of which adds a new method to class Stack . Finally,
suppose that, at some point in time, the two branches are merged
again to combine both revisions including the new methods.
Merging the two branches involves merging the two revisions
TOPandSIZE(solid arrows) on the basis of the common ancestor,
the base program STACK (dashed arrow). This process is called a
three-way merge because it involves three revisions [19]. In our
example, the merge process reports a conﬂict that cannot be resolved
automatically with unstructured merge. Figure 1 (bottom) contains
the output of the merge tool of CVS for this example. The output
shows that the tool is not able to merge the two new methods topand
size, such that both can be present in the merged program, because
it cannot determine the desired order of both methods. Similar
conﬂicts are reported by the merge tools of Subversion and Git —
the user has to merge the revisions manually.
This example is very simple but it sufﬁces to illustrate the prob-
lems of unstructured merge. An unstructured merge tool operates
solely on the basis of text lines or tokens. It identiﬁes new text
fragments with regard to the common ancestor (base program) and
stores the common fragments before and after the new fragments. If
the two revisions change or extend text in the same region, the sys-
tem reports a conﬂict. That is, it is not able to decide how to merge
the changes or extensions. In our example, the merge tool knows
that two independent text fragments (which actually implement the
two methods topandsize) are added to the same location of the base
program (which is enclosed by the two fragments that implement
the methods push andpop). The problem is that the unstructured
merge tool does not know that these fragments are Java methods
and that a merge of the two is actually straightforward because their
order within their enclosing class can be permuted safely. If the
tool knew this, it would be able to resolve the conﬂict automatically.
There are actually two solutions: include method topﬁrst and then
method size, or vice versa.
2.2 Structured Merge
In the past, many tools have been proposed that leverage infor-
mation on the artifact language to resolve as many conﬂicts as
possible [17]. Westfechtel and Buffenbarger pioneered this ﬁeld
by proposing tools that incorporate structural information such
as the context-free and context-sensitive syntax in the merge pro-
cess [11, 21]. Researchers proposed a wide variety of structural
comparison and merge tools including tools speciﬁc to Java [8] and
C++ [15]. Some tools even consult additionally semantic informa-
tion of the language [10].
Let us illustrate the abilities of structured merge by a further ex-Base Program S TACK
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2public class Stack<T> implements Cloneable {
3 private LinkedList<T> items = new LinkedList<T>();
4 public void push(T item) {
5 items.addFirst(item);
6 }
7 public T pop() {
8 if(items.size() > 0) return items.removeFirst();
9 else return null ;
10 }
11}
Revision T OP
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2public class Stack<T>
implements Cloneable {
3 private LinkedList<T> items =
new LinkedList<T>();
4 public void push(T item) {
5 items.addFirst(item);
6 }
7 public T top() {
8 return items.getFirst();
9 }
10 public T pop() {
11 if(items.size() > 0) return
items.removeFirst();
12 else return null ;
13 }
14}Revision S IZE
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2public class Stack<T>
implements Cloneable {
3 private LinkedList<T> items =
new LinkedList<T>();
4 public void push(T item) {
5 items.addFirst(item);
6 }
7 public int size() {
8 return items.size();
9 }
10 public T pop() {
11 if(items.size() > 0) return
items.removeFirst();
12 else return null ;
13 }
14}
mergeunstructured (TOP, STACK , SIZE)
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2public class Stack<T> implements Cloneable {
3 private LinkedList<T> items = new LinkedList<T>();
4 public void push(T item) {
5 items.addFirst(item);
6 }
7<<<<<<< Top/Stack.java
8 public T top() {
9 return items.getFirst();
10 }
11=======
12 public int size() {
13 return items.size();
14 }
15>>>>>>> Size/Stack.java
16 public T pop() {
17 if(items.size() > 0) return items.removeFirst();
18 else return null ;
19 }
20}branch
merge
Figure 1: Merging the revisions S IZEand T OPwith unstruc-
tured merge
ample in Figure 2. Suppose we have the base stack implementation
and we create two independent revisions, one that enables stack
objects to be serialized (revision SERIALIZABLE ) and another that
allows programmers to ﬂush the elements of the stack to a data
stream (revision FLUSHABLE ). Figure 2 depicts excerpts of the
revisions. Merging the two revisions with the base program using
unstructured merge causes two conﬂicts. First, the system is not
able to merge the two new import statements and, second, it is not
able to merge the implements clauses of the two revisions. Figure 2
(bottom) shows the conﬂicts as reported by the merge tool of CVS.Base Program S TACK
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2public class Stack<T> implements Cloneable { ... }
Revision S ERIALIZABLE
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2import java.io.Serializable;
3public class Stack<T>
implements Cloneable,
Serializable {
4 private static ﬁnal long
serialVersionUID = 42;
5 ...
6}Revision F LUSHABLE
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2import java.io.Flushable;
3public class Stack<T>
implements Cloneable,
Flushable {
4 ...
5 public void ﬂush() { ... }
6}
mergeunstructured (SERIALIZABLE , STACK , FLUSHABLE )
1import java.util.LinkedList;
2<<<<<<< Serializable/Stack.java
3import java.io.Serializable;
4=======
5import java.io.Flushable;
6>>>>>>> Flushable/Stack.java
7<<<<<<< Serializable/Stack.java
8public class Stack<T> implements Cloneable, Serializable {
9 private static ﬁnal long serialVersionUID = 42;
10=======
11public class Stack<T> implements Cloneable, Flushable {
12>>>>>>> Flushable/Stack.java
13 private LinkedList<T> items = new LinkedList<T>();
14 public void push(T item) {
15 items.addFirst(item);
16 }
17 public T pop() {
18 if(items.size() > 0) return items.removeFirst();
19 else return null ;
20 }
21 public void ﬂush() { ... }
22}branch
merge
Figure 2: Merging the independently developed revisions
FLUSHABLE and S ERIALIZABLE with unstructured merge
In contrast, a structured revision control system that knows that
the base program and the revisions are written in Java is able to
resolve such conﬂicts automatically. It knows that the order of
imports does not matter and that, in this case, implements clauses
can be combined by union.
Beside the types of conﬂicts we have seen so far, there are other
types of conﬂicts that can be resolved by structured revision control
systems on the basis of language-speciﬁc knowledge. For example,
aforloop in Java consists of a head and a body, and the head consists
of three parts. This information is useful when two revisions modify
disjoint parts of the head. Even if a structured merge cannot merge
a conﬂict automatically, it may have information that assists the
programmer in resolving the conﬂict (e.g., even if the heads of two
forloops cannot be merged, a structured merge tool knows that the
conﬂict occurs in a loop head and not in an arbitrary line of text).
2.3 Generality vs. Expressiveness
The previous discussion reveals that there is a trade-off between
generality and expressiveness of revision control systems, as has
been observed before [14]. Unstructured revision control systems
are very general. They can be used with every kind of (textual)
software artifact, but they are not able to resolve conﬂicts that requireknowledge on the language of the artifacts involved. In contrast, a
structured revision control system is typically tailored to a particular
language. So, it would be possible to build a revision control system
for Java that can resolve the conﬂicts we have discussed so far and,
in addition, many other conﬂicts. However, such a system would
be less useful in a setting in which a software system consists of
artifacts written in many different languages (e.g., Java, JSP, Python,
SQL, and Ant in a Web application).
This trade-off motivates us to explore the space between unstruc-
tured and structured revision control systems. Can we design a
system that is able to handle a wide variety of software artifacts and
that has enough information on these artifacts to resolve a reasonable
number of conﬂicts automatically? A trivial solution would be to
develop one structured revision control system for every artifact type
that occurs in a software project, respectively. A problem with this
naive approach is that it is very tedious and error-prone. Moreover,
in many cases, not all artifact types can be anticipated.
2.4 Finding a Balance
Previous attempts to ﬁnd a proper balance between structured and
unstructured merge have some limitations. Niu et al. have proposed
a merge approach that is both structured and independent of the
language [18]. They represent programs as graphs and use graph
morphisms to capture the relationships between the structural ele-
ments of the programs to be merged. The focus on graph structures,
instead of on tree structures, is the biggest difference to our approach.
The question of the scalability of graph-based algorithms may be
raised, as general graph algorithms are usually more complex than
tree algorithms. Niu et al. tested their approach only using a single
C program of moderate size. It is not clear how their tool performs
on larger programs and how difﬁcult it is to provide support for new
languages.
The approach of Dig et al. assumes a setting in which refactorings
of the documents under revision control are recorded and replayed
on demand [13]. That is, their approach is not applicable to scenarios
in which this additional information is not available, which appears
to be the rule rather than the exception in practice.
Other approaches require that the documents to be merged come
with a formal semantics [9, 16], which is not always feasible in
practice because, even for mainstream languages such as C++, there
is no formal semantics available. We explore whether we can reduce
the number of conﬂicts without these limitations.
3. SEMISTRUCTURED MERGE
3.1 Overview
Program Structure Trees. The basic idea of semistructured
revision control systems is to represent software artifacts as trees
and to provide information on how the nodes of a certain type
(e.g., methods or classes) and their subtrees are merged. We call
such a tree, which is essentially a parse tree, a program structure
tree (orfeature structure tree [4]). In Figure 3 (a), we show a
simpliﬁed program structure tree of the base program STACK and,
in Figures 3 (b) and 3 (c), simpliﬁed program structure trees of
revisions TOPandSIZE. It is important to note that not all structural
information is represented in the tree. For example, there are no
nodes that represent statements or expressions. But this information
is not lost; it is contained as plain text in the leaves (not shown).
So a program structure tree is not necessarily a full parse tree; it
abstracts from some details and contains them as text. In our setting,
the order of child nodes of a common parent is arbitrary. That is, it
may change without affecting the program semantics. This is a key
items push popStack<T>Stack
items push popStack<T>Stack
sizeitems push top popStack<T>Stack
items push top popStack<T>Stack
size(b)
(d)(a)
(c)Figure 3: Revisions of the stack example as program structure
trees
property when resolving conﬂicts that rely on the element order, as
we will explain shortly.
The choice of which kind of structural element is represented by a
distinct node depends on the expressiveness which we want to attain
with semistructured merge. Let us explain this choice by means of
the stack example. Taking the three program structure trees as input,
a merge tool can produce the desired output without conﬂict only by
superimposing the trees, as shown in Figure 3 (d).2Why does this
algorithm work? It works because the order of method declarations
in Java does not matter, so superimposing the trees just adds the
two new methods topandsize in any possible order. If the two
revisions added methods with identical signatures, the tool would
have to merge the statements of their bodies. This would be more
difﬁcult since their order matters (and statements do not have unique
names) [1, 5]. Even with all the knowledge on the Java language
at our disposal, there remain cases in which we cannot say how to
merge sequences of statements. This is the reason why we choose
to represent methods as opaque leaves and their statements as text
content; in other languages, we may choose a different granularity.
Conﬂict Types. The ability of semistructured merge to resolve
certain conﬂicts is based on the observation that the order of certain
elements (e.g., of classes, interfaces, methods, ﬁelds, imports, and
so on) does not matter. We call such conﬂicts ordering conﬂicts . A
merge algorithm that resolves just ordering conﬂicts automatically is
deﬁned more simply than a fully structured merge. A semistructured
merge uses an abstraction of the structure of the document, which
provides just enough information to identify ordered items.
Furthermore, in the example of Figure 2, we see that unstructured
merge is not able to combine the differing implements clauses of
two revisions of a class. With semistructured (and structured) merge,
we are able to achieve this because we know that lists of types can be
uniﬁed in this case . The routine that resolves conﬂicts of a special
kind is called a conﬂict handler . To distinguish conﬂicts for which
we use special conﬂict handlers from the conﬂicts that occur due to
ordering issues, we call the former semantic conﬂicts and the latter,
as before, ordering conﬂicts. We do not claim that it is possible
to deﬁne a conﬂict handler for every case. However, at least, a
conﬂict handler can assist the developer in identifying and resolving
conﬂicts.
But what do we do with program elements which we do not
2Superimposition merges trees recursively, beginning from the root,
based on structural and nominal similarities [4].1@FSTNonTerminal(name="{Type}")
2ClassDecl : "class" Type ImplList "{"
3 (FieldDecl) (ClassConstr) (MethodDecl) 
4"}";
5@FSTTerminal(name="Impl", merge="ImplUnion")
6ImplList : "implements" Type ("," Type) 
7@FSTTerminal(name="{ID}({Params})", merge="LineBasedMerge")
8MethodDeclaration : Type ID "(" (Params)? ")" "{"
9 (Statement) 
10"}"; ...
Figure 4: An excerpt of a simpliﬁed Java grammar with anno-
tations
know how to merge, such as method bodies with statements? The
answer is simple: we represent the elements as plain text and use
conventional unstructured merge. That is, if a conﬂict occurs inside
a method body, we do not attempt to resolve it automatically —
much like in unstructured merge.
Note that superimposition alone is not sufﬁcient to implement
semistructured merge because revisions may remove program ele-
ments. For example, one or both revisions of STACK may remove
method push . The result should be a stack without this method.
To this end, the merge algorithm has to check whether one or both
revisions remove elements, and so on. In our tool, we implemented
a set of standard rules for removing elements (following RCS’s
merge), whose description we omit here because they do not add
anything to the discussion.
3.2 System Architecture and Annotations
Our system consists of two parts: (1) a generic engine that knows
how to identify and resolve certain conﬂicts and (2) a small abstract
speciﬁcation — for each artifact language — of the program’s or
document’s elements whose order does not matter or for which spe-
cial conﬂict handlers are available. The abstract speciﬁcation of a
document structure is given by an annotated grammar of the lan-
guage. Most of the work is done by the generic merge engine, using
the grammar as a guide. This architecture makes it relatively easy to
include new languages by providing proper abstract speciﬁcations,
compared to implementing a complete structured merge tool from
scratch.
To illustrate the role of annotations, consider the excerpt of a sim-
pliﬁed Java grammar in Figure 4. It contains a set of production rules.
For example, rule ClassDecl deﬁnes the structure of classes con-
taining ﬁelds ( FieldDecl ), constructors ( ClassConstr ), and methods
(MethodDecl ). Production rules may be annotated with @FSTNon-
Terminal and@FSTTerminal . The former annotation deﬁnes that
elements corresponding to the rule are represented as nodes in the
corresponding program structure tree, there may be subnodes, and
the order of elements or nodes is arbitrary. In our example, we anno-
tate the rule for class declarations with @FSTNonTerminal because
classes may contain further classes, methods, and so on, and the
order of classes in a ﬁle or package may vary. The annotation param-
etername is used to assign a name to the corresponding node in the
program structure tree. Annotation @FSTTerminal is like annotation
@FSTNonTerminal except that subelements are represented as plain
text and that the developer can decide how code corresponding to
the element in question is merged. For example, we annotate the
rule for method declarations with @FSTTerminal to represent their
inner statements by plain text, as explained before. Annotation
parameter merge deﬁnes that the method’s content is merged by a
classic line-based merge algorithm, as used in unstructured merge.
A further interesting example is the rule for describing the syntax
of implements lists (Fig. 4, Lines 5–6). This rule is annotated with1public class ImplUnion {
2 public ﬁnal static String HANDLER = "ImplUnion";
3 public static void compose(FSTTerminal a, FSTTerminal b,
FSTTerminal comp, FSTNonTerminal parent) {
4 String ifcA = a.getBody();
5 String ifcB = b.getBody();
6 String ifcComp = ifcB + ifcA;
7 ...
8 }
9}
Figure 5: An excerpt of a conﬂict handler for merging imple-
ments lists in Java
@FSTTerminal , so the subelements (i.e., list of type names) are rep-
resented as plain text. But, in contrast to method declarations, we
state that implements lists are merged by a special conﬂict handler
that combines them by union ( merge="ImplUnion" ). This conﬂict
handler is speciﬁc to Java’s implements list and provided as a plugin
forFSTM ERGE (viaFEATURE HOUSE ’s plugin mechanism). In Fig-
ure 5, we show an excerpt of a possible implementation in our tool.
Note that the name of the handler, deﬁned in constant HANDLER
(Line 2), matches the name of the selected handler in the annotated
grammar (Fig. 4, Line 5).
The example of Figure 5 illustrates the simplicity of deﬁning
conﬂict handlers. It is important to note that conﬂict handlers are
not always language-independent but optional (if not provided, un-
structured merge is used). Conﬂict handlers can be used not only
to resolve conﬂicts, but also to provide structured and language-
speciﬁc information on the kind of conﬂict and potential conﬂict
resolution strategies, in the case a conﬂict cannot be resolved auto-
matically using the information available. For example, we could
use a conﬂict handler to specify how the parts of a forloop head are
merged and, if this is not possible, to provide information on the
kind and cause of the conﬂict.
3.3 Balancing Generality and Expressiveness
Semistructured merge is a combination of unstructured merge and
structured merge. Elements whose order is arbitrary are represented
by nodes and can be merged by superimposition. Elements whose
order is not arbitrary are represented by text and merged either by
unstructured merge or by special conﬂict handlers. That is, we
have a choice per language of which elements are to be represented
by nodes and which by text and which elements are treated by
conﬂict handlers. With a coarse granularity, we have simple program
structure trees (e.g., with Java classes as leaves) but cannot resolve
conﬂicts at the method level. That is, the expressiveness of the merge
algorithm is limited. A ﬁner granularity leads to more complex
trees (e.g., with Java ﬁelds and methods as leaves) but also allows
a merge tool to resolve ordering conﬂicts automatically (or via
conﬂict handlers). The result is a higher expressiveness of the merge
algorithm.
As we have illustrated, an annotated grammar contains sufﬁcient
information to guide a revision control system in merging Java ar-
tifacts. But how does this approach facilitate generality? Indeed,
for a language to be supported, we need some information in the
form of an annotated grammar and, if desired, special conﬂict han-
dlers, so the tool is not entirely language-independent. But, for
many languages, such a grammar is easily provided, since standard
grammars in Backus-Naur-Form are available on the Web for many
languages, and adding annotations is a matter of hours, at most.
Also, implementing special conﬂict handlers in the form of Java
code is a matter of hours (e.g., for concatenating implements lists, a
few lines of Java code are sufﬁcient).3.4 Summary
To summarize, semistructured merge is more expressive than
unstructured merge, since certain conﬂicts can be resolved auto-
matically based on information on the underlying languages. And
semistructured merge is more general than structured merge, since
a wide variety of languages can be supported on the basis of an
annotated grammar, which needs to be provided only once per lan-
guage. If, for whatever reason, no information on a given language
is available, semistructured merge behaves exactly like unstructured
merge, parsing the corresponding software artifact line by line.
4. IMPLEMENTATION
To demonstrate the feasibility of our approach, we implemented
a semistructured-merge tool and used it to merge artifacts written in
Java, C#, and Python.
4.1 Generic Merge Engine
We have implemented a ﬁrst prototype of a semistructured-merge
tool, called FSTM ERGE , which is able to resolve ordering con-
ﬂicts and which can be extended with special conﬂict handlers.
FSTM ERGE and the sample programs of our empirical study are
publicly available on the project’s Web site.3
FSTM ERGE takes advantage of the existing tool infrastructure
FEATURE HOUSE [4], as illustrated in Figure 6. The tool FST-
GENERATOR generates almost all code that is necessary for the
integration of a new language into FSTM ERGE .FSTG ENERATOR
expects the grammar of the language in a speciﬁc format, called
FEATURE BNF , of which we have already shown an example in
Figure 4. We have extended FSTG ENERATOR andFEATURE BNF
to support annotations relevant to semistructured merge.
Using a grammar written in FEATURE BNF ,FSTG ENERATOR
generates an LL(k) parser (that produces program structure trees)
and a corresponding pretty printer, both of which are then integrated
intoFSTM ERGE . Furthermore, developers have the opportunity to
plug in special conﬂict handlers and to activate them in the grammar
(using annotation parameter merge ). After the generation step,
FSTM ERGE proceeds as follows: the generated parser takes the
base program and two revisions written in the target language and
produces a program structure tree for each program; FSTM ERGE
performs the semistructured merge as explained before (the trees are
superimposed, deletions are handled separately, and special conﬂict
handlers or a conventional unstructured merge are applied to the
leaves); the generated pretty printer writes the merged revisions to
disk.
GeneratorC Java ... C# Haskell JavaCC Python
special conflict handlers
and line−based mergeMerge Parser
and revisionsbase program
structure tree revisionsmergedPretty Printer
FSTMergeFSTGeneratorFeatureBNF
structure treesprogram program
Figure 6: The architecture of F EATURE HOUSE
3http://www.fosd.de/SSMerge/4.2 Language Plugins
We have tested FSTM ERGE with three languages: Java, C#, and
Python. All three languages are common in projects that use revi-
sion control systems and all are sufﬁciently complex and different
from each other to demonstrate the practicality and generality of
our approach. As a basis, we used publicly available grammars
that we adapted and annotated for our purposes. Beside technical
problems with the Python grammar (the Python grammar relies on
indentation), plugging the three languages into FEATURE HOUSE
andFSTM ERGE was easy. Annotating and testing them was a mat-
ter of a few hours. Furthermore, we implemented special conﬂict
handlers for merging implements, extends, and throws lists and
for modiﬁers, mainly for displaying information on the conﬂicts.
Typically, the implementation of a conﬂict handler requires only a
few lines of well-separated Java code and follows the pattern of the
handler shown in Figure 5.
5. EMPIRICAL STUDY
To quantify the beneﬁts of our approach and to discover open
issues, we conducted an empirical study on merging and conﬂict
resolution in a number of software projects.
5.1 Motivation & Methodology
Due to our experience with FEATURE HOUSE in software product-
line engineering [2 –4, 7], we expect that integrating further lan-
guages is easy. The interesting issue is whether, in its current
form, semistructured merge can play to its strengths in real software
projects. The point is that concentrating on ordering and certain se-
mantic conﬂicts is a fairly simple approach. By means of examples,
we have demonstrated that semistructured merge is able to resolve
conﬂicts that cannot be resolved with unstructured merge. But how
frequently do such conﬂicts occur in real software projects? How
far can we get with such a simple approach?
Hypothesis :Many of the conﬂicts that occur in merging revisions
are ordering conﬂicts, which can be resolved automatically with
semistructured merge. An additional fraction of conﬂicts can be
resolved with conﬂict handlers.
Although there is some evidence that revisions often involve ad-
ditions of larger structures such as entire functions [20], we need a
substantial set of data to answer the question systematically. To this
end, we used both semistructured merge and unstructured merge in
a number of merge scenarios and compared the resulting numbers
of conﬂicts, lines of conﬂicting code, and conﬂicting ﬁles. Unfortu-
nately, we could not compare semistructured merge with structured
merge because there are simply no practical tools available, least
of all for Java, C#, and Python.4Also we could not compare our
approach with tools that build on formal semantics [9, 16] or on
refactoring replaying [13] because our approach aims at a broader
scenario in which this information is not available.
Beside the quantitative analysis, we looked at selected samples
of merged code in order to learn about the inﬂuence of the merge
approach on the resulting code structure. We found a number of
differences that may have an impact on code comprehension, which
we discuss in Section 5.4.
4We are aware only of the academic prototypes for C of Westfech-
tel [21] and Buffenbarger [11]. These tools are not able to resolve
ordering conﬂicts (personal communication with Westfechtel).5.2 Sample Projects
Criteria. An important issue is how to select merge and conﬂict
scenarios in a comparison of semistructured and unstructured merge.
Developing our own case study would leave too much room for
bias. Using only one or two scenarios would threaten external
validity (i.e., we would not be able to generalize our ﬁndings). Thus,
we decided to base our study on a substantial number of open-
source projects developed by practitioners for real applications.
We explored SourceForge, a popular open-source software portal,
for candidates. We had two criteria: (1) the projects must be of
reasonable but varying sizes and (2) either semistructured merge
or unstructured merge must produce at least one conﬂict. To this
end, we analyzed the revision history of the candidates including
logs for real and realistic merges, which we call henceforth merge
scenarios . Technically, we used Subversion to browse the revision
histories and to check out revisions. In principle, we could have
used any other state-of-the-art revision control system, but we were
most familiar with Subversion.
Identifying Merge Scenarios. We have been considering two
kinds of merge scenarios: (1) merges that have actually been per-
formed in the revision history of a project and (2) merges that are
realistic considering the history of a project.
Based on the logs, we were able to extract information on merges
that actually have been performed by the developers and to obtain
the revisions involved. Since Subversion has no standard log entry
type for merges,5we used comments of the developers that point
clearly to merges.
Beside merges that actually happened, we searched for merges
that could have been performed (the logs are not clear about this)
or that are realistic considering the revision history — to increase
the sample size. One kind of indicator is a sequence of multiple,
alternating changes in different branches (e.g., trunk !branch!
trunk). This pattern indicates concurrent development and points
to potential conﬂict scenarios (as long as the changes in different
branches are not identical). A second indication is that developers
evolve only a single branch in many revisions. Merging the branch
back to the trunk is a classic scenario in revision control (e.g., to
merge new features that have been added and tested in a separate
branch with the trunk) and is likely to produce conﬂicts when the
trunk has changed in between (typically, the more changes, the more
conﬂicts).
Technically, a merge scenario is a triple consisting of a base
revision, a left branch, and a right branch. The base revision marks
the point in time in which the left or right branch was copied from
the other. This way, we ensure that both branches have a common
ancestor, which is necessary for a three-way merge. Furthermore,
we check the two independently evolved branches out at the same
point in the revision history, which is a prerequisite for merging
them in practice.
In Table 1, we list information on the sample projects including
name, domain, number of lines of code, number of merge scenarios,
and programming language. Since Java is widely used, we were able
to locate ten projects with ten conﬂict scenarios each. For C# and
Python, we located fewer candidates with fewer conﬂict scenarios.
Overall, our sample consists of 24 projects with, in summary, 180
merge scenarios comprising, summed over all scenarios, 50 million
lines of code. All merge scenarios are available and documented on
the project’s Web site.
5This entry type is available since version 1.5, but all sample projects
use earlier versions or did not take full advantage of this feature.Project Domain LOC MS Lang.
AutoWikiBrowser semi-autom. Wikipedia editor 63 K 9 C#
BitPim mobile phone synchronization 180 K 7 Python
CruiseControl.NET continuous integration server 148 K 9 C#
DrJava development environment 89 K 10 Java
emesene instant messaging client 29 K 1 Python
Eraser secure data removal tool 18 K 6 C#
eXe eLearning XHTML editor 98 K 9 Python
FreeCol turn-based strategy game 86 K 10 Java
FireIRC IRC client 17 K 1 C#
GenealogyJ editor for genealogic data 56 K 10 Java
iFolder directory synchronization 68 K 4 C#
iText PDF library 71 K 10 Java
JabRef BibTeX entry manager 75 K 10 Java
jEdit programmer’s text editor 107 K 10 Java
JFreeChart chart library 149 K 10 Java
Jmol viewer for chemical structures 135 K 10 Java
matplotlib plotting library 86 K 10 Python
NASA WorldWind virtual globe 193 K 8 C#
PMD bug ﬁnder 71 K 10 Java
Process Hacker process viewer 99 K 1 C#
RSS Bandit news feeds reader 116 K 4 C#
SpamBayes Bayesian anti-spam classiﬁer 47 K 6 Python
SQuirrelSQL graphical SQL client 218 K 10 Java
Wicd network manager for Linux 5 K 5 Python
Table 1: Overview of the sample projects (all available on
http://sourceforge.net/ ); LOC: lines of code; MS:
number of merge scenarios.
5.3 Results
In Table 2, we depict the results of our analysis in terms of the
numbers of conﬂicts, conﬂicting lines of code, conﬂicting ﬁles, and
semantic conﬂicts. For the purpose of the study, we deﬁned conﬂict
handlers for 54 structural elements of Java, C#, and Python (imple-
ments lists, modiﬁers, and so on). Typically, the handlers are very
simple and only ﬂag a semantic conﬂict. So, we did not implement
speciﬁc resolution strategies but we just counted situations in which
they can be applied, which is sufﬁcient for the quantitative analysis.
Details on the conﬂict handlers are available on the project’s Web
site.
Due to the sheer amount of data, we provide for each project
mean values over all merge scenarios. Detailed information on each
merge scenario (including the number of conﬂicts, conﬂicting lines
of code, conﬂicting ﬁles, and semantic conﬂicts per ﬁle and per
merge scenario in the form of tables and diagrams) are available on
the project’s Web site.
Based on the results, we classify the projects into two categories,
according to which numbers are reduced by semistructured merge
compared to unstructured merge:
1.The number of conﬂicts, conﬂicting lines of code, and con-
ﬂicting ﬁles are reduced or on the same order of magnitude.
2.The number of conﬂicts or conﬂicting lines is signiﬁcantly
increased (highlighted in Tab. 2), but other numbers are re-
duced.
We have highlighted projects that fall into the second category with
a gray background in Table 2.
Compared to unstructured merge, semistructured merge (includ-
ing conﬂict handlers) can reduce the number of conﬂicts in 60 % of
the sample merge scenarios by 34 21 % (the number of conﬂicting
lines of code is reduced in 82 % of the sample merge scenarios by
6122 %; the number of conﬂicting ﬁles is reduced in 72 % of the
sample merge scenarios by 28 12 %).
Remarkably, in 26 % (46 of 180) of the sample merge scenar-conﬂicts conﬂ. LOC conﬂ. ﬁles sem. conﬂ.
Project UM SM UM SM UM SM UM SM
AutoWikiBrowser 20 17 418 362 6 6 – 0
BitPim 29 25 5240 471 6 3 – 4
CruiseControl.NET 26 16 1133 279 14 8 – 5
DrJava 20 16 293 210 7 7 – 0
emesene 7 4 400 17 7 4 – 17
Eraser 24 24 2146 637 12 11 – 0
eXe 5 3 112 35 4 2 – 2
FireIRC IRC Client 5 3 36 23 3 2 – 0
FreeCol 237 213 4606 3265 63 58 – 1
GenealogyJ 19 9 489 146 9 6 – 0
iFolder 44 10 228 156 6 4 – 34
iText 219 706 113757 35109 216 179 – 262
JabRef 75 49 1701 1782 28 24 – 2
jEdit 7 6 105 80 3 3 – 0
JFreeChart 560 361 18142 5500 193 109 – 21
Jmol 94112 20094 6869 40 33 – 4
matplotlib 57 15 500 466 13 9 – 16
NASA WorldWind 23 36 5946 2328 12 9 – 10
PMD 55371 18469 6596 48 36 – 17
Process Hacker 1 1 4 4 1 1 – 1
RSS Bandit 65 51 4086 1478 12 8 – 32
SpamBayes 25 22 1166 343 10 7 – 2
SQuirrelSQL 26 24 2620 579 16 13 – 1
Wicd 10 9 1267 218 4 3 – 2
Table 2: Mean conﬂicts per scenario: numbers of conﬂicts, con-
ﬂicting lines of code, conﬂicting ﬁles, and semantic conﬂicts for
semistructured merge (SM) and unstructured merge (UM).
ios, semistructured merge increases the number of conﬂicts by
109170 %. We found this result counter-intuitive at ﬁrst: Why
should additional information incur additional conﬂicts? In Sec-
tion 5.4, we explain that renaming is the reason for the increased
number of conﬂicts (and conﬂicting lines of code) in the projects of
the second category.
To present more than just the mean values and to explore the
reasons for the differences of the individual projects, we had a closer
look at some representatives. In Figure 7, we display the numbers
of conﬂicts and conﬂicting lines of code of all merge scenarios
of CruiseControl.NET (ﬁrst category).6The numbers show that
semistructured merge can play to its strengths in CruiseControl.NET;
the same applies to 18 other projects of our sample (all projects
without gray cells in Table 2).
In Figure 8, we display the numbers of NASA WorldWind (sec-
ond category). Interestingly, semistructured merge produces more
conﬂicts than unstructured merge, which we did not expect initially.
However, the number of conﬂicting lines of code is reduced sig-
niﬁcantly. This is similar for all projects in which the number of
conﬂicts is increased. In Section 5.4, we discuss reasons for the
diverging numbers.
Finally, we were surprised that the numbers of semantic conﬂicts
are rather low compared to the numbers of ordering conﬂicts, espe-
cially when considering the quite high number of 54 elements that
we handle with special conﬂict handlers. A notable difference is
iText, which we discuss in Section 5.4.
6The name of a merge scenario is composed of the revision number
of the base revision and the revision number of the left and right
branch (which are equal, as explained in Sec. 5.2). For example,
rev0815-4711 denotes a merge of the left and right branch of revision
4711 based on the base revision 0851.
Figure 7: Results for CruiseControl.NET (ﬁrst category)
Figure 8: Results for NASA WorldWind (second category)5.4 Discussion
We found many scenarios in which semistructured merge is supe-
rior to unstructured merge in that it reduces the number of conﬂicts,
conﬂicting lines of code, and conﬂicting ﬁles. So, we can conﬁrm
our hypothesis: many of the conﬂicts that occur in merging revisions
are ordering conﬂicts, which can be resolved automatically with
semistructured merge. We also found that an additional fraction of
conﬂicts can be potentially resolved with language-speciﬁc conﬂict
handlers.
Nevertheless, the fact that, in some cases, semistructured merge
increases the number of conﬂicts or conﬂicting lines of code sur-
prised us. We had expected semistructured merge to be at least as
good as unstructured merge. To address this issue and to learn more
about the nature of semistructured merge, we reviewed the merged
revisions of all projects manually. Next, we provide a summary of
our ﬁndings.
Renaming. An analysis of the projects of the second category
revealed that renaming poses a challenge for semistructured merge.
The point is that semistructured merge uses superimposition to
merge revisions. If a program element is renamed in one revision (in
one of the branches), the merge algorithm is not aware of this fact
and cannot map the renamed element to its previous version. This
results in a situation in which we have in one branch an empty or
non-existent element. In Figure 9, we illustrate a situation in which
semistructured merge produces more conﬂicts and conﬂicting lines
than unstructured merge. In the base revision, we have a simple
stack. In revision SOME CHANGE , method push ofStack has been
changed. In revision RENAMING , class Stack has been renamed to
RenamedStack . Unstructured merge does not produce any conﬂicts
because the changes to the method and the class name are located
in different lines. Semistructured merge identiﬁes merge partners
by name, so it treats class Stack and class RenamedStack as distinct
elements. The result of semistructured merge is shown at the bottom
of in Figure 9. It contains a conﬂict comprising four lines of code.
The worst case is that a directory is renamed — instead of a class,
as in the stack example. This happened, for instance, in PMD and
Jmol. In these cases, unstructured merge reports, for each ﬁle of
the directory, a large conﬂict because it cannot map the ﬁles of the
renamed directory to the corresponding ﬁles of the other branch and
uses empty ﬁles instead. The same happens in semistructured merge,
except that the conﬂicts are not reported per ﬁle but per method or
constructor in the ﬁle. This results in more conﬂicts but the overall
number of conﬂicting lines is smaller than in unstructured merge.
The reason is that unstructured merge ﬂags entire ﬁles as conﬂicts
and semistructured merge only individual structural elements such as
methods. We discuss how to handle renaming better in Section 5.6.
Semantic Conﬂicts. We did not ﬁnd many semantic conﬂicts,
compared to other conﬂicts. An exception is iText. Examining
iText’s source code, we found that, at some point, the developers
switched from Java 1.4 to Java 1.5. This transition involved re-
naming a large number of raw types to generic types (e.g., from
LinkedList toLinkedList<String> ). Thus, the cause for the exception-
ally high number of semantics conﬂicts is again a form of renaming.
Structural Boundaries. An observation we made when exam-
ining the results of unstructured and semistructured merge is that
semistructured merge, due to its structure-driven and ﬁne-grained
nature, leads always to conﬂicts that respect boundaries of classes,
methods, and other structural elements. This is not the case for
unstructured merge. We found that respecting structural boundariesBase Program S TACK
1public class Stack<T> {
2 public void push(T item) {
3 items.addFirst(item);
4 }
5}
Revision S OME CHANGE
1public class Stack<T> {
2 public void push(T item) {
3 intcount = 0;
4 items.addFirst(item);
5 }
6}Revision R ENAMING
1public class RenamedStack <T>{
2 public void push(T item) {
3 items.addFirst(item);
4 }
5}
mergesemistructured (SOME CHANGE , STACK , RENAMING )
1public class RenamedStack <T> {
2 public void push(T item) {
3 items.addFirst(item);
4 }
5}
6class Stack <T> {
7<<<<<<< SomeChange/Stack.java
8 public void push(T item) {
9 intcount = 0;
10 items.addFirst(item);
11 }
12=======
13>>>>>>> Renamed/Stack.java
14}branch
merge
Figure 9: Semistructured merge in the presence of renaming
(i.e., aligning the merge with the program structure) is beneﬁcial,
because, this way, we could understand conﬂicts in terms of the
underlying structure, even though this may result in more conﬂicts
(e.g., one per method instead of one per ﬁle).
Automation. A goal of research on software merging is to mini-
mize the number of conﬂicts that require manual intervention to be
resolved [17]. However, an automatic resolution of conﬂicts has to
be taken with a grain of salt. For example, if two developers add
independently two methods that are intended to be the same, but
the conﬂict resolution recognizes them as different, this mismatch
goes unnoticed. This can happen in unstructured, structured, and
semistructured merge. It is desirable to minimize the amount of
manual intervention, but it is useful to keep information on conﬂict
resolutions. Semistructured merge has beneﬁts in this regard as it
knows about the structural elements involved, not only about text.
5.5 Threats to Validity
Construct Validity. Although the output of semistructured merge
in the presence of renaming is not satisfactory (cf. Fig. 9), it still
allows us to detect conﬂicts properly and to incorporate them in our
data. A threat to construct validity is that the number of conﬂicting
lines of code may be estimated too low, because the renamed ele-
ment is not considered (cf. Fig. 9). However, after code inspection
we found that this fact is negligible for our conclusions.
Internal Validity. A threat to internal validity is that the results
we obtained are inﬂuenced by (hidden) variables other than the kindof merge (which is the independent variable). Due to the simplicity
of our setting, we can largely rule out such confounding variables.
We applied semistructured and unstructured merge to the same set of
merge scenarios and counted the number of conﬂicts subsequently
on the merged code. Furthermore, we used a comparatively large
sample (24 projects, 180 merge scenarios, 50 million lines of code)
to rule out confounding variables such as programming experience,
programming style, and the difference between domains.
A potential threat to internal (and external) validity is our ap-
proach of selecting conﬂict scenarios. The problem is that none of
the projects we found contains explicit information on merges in
its logs. So, we had to search the logs for comments that indicate
merge scenarios (such comments are fortunately quite common).
To increase the number of conﬂict scenarios, we considered further
merge scenarios based on a number of patterns in the revision hierar-
chy (e.g., small alternating changes in two independent branches or
branches that end abruptly) — see Section 5.2. Overall, we are con-
ﬁdent that the conﬂict scenarios we selected reﬂect a broad spectrum
of the current practice in revision control (due to the large sample)
and thus our results are reliable in this respect.
One can speculate about the inﬂuence of the merge approach on
patterns of concurrent development. Developers may avoid certain
programming and change patterns in order not to run into conﬂicts
when using unstructured merge. The availability of semistructured
merge may inﬂuence developers in the choice of their patterns be-
cause more conﬂicts can be resolved.
Even though a comprehensive analysis of code quality is well
beyond the scope of the paper, a look at samples of merged code
made us conﬁdent that the resulting code structure of semistructured
merge can aid code comprehension as the merge process follows the
structural boundaries of the artifacts involved. However, a series of
controlled experiments is necessary to provide a deﬁnite answer to
this question.
External Validity. A common issue is to what extent the exter-
nal validity of our study relies on the selection of samples. Can we
generalize to other projects in other domain and written in other
languages? To increase external validity, we collected a substantial
number of projects and merge scenarios written in different lan-
guages and of different domains. This does not guarantee that we
will arrive at the same picture in other projects, domains, and lan-
guages, but we are conﬁdent that we have covered a broad spectrum
of merge scenarios.
5.6 Open Issues & Perspectives
We see some interesting open issues. A ﬁrst issue is the role of
refactoring. So far, we have not addressed changes, such as the
renaming of methods or classes, systematically. We found that re-
naming can increase the number of conﬂicts substantially, compared
to unstructured merge. The reason is that superimposition relies on
nominal equality. We see two ways of dealing with this problem.
First, we could use unstructured merge instead of semistructured
merge for ﬁles that contain renamings. A merge tool can simply
compare the numbers of conﬂicts produced by semistructured merge
and by unstructured merge on a per-ﬁle basis and choose the bet-
ter alternative. Since merging is done in linear time, the overhead
should be acceptable. For our sample, the combination of unstruc-
tured and semistructured merge reduces the number of conﬂicts, in
sum, by 35 % compared to pure unstructured merge (and by 50 %
compared to pure semistructured merge). A merge in our setting
takes about 15 min but, compared to the time for resolving conﬂicts
manually, the overhead for applying both kinds of merge can be
safely neglected.Additionally, like in the approach of Dig et al. [13], we could
trace renamings and pass this information to the revision control sub-
system. This way, pairs of corresponding elements can be matched,
even though they have different names, and the conﬂict of Figure 9
can be resolved automatically. This would further decrease the
number of conﬂicts but is only applicable in speciﬁc scenarios.
Beside renaming, a further issue is that semistructured merge
(much like structured merge) relies on structural information, so the
revisions must be syntactically correct. Whereas it is best practice
to commit only correct programs or documents, which has been
conﬁrmed by our study (we found only one Python project with a
few problematic revisions), this is not a strict requirement of today’s
(unstructured) revision control systems. In such cases, the artifacts
involved have to be parsed as plain text such that semistructured
merge behaves exactly like unstructured merge. It is interesting to
explore whether, in such cases, syntactically correct fragments can
be represented by program structure trees and only the incorrect
fragments as plain text.
In discussions at V AMOS’10 [6], some people asked how re-
solving ordering conﬂicts inﬂuences program comprehension. The
background is that, in our approach, the merge tool decides the order
(e.g., of method declarations in a class). An empirical assessment of
this issue is well beyond the scope of this paper but an interesting
avenue of further work. However, examinations of sample code
make us believe that semistructured merge can aid program com-
prehension as it follows the structural boundaries of the artifacts
involved in the merge process.
6. CONCLUSION
Both unstructured and structured revision control systems have
strengths and weaknesses. The former are very general but cannot
resolve certain kinds of conﬂicts. The latter are typically tailored to
speciﬁc languages and thus can resolve conﬂicts better than the for-
mer. To reap the beneﬁts of both worlds, we propose semistructured
merge. Developers provide information on the artifact languages
declaratively in the form of annotated grammars as well as in the
form of pluggable conﬂict handlers. This way, a wide variety of
different languages can be supported while taking advantage of the
information provided during the merge process. We have imple-
mented a tool for semistructured merge and plugged in support for
Java, C#, and Python. In an empirical study, we found that semistruc-
tured merge can substantially reduce the number and size of conﬂicts
that occur during merges, be it in terms of the number of conﬂicts
(3421 %), the number of conﬂicting lines of code (61 22 %), and
the number of conﬂicting ﬁles (28 12 %). We also found situations
in which semistructured merge increases the number of conﬂicts or
the number of conﬂicting lines of code. But, in every case, either
the number of conﬂicting lines of code or the number of conﬂicts
decreases. In the presence of renaming, semistructured merge pro-
duces more but often smaller conﬂicts than unstructured merge. In
general, semistructured merge is ﬁner-grained than unstructured
merge and disallows conﬂicts across class or method boundaries.
Interestingly, a combination of unstructured and semistructured
merge can reduce the number of conﬂicts further (by 35 % compared
to pure unstructured merge). In the future, we would like to explore
whether it is possible to trace renaming and to use this information
during the merge process.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Don Batory and William Cook (who was also
an author of the workshop paper on which this paper is based) for
fruitful discussions on the potential of semistructured merge. Wethank Jens Dörre for preparing the grammars for FSTM ERGE . Sven
Apel’s and Christian Lengauer’s work is supported by the German
Research Foundation (DFG – AP 206/2 and AP 206/4). Christian
Kästner’s work is supported by the European Research Council
(ERC grant ScalPL #203099).
8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Apel and D. Hutchins. A Calculus for Uniform Feature
Composition. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages
and Systems (TOPLAS) , 32(5):Article 19, 2010.
[2] S. Apel, F. Janda, S. Trujillo, and C. Kästner. Model
Superimposition in Software Product Lines. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Model Transformation
(ICMT) , volume 5563 of LNCS , pages 4–19. Springer-Verlag,
2009.
[3] S. Apel, C. Kästner, A. Größlinger, and C. Lengauer. Feature
(De)composition in Functional Programming. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Software Composition
(SC), volume 5634 of LNCS , pages 9–26. Springer-Verlag,
2009.
[4] S. Apel, C. Kästner, and C. Lengauer. FeatureHouse:
Language-Independent, Automated Software Composition. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , pages 221–231. IEEE CS, 2009.
[5]S. Apel, C. Lengauer, B. Möller, and C. Kästner. An Algebraic
Foundation for Automatic Feature-Based Program Synthesis.
Science of Computer Programming , 75(11):1022–1047, 2010.
[6] S. Apel, J. Liebig, C. Lengauer, C. Kästner, and W. Cook.
Semistructured Merge in Revision Control Systems. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Variability
Modelling of Software-intensive Systems (VaMoS) , pages
13–19. University of Duisburg-Essen, 2010.
[7] S. Apel, W. Scholz, C. Lengauer, and C. Kästner. Detecting
Dependences and Interactions in Feature-Oriented Design. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) , pages 161–170. IEEE CS,
2010.
[8] T. Apiwattanapong, A. Orso, and M. Harrold. JDiff: A
Differencing Technique and Tool for Object-Oriented
Programs. Automated Software Engineering , 14(1):3–36,
2007.
[9] V . Berzins. Software Merge: Semantics of Combining
Changes to Programs. ACM Transactions on Programming
Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) , 16(6):1875–1903, 1994.
[10] D. Binkley, S. Horwitz, and T. Reps. Program Integration for
Languages with Procedure Calls. ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) , 4(1):3–35,
1995.[11] J. Buffenbarger. Syntactic Software Merging. In Selected
Papers from the ICSE SCM-4 and SCM-5 Workshops on
Software Conﬁguration Management , volume 1005 of LNCS ,
pages 153–172. Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[12] R. Conradi and B. Westfechtel. Version Models for Software
Conﬁguration Management. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) , 30(2):232–282, 1998.
[13] D. Dig, K. Manzoor, R. Johnson, and T. Nguyen.
Refactoring-Aware Conﬁguration Management for
Object-Oriented Programs. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) ,
pages 427–436. IEEE CS, 2007.
[14] J. Estublier, D. Leblang, A. van der Hoek, R. Conradi,
G. Clemm, W. Tichy, and D. Wiborg-Weber. Impact of
Software Engineering Research on the Practice of Software
Conﬁguration Management. ACM Transactions on Software
Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) , 14(4):383–430,
2005.
[15] J. Grass. Cdiff: A Syntax Directed Differencer for C++
Programs. In Proceedings of the USENIX C++ Conference ,
pages 181–193. USENIX Association, 1992.
[16] D. Jackson and D. Ladd. Semantic Diff: A Tool for
Summarizing the Effects of Modiﬁcations. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Software Maintenance
(ICSM) , pages 243–252. IEEE CS, 1994.
[17] T. Mens. A State-of-the-Art Survey on Software Merging.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE) ,
28(5):449–462, 2002.
[18] N. Niu, S. Easterbrook, and M. Sabetzadeh. A
Category-theoretic Approach to Syntactic Software Merging.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Software
Maintenance (ICSM) , pages 197–206. IEEE CS, 2005.
[19] Bryan O’Sullivan. Making Sense of Revision-Control
Systems. Communication of the ACM , 52(9):56–62, 2009.
[20] G. Stoyle, M. Hicks, G. Bierman, P. Sewell, and I. Neamtiu.
Mutatis Mutandis: Safe and Predictable Dynamic Software
Updating. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) , pages
183–194. ACM Press, 2005.
[21] B. Westfechtel. Structure-Oriented Merging of Revisions of
Software Documents. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Software Conﬁguration Management (SCM) ,
pages 68–79. ACM Press, 1991.
[22] T. Zimmermann. Mining Workspace Updates in CVS. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR) , page 11. IEEE CS, 2007.