 Influence of Social and Technical Factors for Evaluating 
Contribution in GitHub 
Jason Tsay, Laura Dabbish, James Herbsleb 
School of Computer Science and Center for the Future of Work, Heinz College  
Carnegie Mellon University  
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, P A 15213 USA 
{jtsay, dabbish, jdh}@cs.cmu.edu
 
   
ABSTRACT  
Open source software is commonly portrayed as a meritocracy, 
where decisions are base d solely on their technical merit. 
However, literature on open source suggests a complex social structure underlying the meritocracy. Social work environments 
such as GitHub make the relationships between users and 
between users and work artifacts transparent. This transpar ency 
enables developers to better use information such as technical 
value  and social connections when making work decisions. We 
present a study on open source software contribution in GitHub  
that focuses on the task of evaluating pull requests, which are one 
of the primary method s for contributing code in GitHub . We 
analyze d the association of various technical and social measures 
with the likelihood of contribution acceptance. We found that project managers made use  of information signaling both good 
techn ical contribution practices for a pull request and the strength 
of the social connection between the submitter and project 
manager when evaluating pull requests. Pull requests with many 
comments were m uch less likely to be accepted, moderated by 
the submit ter's prior interaction in the project. Well- established 
projects were more conservative in accepting pull requests. These 
findings provide evidence that developers use both technical and 
social information when  evaluat ing potential contributions to 
open source software projects.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
D.2.6 [Software Engineering]: Programming Environments - 
Integrated Environments ; H.4.3 [ Information Systems 
Applications ]: Communications Applications.  
General Terms  
Management, Measurement, Human Factors 
Keywords  
GitHub; transparency; open source; social computing; signaling 
theory ; social media ; contribution 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Traditionally, open source software (OSS) communit ies have  
been characterized as meritocracies  [26] where "code is king" and 
decisions are based solely on technical merit.  Multiple popular 
open source software foundations such as the GNOME Foundation [10], Apache Software Foundation [14] , and Mozilla 
Foundation [21] officially describe themselves as meritocracies. 
For example, in the case of Mozilla, “authority is distributed to 
both volunteer and employed community members as they show 
their abilities through contributions to the project”  [21]. These 
“abilities” are ge nerally assumed to be technical expertise 
brought to the software project by various developers.  
Previous studies on open source software suggest that there are 
many more factors that influence  contribution  evaluation beyond 
technical merit.  In fact, prio r work suggests that there exists a 
complex social structure around contribution in open source 
software [8]. New contributors to traditional open source projects 
are expected to “lurk” or monitor project mailing lists before even attempting contributions. These projects have comp lex 
socialization processes that need to be undertaken before accepting technical contributions [17]. 
With the advent  of social media and distributed version control 
systems, many open source software projects operate with  an 
unprecedented degree  of transparency. With social media  
attached to the development activity, relationships between 
developers and actions on code  are made visible , and developers 
use these as signals from which they infer important but hidden 
qualities  [6]. For example, project managers are able to view all 
of the prior projects that a newcomer might have participated in 
and evaluate them as signals of developer skill before deciding 
whether or not to accept a cont ribution. Newcomers looking for 
open source projects to join might investigate what prior 
contribution attempts look like  and how they have fared, as 
signals of openness and project norms. Studies on these kinds of transparent environments suggest that developers make complex 
inferences about other developers and projects using th ese kinds 
of information [5][19] .  
With information available from potentially millions of 
developers and millions of repositories in these transparent work 
environments, then what inform ation do software developers use 
when evaluating software contributions? Conventional wisdom 
on open source projects suggests  that technical merit of the 
contribution itself should be all -important [26]. Prior literature on 
traditional open source suggests that prior interactions with a 
project and project culture should also have an important effect. 
In a transparent environment,  the visible relationships between 
users may also have an important effect on contribution decisions. These environments also make explicit the relationship 
between users and work artifacts such as rep ositories  information 
that project managers may be making use of.  We aim to better 
understand how different signals are  used by software project 
managers in order to  evaluate contributions  in open source 
projects.   
Permission to mak e digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the firs t page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
ICSE '14, May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India  
Copyright 2014 ACM 978- 1-4503- 2756 -5/14/05... $15.00.
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’14 , May 31 – June 7, 2014, Hyderabad, India
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2756-5/14/05...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568315
356
 With this work, our goal is to deepen  our understanding  of how 
information in transparent open source software environments is 
used to evaluate contributions. In par ticular, we investigate  
signals and cues associated with contribution acceptance.  By 
better understanding how developers in transpare nt work 
environments use information available to evaluate contributions, 
we can inform tool design for similar work environments. For 
example, site designers may choose to make important signals 
more salient  to developers. To answer these questions, we 
performed an analysis of contribution  from thousands of projects 
on the social open source project-hosting site GitHub.  For our 
unit of analysis, we use the  pull request, one of the primary 
method s for code contributions in GitHub, where a developer 
submits a code change to a project that notifies the project core 
members  for a review of the code contribution  to evaluate 
whether or not to accept the change . GitHub is an example of a 
new class of work environment that offers greater t ransparency of 
work actions and social relationships.  
We found that both technical and social signals had strong 
associations with contribution acceptance. In particular, social 
signals of the connection between the submitting user and the 
user managing t he contribution were especially associated with 
contribution acceptance . Contributions with many associated 
comments were much less likely to be accepted, perhaps due to 
contention between the submitter and the core project team. The 
negative influence of comments was moderated , however,  by the 
submitter's prior interaction in the project.  In the following 
sections we consider related research  on the contribution 
practices of open source software projects and online 
communities in order to generate hypothes es, describe our multi-
level logistic model of pull request acceptance , report the results 
of our analysis, and discuss the implications of our findings.  
2. TRANSPARENCY AND OPEN SOURCE  
Previous work on open source software projects and developers suggests th at there is a complex social and technical structure 
around the concept of making contributions to projects. We position our work in the literature on newcomers making 
contributions in online communities more generally . We also 
examine new software development environments that make use 
of transparency and social media features , which sheds light on 
the kinds of signals that are visible and the inferences developers 
make . Informed by previous work, we generate hypotheses to test 
in our analysis of contributions in GitHub.  
2.1 Open Source Software  
As open source software often relies on the volunteer efforts of 
software developers, the survival and well -being of open source 
software projects often depends on attracting contributions from 
the larger community [4]. Developers choose to offer 
contributions to  open source software projects for a variety of 
reasons . Hars and Ou  [13] performed a survey on the motivations 
of open source developers. They found that developers would contribute  their time and effort for various reasons, with self -
determination and developing human capital the most highly 
ranked. Other highly ranked motivations include peer 
recognition, self -marketing, and a developer's personal need for  
the software project. Lakhani and Wolf [18]  and Roberts  et al.  
[25] found that open sour ce developers are motivated by both 
intrinsic motivations such as intellectual stimulation , and 
extrinsic motivations such as improving skills.  
Literature on the contribution process for open source software projec ts suggests that accepting contributions, especially from unknown developers, is a complex process. Krogh et al. [17]  
found in their study of the contribution process in the Freenet 
open source project that there are "joining scripts" that successful 
newcomers follow before offering contributions.  These joining 
scripts involve participating in prior activity such as lurking on 
the project's mailing list, participating in technical discussions, 
and reporting bugs. Developers that offered technical 
contributions without following this joining script tended not to 
have their contributions accepted into the project. Ducheneaut [8] 
made a similar observation in the Python project, noting a 
progressive socialization process that requires both displaying technical skills and creating  the right social relations.  In order for 
contributions to be accepted into the project, the contribution must both be technically sound and be vetted by core members of 
the project. For successful and complete socialization (becoming 
an "insider") , a developer needs to recruit core members of the 
project as a network of "a llies".  
Shah [27] observed that this contri bution process also leads to 
evolution for a developer's level of participation in the project. 
Most developers make simple initial contributions such as bug fixes in order to fulfill some need. A number of these developers 
choose to continue to participate in the project, evolving from a 
need-based participation to a hobbyist. Often, these developers 
will also gain committer rights or the right to freely commit their 
changes directly into the project.  
As open source software projects e volve, their contrib ution needs 
tend to change as the project matures. Nakakoji et al. [22]  
observe d that as open source projects evolve, the communities 
around the project co -evolve along with the open source software 
system.  Contributions to the project influence the transformation 
of both the software system and the community . Nakakoji et al. 
also define d at least three different classes of open source 
projects that evolve into each other. These project classes each 
have the ir own unique contribution needs and selection criteria. 
For example, a Service-Oriented OSS system like PostgreSQL tends to be very conservative in terms of accepting contributions due to a need for stability. Stewart and Gosain [28] also found 
that project maturity in open source software projects on 
SourceForge moderates both objective and subjective 
performance outcomes. For example, the effect of task 
completion on perceived effectiveness is more positive for more mature projects.  
2.2 Contribution  in Online C ommunities  
Open source projects are a form of online community.  To survive and thrive, online communities face the challenge of 
attracting and evaluating contributions. Kraut and Resnick [16] 
claim that when dealing with newcomers, successful online 
communities must meet a number of challenges: attracting 
newcomers, selecting among the newcomers, retaining 
newcomers, socializing newcomers, and protecting existing 
members from potential problems newcomers may bring.  When 
evaluating ne wcomers, communities will often screen potential 
members by using signals of whether or not a newcomer is a 
good fit.  In order to gather information about these signals, 
diagnostic tasks are often used such as solving CAPTCHAs to 
screen automated attack ers or acquiring experience points and 
weapons to signal character prowess in the online game World of 
Warcraft. An open question is whether transparent work 
environments already provide these  kinds of  signals by virtue of 
making past work activity visible.  
In the community of Wikipedia, Bryant et al. [3] found that some 
newcomers will transition from making peripher al contributions 357 to specific articles into core users that help maintain Wikipedia 
and its community as a whole. Newcomers learn the conventions 
and contribution rules of the Wikipedia community through 
observation (lurking) and direct mentoring from more 
experienced users. Related to this concept of mentoring is a community -wide norm of "don't bite the newcomer s". The nature 
of users' contributions also tends to change as newcomers become 
more socialized, from purely making edits in articles to also 
participating in community discussions, administrative duties, 
and "meta" tasks.  
Iriberri and Leroy [15]  found that online communities have 
multiple lifecycle stages with different contribution needs.  For 
example, during the earlier Growth stage , communities are more 
concerned with  attracting  new members and supporting 
interactions while the later Maturity stage, communities may prefer to recognize contributions and increase visibility of certain 
members.  
2.3 Transparent Work Environments  
We use GitHub as an example of a new class of transparent 
software environments that incorporate  social media features to 
make work more visible . Previous qualitative research on GitHub  
by Dabbish et al. [5] showed that developers are able to make a 
variety of subtle inferences about other developers and projects using the social media cues. They use these inferences in 
practical ways, for instance to help manage their projects, discover us er needs, and recruit developers. This research also 
suggested that the feed of project activity generated by social 
media strongly influences who and what developers attend to. 
Developers in this study used signals of community attention to a 
project or e vent in the feed to determine if a project was worth 
using or a discussion was worth reading. Project managers, 
especially those in popular projects that received many 
contributions (pull requests) per day, would make inferences 
about the quality of code c ontributions and submitter competence 
based on these signals.  In some cases, project managers would 
directly communicate with submitters about contributions in 
order to solicit or negotiate changes.  In some cases, multiple 
rounds of comments were necessary  in order to establish shared 
understanding . The transparent nature of GitHub also led 
developers to become acutely aware that their work actions had 
an audience. These audience pressures encouraged developers to 
create more legible contributions with “sna ppy” commit 
messages and clean code because users would potentially later 
use the commit history to make inferences such as developer 
intention and competence . 
Marlow et al. [19]  found that when GitHub developers engage in 
information-seeking behaviors, they use signals  in the 
environment to  form impressions of users and projects. For 
example, impressions of general coding ability could be gleamed 
from the contents of a GitHub user's profile. Signals of whether 
or not a developer possesses specialized project-relevant skills 
were embedded in the user's activity log.  Project managers would 
often account for  uncertainty when evaluating contributions, 
straightforward and easily verifiable changes were often accepted 
"as is" whereas complicated , uncertain changes would require  
discussion before acceptance. In these cases, project managers 
would often engage in discussion with the submitter in  order to 
negotiate the change. In these cases , where the value of the 
contribution was uncertain, project managers would make use of 
both code -based factors and person -based factors. For example, a 
project manager may weigh the cost of fixing a contribution against the benefit of recruiting a new memb er to the project.  Pham et al. [23]  found in their study of the testing culture in 
GitHub that project managers would demand that contributions 
include tests in certain cases. For example, contributions that 
introduced new features were expected to include tests. On the 
other hand, contributions that involved existing code, especially 
if the change was small like a bug fix, may or may not require 
tests. Also, if the project manager trusted the submitting 
developer, the contribution tended to be evaluated more leniently. 
Project man agers also saw an urgent need for automatic testing in 
their projects due to the large group of peripheral developers and 
general issues of scale. Many submitters would include tests as a 
method for highlighting the value of their contr ibution to the 
proje ct manager. The transparent nature of GitHub helped lower 
the barrier for including tests in contributions. For example, if 
tests for existing parts of the codebase were prominent and 
visible, submitters would be much more likely to make use of 
these existing tests and include tests in their own contributions.  
2.4 Research Questions and Hypotheses  
Our examination of literature on contributions in open source 
software and online communities suggests a number of 
potentially important factors in evaluating contri butions in 
transparent work environments such as GitHub.  
2.4.1 Technical Contribution Norms  
We see in prior work about GitHub that there are certain 
contribution norms that signal a technically well-prepared 
contribution . For example, project managers see an urgent need 
for automatic testing in their projects in order to maintain quality as the number of peripheral developers scales [23] . So, project 
managers tend to value contributions that include test cases more 
highly. Another example of such a signal is the community norm 
of having legible, easy -to-evaluate pull requests [5]. 
Contributions that display these signals of te chnical value may 
indicate a well -thought out technical submission that is also 
easier for a project manager to evaluate  [5]. 
H1: Contributions that show signs of following technical 
contribution norms  are more likely to be accepted.  
2.4.2 Social Connection 
In traditional open source software projects, newcomers often 
need to “ recruit ” core members of a project in order to have their 
contributions accepted  [8]. This process involves knowing who 
the key core members are and being able to c onvince them of the 
usefulness of the contribution, especially if the code contribution 
is complex.  Often, these key members expect newcomers to have 
previously participated in technical discussions and other 
peripheral actions in order to learn project-specific norms and 
prove suitability before submitting contributions [17] . In GitHub, 
these kinds of social connections are visible and made explicit, 
perhaps making social connections between submitters and project mana gers more salient.  
H2: Contributions from submitters with a stronger social 
connection to the project are more likely to be accepted.  
2.4.3 Highly Discussed Cont ributions  
Certain contributions raise uncertainty about their value for a 
project and subsequently generate more discussion  [19]. Changes 
that required high amounts of discussion tend to be more closely 
scrutinized by more members of the site , as GitHub users would 
look at discussion on a contribution as a signal of controversy. 
These contributions may be less technically sound, more 
complicated to evaluate, or simply controversial in terms of 
project direction or implementation strategy.  Due to the high 358 degree of uncertainty, project managers may then be less willing 
to accept the contribution.  
H3: Contributions with a high  amount of discussion  are less 
likely to be  accept ed. 
2.4.4 Decision -Making for  Highly Discussed 
Contributions  
When the value of a contribution  is uncertain , project managers 
may employ different standards when evaluating the 
contributions  [19]. In the cases of contributions with high 
amounts of discussion, we expect both  the tone of the discussion 
and the degree of uncertainty to change depending on differences between the technical nature of the contribution and the social 
relationship between the submitter and the core project team. 
These different social and technical factors should then moderate 
the uncertainty in highly discussed contributions.  
H4: Acceptance of highly discussed contributions will be 
moderated by both social and technical factors.  
2.4.5 Submitter ’s General Community Standing  
Previous research  on GitHub has found that developers often use 
inferences about developers and softwar e projects to evaluate 
them  [19]. This research suggests the identity of the submitter 
and/or the software project may affect h ow contributions are 
evaluated. Members of the GitHub community regard certain 
members as being at a higher standing. Some prolific developers 
are even considered "coding rockstars" by the overall community 
[5]. Project managers who receive contributions from higher 
standing  submitters may then be more willing to accept them 
based on the submitter’s status.  
H5: Contributions from sub mitters with a high status in the 
general community are more likely to be accepted.  
2.4.6 Submitter ’s Status in Project  
With open source software projects,  there often is a structure of 
"core" and "periphery" developers, with core developers being 
the few central developers who implement most of the code 
changes and make important project direction decisions and 
peripheral developers being the "many eyes" of the project that make s mall changes such as bug fixes [20] . Core developers who 
make con tributions to their own project may then be more likely 
to have their contributions ac cepted by fellow project managers.  
H6: Contributions from submitters that hold higher status in a 
specific  project are more likely to be accepted.  
2.4.7 Project Establishment  
As open source software projects progress through their lifecycle, 
their needs tend to differ from less mature projects [22]. The 
development stage of an open source project also tends to moderate its performance outcomes [28] . As projects evolve, 
their contribution needs may also co-evolve  [22]. More 
established projects may be more service -oriented with many 
downstream dependencies. Project managers are often aware that their projects are depended on by other, perhaps more high 
profile projects. For example, certain popular websites may depend on a particular library on GitHub, so a broken release 
may also break the popular website [5]. Project managers of 
established projects may then be much more conservative when 
accepting contributions in light of these dependencies.  
H7: Contributions to established projects are less likely to be accepted.  3. METHODS  
To answer our research questions, we create d and analyze d a 
dataset from the social open source software hosting site GitHub [12]. We selected a sample of pull requests on GitHub and 
gathered information on the pull requests, the submitting users, 
and the project the pull request w as submitted to. From this 
dataset, we fit a statistical model that associates social and 
technical con tribution measures with the likelihood of pull 
request acceptance. In this section we present descriptions of the 
GitHub setting, our data collection procedures, measure calculation, and analysis technique.  
3.1 Description of the Research Setting  
GitHub is a p roject-hosting site started in 2008 that brands itself 
as "Social Coding." The site offers both free open source project 
hosting and paid private hosting and is home to over t en million  
repositories [1]. Some of the more popular open source software 
projects that GitHub hosts include Ruby on Rails and jQuery . We 
selected GitHub as our research setting because it implements many of the social networking features found in well -known 
social networking sites such a s Facebook and Twitter to improve 
collaboration between software developers through transparency.  
GitHub  allows potential project contributors to "fork" or make a 
personal copy of any public project where they can make changes 
to, add, or alter functionality, without disturbing the code in the 
original branch. This potential participant can then request that 
code changes in their personal copy be merged in to the project’s 
main repository. This can be accomplished by creating a "pull 
request”  to the original project. The project manager has several 
options  to "close" the pull request, including accepting  the 
offered contribution and merging it into the project's code base  or 
rejecting the contribution . At the same time, managers and other 
interested users may  comment on the pull request, perh aps to 
suggest improvements or negotiate over the code change.  Of 
course, project managers may also ignore the contribution, 
leaving the pull request "open".  
GitHub  also provides a set of social networking features. These 
include the ability for developers to "follow" other members in the community and to " star" the repositories of different projects.  
Following direct s events about actions by a developer to the 
participant’s news feed. Examples of such events include the 
creation of a new project or the starring of an existing project by 
a followed participant. Much of the followed participants’ social 
activity is also visible in the  feed, including changes to the set of 
users that person is following. Starring a repository works 
similarly to a bookmarking system, adding the starred project to a 
list of projects for a particular user. In addition, participants have 
a profile page that lists personal information as well as activity -
related information such as the repositories they own and watch 
as well as the participants that they follow . 
3.2 Pull Request  Selection  
We create a dataset of pull requests and the users and repositories 
associated with each pull request through sampling for active, 
collaborative projects on GitHub. Our dataset comprises information gathered from the GitHub Application Programmer 
Interface (API). First, we drew a sample of repositories from the GitHub Archive dat aset [11] on July 17, 2013 with the following 
sampling criteria:  
1) Excluded forks, developer -specific copies of repositories often 
meant for interim development work, in order to avoid double -
counting contributions in our model.  359 2) Excluded repositories that have not had at least one event of 
activity within one week prior to data collection, July 10, 2013 in 
order to avoid inactive projects.  
3) Excluded repositories that do not use the GitHub issue tracker, 
as we also use the issue tracker as a source of data . 
This selection included 185,342 repositories. We further refined 
the selection using the GitHub API to retrieve more detailed 
information about each repository  with the following criteria: 
1) Removed each repository that did not contain at least one 
closed pull request due to  using closed pull requests as a base unit 
of analysis.  
2) Excluded repositories with less than three unique contributors 
in order to ensure that the project has received some outside 
contributions . 
After this second phase of filtering, our sample included 12,482 
projects.  
We used pull requests as a base unit of analysis. From these 
12,482 projects, we extract all closed pull requests from the API. 
As we were interested in the decision of whether or not to accept 
a pull request, we excluded all open pull requests.  In total, this 
includes 659,501 pull requests across the 12,482 projects.  For this 
dataset, we also gathered information about each unique GitHub 
user associated with the set of pull requests. This set of user 
information includes 95,270 unique GitHub user accounts. We  
also use d the API to gather information on all issues and 
comments for each repository.  
3.3 Measures  
From our created dataset, we generated contribution measures for 
our analysis based on prior literature on GitHub , traditional open 
source  software communitie s, and online communities (see Table 
1 for a descriptive summary of the measures).  3.3.1 Outcome Measure  
Our main outcome measure was whether or not a pull request is 
accepted. Pull request acceptance in this context means that the code contributions included in the pull request were merged into 
the project’s code base. Pull request acceptance is a dichotomous variable.  
3.3.2 Pull Request -level Measures  
For our base level of measurement, we collect ed information 
unique to each closed pull request in our dataset. Each signal for 
the pull request represents a social or technical attribute about the 
contribution that may factor into the acceptance decision.  
3.3.2.1  Technical Contribution Norms  
We use  three meas ures to operationalize different dimensions of 
valued technical contribution norms for  a pull request.  
Test Inclusion –  This measure was a dichotomous variable 
indicating  whether or not the pull request include d test cases. 
From the prior work of Dabbish et al.  [5] on GitHub, we know 
that when core members evaluate pull requests, they look  for the 
inclusion of test cases as a signal of the thoroughness of the contribution. To measure this, we looked at the file pathnames in 
each pull request and looked for the word “test”. If the pull 
request included such a pathname, then the pull request is labeled 
as including tests. This is due to most test cases either residing in 
a test folder (i.e. project/test/…) or the filenames including the 
word “test” (i.e. test_numberformat.java). To verify, a simple 
spot-check was performed on forty  randomly chosen pull 
requests, twenty labeled as having tests, twenty labeled as not having tests. All checked pull requests were found to be correctly 
labeled. Of course, this measure is probably conservative, with 
unfound false negatives.  
Commit Size – This measure is the number of lines changed in 
the pull request. Along with number of files changed, we 
included the number of lines changed in a pull request as a signal of a pull request’s legibility. Pull requests that change large 
portions of the code base at a time are much harder for project managers to understand and evaluate.  
Number of Files Changed –  This measure is the number of files 
changed in the pull request. Along wit h the commit size, we use 
these measures to indicate how legible a particular pull request is.  
Pull requests that touch a large number of files tend to be much 
harder to understand and evaluate for project managers [19].  
3.3.2.2  Social Connection 
To represent two different dimensions of the social connections 
in GitHub, we use d a measure for social distance and another for 
prior interaction.  
Social Distance – This measure was  a dichotomous variable  
indicat ing whether or not the submitter follows the user that 
closes the pull request.  We use this as a proxy of the social 
closeness betwee n the submitter and the closer in a particular pull 
request.  
Prior Interaction – Prior work on GitHub by Dabbish et al. [5], 
indicates that core members for a project, especially when 
attempting to recruit new members, use prior contributions as a signal of the trustworthine ss of a contributor and contribution. To 
measure prior interaction, we count ed the number of events 
before a particular pull request that the user has participated in for 
this project. Events include participating in issues, pull requests, 
and commenting on various GitHub artifacts.  Table 1. Descriptives of measures  pre-transformation.  
 Measure  mean  median  stdev  skew  
Test Inclusion*  0.151  0.000 0.358  1.950  
Commit Size 
(lines)  1456  25.000  27799  61.876  
Files Changed  13.265  2.000  165.46
0 67.691  
Social Distance* 0.096  0.000 0.295  2.740  
Prior Interaction  200.583  22.000  566.38
8 8.184  
Comments  2.664  1.000  6.656  19.198  
Followers  35.972  7.000  177.08
2 22.965  
Collaborator 
Status*  0.435  0.000 0.496  0.261  
Repo Maturity**  2.104  1.956  1.188  0.568  
Collaborators  20.203  8.000  42.808  6.063  
Stars  1981 293 4095  2.977  
Pull Req 
Acceptance*  0.723  1.000  0.447  -0.999  
*Dichotomous variables  
  **In years as of July 17, 2013  
 
   360 3.3.2.3  Highly Discussed Contribution s 
Comments on Pull Request – Marlow et al. [19]  found that 
uncertain pull r equests tended to require negotiation and/or 
explanation. Pull requests with lots of comments also tended to 
signal controversy [5]. To measure the level of discussion , we 
count ed the number of comments in the closed pull request.  
3.3.3 User- level Measures  
As each  pull request has a submitting user that may submit 
multiple pull requests to a project, we group ed pull requests by 
the submitting GitHub user account and collect ed information 
about each GitHub  submitter.  
3.3.3.1  Submitter ’s General Community Standing  
Followers  – This measure is  the number of followers a GitHub 
user has  at time of data collection . The number of followers a 
GitHub user possesses is used as a signal of standing [5] within 
the community. For example, users with lots of followers were 
treated as local celebrities.  
3.3.3.2  Submitter ’s Status in Project  
Collaborator Status  – This signal is a dichotomous variable for 
the user's collaborator status within the project. In GitHub, a 
collaborator for a project has direct commit access to the 
repository. Ther efore, they do not need to perform the pull 
request process in order to merge code contributions into the 
project. However, interviews with GitHub users indicate that 
many collaborators opt to create pull requests for code 
contributions despite having comm it status. Often, this is done to 
allow other users to review changes before accepting the code contribution.  
3.3.4 Repository -level Measures  
We further group ed the dataset by grouping each set of 
submitters into a repository and collect ed information about each 
repository.  
3.3.4.1  Project Establishment  
We use d three different measures to represent three dimensions 
of establishment for the project receiving the pull request is.  
Repository Age – This measure is a continuous variable 
representing the project's age how long a project has existed on 
GitHub since the time of data collection.  We use this as a n 
indicator  of the repository's maturity.  
Collaborators  – This measure is the number of collaborators on a 
project. We use the number of collaborator s as a proxy for the 
relative size of  the development team involved in a particular  
GitHub project.  
Stars  – This measure is a continuous variable for the number of 
stars on a project. When evaluating projects, GitHub users make 
use of the number of stars as a signal for community interest in 
the project [5]. As stars were indications of attention from  a user 
to a particular project, more stars indicate more users interested in 
the project. Measures such as the number of forks and the number of contributors to a particular GitHub project were highly 
correlated with this measure, so were omitted to avoid 
collinearity.  
4. RESULTS  
Our analysis suggests that both technical and social contribution 
measures are highly associated with acceptance. First, we 
examine our hypotheses and how each predictor variable 
associates with acceptance. We also consider factors that cut across pull requests such as user -level and repository -level 
measures. A summary of the models is presented in Table 2.  
We report measure associations with contribution in odds ratios, 
which are the increase or decrease of the odds of acceptance occurring per "unit" of the measure. In this case, a "unit" of each 
measure is one standard deviation from the log -transformed for 
continuous variables or the presence of a dichotomous variable.   
4.1 Analysis 
Using these pull request-level, submitter -level, and repository -
level measures, we create a model that predicts the likelihood of 
pull request acceptance. We fit a multi- level mixed effects 
logistic regression model to our data  because our outcome 
variabl e (acceptance) is dichotomous and our dataset nested in 
multiple levels. We chose a logistic regression approach in order to better predict our dichotomous outcome variable. To account 
for the three -level nesting of the dataset from pull requests to 
users to repositories, we created a mixed model where our 
contribution measures are fixed effects and the unique user and 
repository intercepts are represented as random effects. We used 
a R [24]  package [2] that accounts for cross-classification of data, 
as 28,880 out of 95,720 users appear in multiple projects in our 
dataset. None of the measures had pai rwise correlations above 0.6 
suggesting no  multicollinearity problems [7]. To ensure 
normality, each of the continuous variables in the model was log transformed and then centered such that the mean of each 
measure is 0 and standard deviation is 1.  
4.2 Pull Request -Level Measures  
4.2.1 Technical Contribution N orms  
H1: Contributions that follow technical contribution norms are 
more likely to be accepted.  
We tested H1 by examining the association of test case inclusion, 
commit size, and files changed with contribution acceptance. The 
inclusion of test cases was p ositively associated with pull request 
acceptance, with acceptance likelihood increased by 17.1%  when 
tests are included.  Lines changed had a stronger effect but 
negative , with each unit of  lines changed decreasing the chance 
of acceptance by 26.2% compared to 7.3% with each unit  of  files 
changed.  
As we expect contributions that include test cases and are more 
legible are more likely to be accepted, so we find support for H1.  
4.2.2 Social Connection 
H2: Contributions from submitters with a stronger social 
connec tion to the project are more likely to be accepted.  
We tested H2 by examining the association of social distance and 
prior interaction with contribution acceptance. We find support 
for H2 as both of our social connection measures were positively 
associated with pull request acceptance. Our measure of social distance had the strongest influence on likelihood of acceptance 
as compared with other pull -request level factors, increasing 
acceptance by 187% when the submitter follows the project 
manager. Prior interaction was also positively associated with 
accepta nce, increasing acceptance likelihood by 35.6% per unit.  
4.2.3 Highly Discussed Contributions  
H3: Contributions with a high amount of discussion are less 
likely to be accepted.  
To test H3, we examined the association between pull request 
comment count and accept ance. Pull requests with longer 
discussion, as indicated by higher counts of comments, were less  361 likely to be accepted , supporting H3. This is our second strongest 
effect among the pull request-level factors, with the likelihood of 
acceptance decreasing by 54.6% with each unit of comment 
count.  
4.2.4 Decision -Making for Highly Discussed 
Contributions  
H4: Acceptance of highly discussed contributions will be 
moderated by both social and technical factors.  
To test H4, we added an interaction term to the model, interacting 
number of comments with each pull request-level measure in 
order to investigate how social and technical factors moderated 
the decision -making process for highly discussed contributions. 
We found that all five interactions with social and technical 
factors were significant, indicating support for H4.  
We provide charts detailing the direction of the interactions in 
Figures 1, 2, and 3. The associations of test inclusion, number of 
files, com mit size, and social distance all significantly moderate 
the influence of discussion on contribution acceptance, though with a small effect. Prior interaction most strongly moderates the 
relationship between discussion and acceptance, with number of 
commen ts having almost no influence on acceptance for previous 
contributors. We discuss later the implications of these interactions for how evaluating highly discussed contributions may differ from more standard contributions.   
4.3 User -Level Measures  
4.3.1 Submitter Sta tus in General Community  
H5: Contributions from submitters with a high status in the general community are more likely to be accepted.  
To test H5, we examine d the association of follow count with 
pull request acceptance. We find a positive association,  
supporting H5.  Having followers increases the likelihood of 
acceptance by 18 .1% per unit of followers . This suggests that 
submitters with higher community standing  are more likely to 
have their pull requests accepted.  
4.3.2 Submitter Status in Project  
H6: Contribut ions from submitters that hold higher status in a 
specific project are more likely to be accepted.  
We tested H6 by examining the association of collaborator status 
with contribution acceptance. Perhaps unsurprisingly, when 
submitters with commit access choose to create pull requests 
instead of directly merging code, their pull requests are more likely to be accepted than non- collaborators , supporting H6. Table 2. Multi -level mixed effects logistic model for pull request acceptance  
    Model I  Model II Model III  Model IV 
   Pull Request Level  Pull + 
Submitter  
Level   Pull + 
Submitter + 
Repo Level  
  Factor  Variable  Odds Ratio  Odds Ratio  Odds Ratio  Odds Ratio  
Pull 
Request 
Level   (Intercept)  2.934  *** 2.898  *** 2.845  *** 3.925  *** 
Technical 
Contribution 
Norms  (H1)  Test Inclusion 1.059  *** 1.023  * 1.114  *** 1.171  *** 
Commit Size  0.849  *** 0.834  *** 0.736  *** 0.738  *** 
Number of Files Changed 1.165  *** 1.152  *** 0.970  *** 0.927  *** 
Social 
Connection (H2)  Social Distance  1.345  *** 1.461  *** 3.636  *** 2.870  *** 
Prior Interaction  1.423  *** 1.362  *** 1.207  *** 1.356  *** 
Highly Discussed 
Contributions 
(H3)  Comments  0.481  *** 0.480  *** 0.414  *** 0.454  *** 
Decision-Making 
for Highly 
Discussed 
Contributions  
(H4)  Test Inclusion x Comments     1.057  *** 1.092  *** 1.106  *** 
Commit Size x Comments      1.101  *** 1.166  *** 1.169  *** 
Files Changed x Comments     1.017  *** 1.043  *** 1.035  *** 
Social  Distance x 
Comments      0.806  *** 0.792  *** 0.796  *** 
Prior Interaction x 
Comments      1.106  *** 1.246  *** 1.142  *** 
Submitte
r Level  Status in General 
Community  (H5)  Followers          1.060  *** 1.181  *** 
Status in Project 
(H6)  Collaborator Status          3.904  *** 1.636  *** 
Repo 
Level  Project 
Establishment 
(H7)  Repository Age              0.820  *** 
Collaborators              0.954  ** 
Stars              0.648  *** 
AIC:      633600  630879  506850  461077  362 Being a collaborator on a project increases the likelihood of 
contributions being accepted by  63.6%. 
4.4 Repository -Level Measures  
4.4.1 Project Establishment  
H7: Contributions to established projects are less likely to be 
accepted.  
We test H7 by examining the association of  our project 
establishment measures ( the age of the project, number of users 
with commit sta tus, and popularity of the project ) with 
contribution acceptance. A ll three of our project establishment 
dimensions  have negative associations with pull request 
acceptance,  so we find support for  H7. Number of collaborators, 
used as a proxy for project tea m size, has the smallest influence  
on acceptance likelihood out of the three establishment measures, 
decreasing acceptance by 4.6% per unit of collaborator count . 
Somewhat surprisingly, this suggests that project "size" does not 
have as strong  an influence  on pull request acceptance as 
compared with age or popularity . The older  a project, used here 
as a proxy for maturity, the less likely it is to accept pull requests, 
with acceptance decreasing by 18. 0% per unit of project age . 
Popularity  had the strongest negative influence on acceptance , 
with projects 35.2%  less likely to accept pull requests per  unit of 
increase in  stars.  
5. DISCUSSION  
In this section, we summarize the results and discuss the 
implications of the hypotheses in terms of prior literature.  
5.1 Technical Norms  and Social Connection  
From conventional wisdom on open source software projects, we 
expect to see some evidence for a "meritocracy", in that technical 
contribution norms  should reign over other signals when 
considering contributions  [26]. However, in the environment of 
GitHub, which is both transparent and equipped with social 
media functionality, we also expect contributors to make use of 
the social connections that the  environment  makes salient. Our 
analysis suggests that while  following technical contribution 
norms  for pull requests is associated with acceptance, the s ocial 
connections behind pull requests have even stronger associations.  
In terms of technical contribution norms , we found that pull 
requests more consistent with community -wide pull request 
practices  like inclusion of test cases and small commit sizes [5] 
were more likely to be accepted. Code contributions that did not 
follow technical norms were less likely to be accepted, perha ps 
due to the higher assessment costs required by the project 
manager .  
We also find that social connections increase likelihood of 
contribution acceptance , even when controlling for compliance 
with technical contribution norms . In traditional open source 
software projects, contributors are often expected to participate in 
more social aspects of the project such as participating in mailing 
list technical discussions before making code contributions in 
order to learn project-specific norms and ease socializa tion [17]. 
In the case of GitHub however , this expectation may be less 
prevalent because the pull request system  standar dizes the 
contribution process. The pull -request process also lowers the 
barriers for contribution, meaning many developers will make  
one-off contributions  to projects or "drive -by commits"  [23]. 
However, we still found that a contributor that has prior 
interaction with a project also has a higher likelihood of pull 
request acceptance. We also find that submitters socially closer to project managers tend to have  their contributions accepted . This 
social distance association is also the strongest in the model. 
Similar to evalua ting technical contribution norms , stronger 
social connections may indicate qualities such as trust, which 
may lower  the project manager's assessment cost. For example, if 
the submitter is trusted to make good contributions, project 
managers may be more le nient in their evaluations [2 3]. 
While both technical contribution norms and social connections 
were associated with pull request acceptance, our measures for 
social contribution had much stronger associations than our 
technical contribution norm measures. One possible explanation 
is that when project managers are  evaluating pull requests, when 
the evaluation cost is too high, they may  decide to outright reject 
the contribution. Whereas pull requests that follow technical 
norms such as legible code changes and test cases make the pu ll 
request  
 
 
 0.50.60.70.80.91
No Tests Has TestsAcceptance
Test InclusionLow 
Discussion
Mid 
Discussion
Hi 
Discussion
Figure 1. Interaction plot of test inclusion and 
contribution contention
0.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.951
No Follow FollowsAcceptance
Social DistanceLow 
Discussion
Mid 
Discussion
Hi 
Discussion
Figure 2. Interaction plot of social distance and 
contribution contention
0.40.50.60.70.80.91Acceptance
Prior InteractionLow 
Discussion
Mid 
Discussion
Hi 
Discussion
Figure 3. Interaction plot of prior interaction and 
contribution contention
(prior interaction values are standardized)363 much easier to evaluate, a strong social connection between the 
project manager and submitter may allow the project manager to 
bypass much of the evaluation process. Pull requests from 
unknown developers may be subject to much more thorough and 
costly evaluations from project managers than pull requests from 
known contributors  [23]. For example, a familiar developer may 
be expected to already have run the contribution through the test 
suite, allowing for a project manager to bypass that phase of the 
evaluation , increasing the likelihood of acceptance . Similarly, we 
see that members of the project with commit rights, perhaps an 
explicit form of trust, also have positive associations with 
acceptance.  This may be similar to the effect of familiarity in 
distribute d software development, where team familiarity is 
associated with team performance, especially for geographically 
dispersed teams (as many GitHub projects are) [9]. One 
explanation for th e familiarity finding is that teammates with high 
familiarity know whom to contact for queries and resources, 
making coordination much more efficient. Perhaps submitters 
with a strong social connection also lower the coordination costs 
required to use the contribution. For example, project managers 
familiar with the submitter may not bother to look for project-specific coding style norms, knowing that the submitter already 
shou ld know them.  All of these factors that lower assessment 
costs reduce the chances that flaws are found, or that the project 
manager will opt to reject the pull request rather than perform and expensive evaluation.   
Future research should examine in more d etail how technical and 
social signals influence evaluation cost during pull request acceptance.  If technical norm signals are harder to evaluate, then 
perhaps future collaborative software tools should focus on 
lowering the evaluation cost of a software c ontribution.  At the 
same time, if developers are using social signals to evaluate 
contributions, then perhaps those signals should be made more 
visible during evaluation tasks , assuming that these signals are 
optimal for decision -making . Future research sh ould also 
examine whether these evaluation decisions are optimal or what 
leads to optimal acceptance decisions.  
5.2 Decision -Making and Highly Discussed 
Contributions  
Next to social distance, the amount of discussion around  a pull 
request had the strongest influence on likelihood of acceptance.  
The more highly discussed the contribution, the less likely the 
contribution would be accepted. This by itself is not too 
surprising, given the high degree of uncertainty present in such 
pull requests [19] . However, we also hypothesized that highly 
discussed pull requests differ in  both the tone of the discussion 
and the degree of uncertainty in th e contribution being discussed. 
These differences in the nature of the discussion around evaluating a pull request also reflect differences in the decision -
making process for project managers. When discussing a pull 
request in order to evaluate the value o f the contribution, project 
managers may be using different kinds of information. We found 
in our model (see Table 2) that both technical contribution norms  
and social connection measures moderated the effect of 
discussion on contributions.  
For highly disc ussed contributions, our social and technical pull 
request-level measures  moderate the negative association of 
discussion amount on acceptance . For most of our factors, 
however, regardless of being social or technical in nature, the 
moderating effect is too small to affect the  very negative 
influence  of having a large amount of discussion in a 
contribution. In Figure 1 for example, the  negative effect of high discussion overwhelms the positive technical effect of test 
inclusion, reducing the likelihood of acceptance by about 30% regardless of test inclusion.  Even for the variable with the largest 
association with acceptance , social  distance,  having a high 
amount of discussion still reduc es the likelihood of acceptance by 
about 25% regardless of whether or n ot following occurs as seen 
in Figure 2. This small moderating effect suggests that for most 
pull requests, project managers are much less willing to accept 
the contribution, regardless of whether or not technical 
contribution norm s are followed or a  socia l connection of the 
submitter to the project manager  exists.  This may indicate that 
regardless of the tone of the discussion or nature of the 
contribution, high amounts of discussion on a pull request 
indicates a high degree of uncertainty  for the value of  the 
contribution.  
However, a submitter's prior interaction on the project 
significantly changes the influence of discussion on acceptance  as 
seen in Figure 3.  Surprisingly, there is a positive association 
between discussion and acceptance likelihood for p articipants 
with prior interaction. This may indicate that when experienced 
submitters are working on a project, the nature of the discussions 
around their pull requests is different in some way than 
submitters who do not have this prior experience.  Discussions 
where the submitter has high amounts of prior interaction may be 
less focused on  evaluating a contribution's value and more 
focused on optimizing the code.  Conversely, the discussion 
around a contribution from a submitter with no prior interaction 
on the project may focus more on evaluating whether the pull 
contribution is worth accepting.  For example, a submitter with no 
prior interaction may be unaware of a project's submission 
practices and the resulting discussion would be focused on 
ensuring the pull request matches the project's standards.  
Interestingly, the moderation effect of  prior interaction is at odds 
with the effect of social distance despite both variables being 
used for our social connection measure in the analysis model.  
This may s uggest that when discussing contributions , project 
managers will turn to prior interaction rather than social distance 
as a signal to use during  evaluation  of pull requests.  Perhaps this 
occurs because prior interactions are a more trustworthy signal than the socia l distance signal of the submitter following the 
project manager. To demonstrate prior interaction, a user has to 
actively participate in discussions, bug reports, and other forms of 
contribution on the project. Prior interaction may act as an 
assessment signal, where the signal of prior interactions cannot 
easily be generated without actual participation [6] . Prior 
interaction is a reliable signal of social connection because 
participation cannot be easily faked.  On the other hand, social 
distance via following may indicate a social connection between 
two users th rough convention. This signal is less reliable because 
a submitter can follow a project manager without actually 
creating a social connection  with the project manager . When 
discussing how to evaluate  contributions , the convention of 
following users does not replace familiarity built from actual 
prior interaction.  
Future research should examine how we can design tools that 
assist in deliberation by highlighting certain information. Future 
tool design may assist developers during softwar e change 
evaluation  discussions by making certain signals more or less 
visibl e. Future tools may even dynamically change the visibility 
of different signals depending on the tone of the discussion.  364 5.3 Audience Pressures  
While social and technical features of pull requests had important 
associations with acceptance, our model also suggests that the 
type of submitter and the type of project that the pull request is 
submitted to also influences acceptance likelihood.  
Pull requests from submitters who have commit rights, known as 
collaborators in GitHub, were associated with acceptance . Pull 
requests from collaborators seem to be special cases of 
contribution because  these users are not required to undergo the 
pull request process in order to have their c hange s merged into 
the project,  unlike other developers.  
Well- established projects were negatively associated with 
acceptance on all three dimensions. In particular, the popularity 
of a repository has the strongest negative association out of the 
three . Number of stars, our proxy for project popularity, is used 
by members of the GitHub community as a signal for project 
quality, which project managers are aware of [5]. 
The contrasting associations between popular projects and 
collaborators may indicate that  audience pressure is a factor when 
project m anagers evaluate pull requests. For popular projects, the 
transparent natu re of GitHub  means  project managers are aware, 
at least in part, of the identity of users of their project [5]. 
Knowing that hundr eds or thousands of users , some highly 
visible,  depend on a particular project may discourage project 
managers from accepting risky or uncertain code contributions.  
Conversely, c ollaborators, who possess the ability to accept pull 
requests into the project, may be immune to these audience 
pressures.  
The effect of audience pressure on software contribution 
evaluation  is not well understood. Future research may 
investigate more thoroughly how audience pressures affect  both 
contributors and core members of pr ojects.  Signals used to 
evaluate contributions may differ depending on whether or not core members feel pressure from the audience. For example, core 
members may be much more concerned about managing 
uncertainty when they are aware that millions of potenti al users 
are watching and depending on the project being stable.  
5.4 Limitations  
One of the main limitations of our study is that most of our data 
is of a cross -sectional nature. At the same time, some of our 
measures are more robust to reverse -causality becau se of timing 
inherent in the pull request process.  Prior interaction, test 
inclusion, and number of lines and files c hanged, are all variables 
whose value is determined prior to any consideration of 
acceptance of the pull request.  Other variables , however,  are 
cross -sectional at the time of data collection, such as follower 
count. Without performing a true longitudinal analysis, we cannot 
be certain  about the direction of causality for these latter 
variables using our dataset. Future work should  perform 
longitudinal analyses on contribution measures in order to make 
stronger inferences about causality.  
6. CONCLUSION  
In this work we examined how social and technical information 
in the transparent open source software environment of GitHub  is 
used to make contribution decisions. We created a statistical 
model analyzing the association of different pull request, 
submitter, and repository measures of contributions with the 
likelihood of the contribution being accepted. We found that 
project managers made us e of information involving both the 
technical contribution practices of a pull request and the strength of the social connection between the submitter and project manager when evaluating pull requests. Highly discussed pull 
requests were much less likely to be accepted, however, the 
submitter's prior interaction in the project moderated this effect. Well- established projects were more conservative when 
evaluating pull requests, perhaps due to audience pressures. Our 
findings inform how software developers a nd project managers 
make use of information in social work environments such as 
GitHub and imply a variety of ways that social features in work 
environments can support software development. Future research 
may investigate how developers use signals in oth er work 
environments, transparent or not. Future tool design may use our 
findings to identify signals to make more visible for project 
managers when making evaluation decisions. Our findings may 
also inform how project managers should change their evaluati on 
policies based on what signals are important.  
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This material is supported by the Center for the Future of Work at 
Carnegie Mellon University's Heinz College and by the National 
Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS1111750.  
8. REFERENCES  
[1] 10 Million Repositories - GitHub: 
https://github.com/blog/1724- 10-million -repositories.  
[2] Bates, D., Maechler, M. and Bolker, B. 2013. lme4.0: Linear mixed -effects models using S4 classes.  
[3] Bryant, S.L. , Forte, A. and Bruckman, A. 2005. Becoming 
Wikipedian: transformation of participation in a 
collaborative online encyclopedia. Proceedings of the 2005 
international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting 
group work  (New York, NY, USA, 2005), 1 –10. 
[4] Crow ston, K., Wei, K., Howison, J. and Wiggins, A. 2008. 
Free/Libre open-source software development: What we 
know and what we do not know. ACM Comput. Surv.  44, 2 
(Mar. 2008), 7:1 –7:35.  
[5] Dabbish, L., Stuart, C., Tsay, J. and Herbsleb, J. 2012. 
Social codin g in GitHub: transparency and collaboration in 
an open software repository. Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work  (New 
York, NY, USA, 2012), 1277 –1286.  
[6] Donath, J. 2005. Signals, truth, and design. MIT Press.  
[7] Dormann, C.F., Elith, J., Bacher, S., Buchmann, C., Carl, G., Carré, G., Marquéz, J.R.G., Gruber, B., Lafourcade, B., 
Leitão, P.J. and others 2013. Collinearity: a review of 
methods to deal with it and a simulation study evaluating 
their performance. Ecography . 36, 1 (2013), 27– 46. 
[8] Ducheneaut, N. 2005. Socialization in an Open Source 
Software Community: A Socio-Technical Analysis. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) . 14, 4 
(2005), 323 –368. 
[9] Espinosa, J.A., Slaughter, S.A., Kraut, R.E. and Herbsleb, J.D. 2007. Familiarity, Complexity, and Team Performance 
in Geographically Distributed Software Development. 
Organization Science . 18, 4 (2007), 613– 630. 
[10] Foundation/Charter - GNOME Wiki: 
https://wiki.gnome.org/Foundation/Charter. Accessed: 
2013- 08-31. 
[11] GitHub Archive: http://www.githubarchive.org/. Accessed: 
2013- 08-31. 365 [12] GitHub: http://github.com . Accessed: 2013-08 -21. 
[13] Hars, A. and Ou, S. 2002. Working for Free? Motivations 
for Participating in Open -Source Projects. Int. J. Electron. 
Commerce . 6, 3 (Apr. 2002), 25– 39. 
[14] How the ASF works: 
http://www.apache.org/foundation/how -it-works.html. 
Accessed: 2013- 08-31. 
[15] Iriberri, A. and Leroy, G. 2009. A life -cycle perspective on 
online community success. ACM Comput. Surv.  41, 2 (Feb. 
2009), 11:1– 11:29.  
[16] Kraut, R.E. and Resnick, P. 2012. Building Successful Online Communities: Evidence -Based Social Design. MIT 
Press.  
[17] Von Krogh, G., Spaeth, S. and Lakhani, K.R. 2003. 
Community , joining, and specialization in open source 
software innovation: a case study. Research Policy . 32, 7 
(Jul. 2003), 1217– 1241.  
[18] Lakhani, K.R. and Wolf, R. 2005. Why Hackers Do What They Do: Understanding Motivation and Effort in 
Free/Open Source Softwa re Projects. Perspectives on Free 
and Open Source Software . J. Feller, B. Fitzgerald, S. 
Hissam, and K.R. Lakhani, eds. MIT Press. 3 –22. 
[19] Marlow, J., Dabbish, L. and Herbsleb, J. 2013. Impression formation in online peer production: activity traces and 
personal profiles in github. Proceedings of the 2013 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work  (New 
York, NY, USA, 2013), 117 –128. 
[20] Mockus, A., Fielding, R.T. and Herbsleb, J.D. 2002. Two case studies of open source software development: Apache 
and Mozilla. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.  11, 3 (Jul. 
2002), 309 –346. [21] Mozilla - Governance - mozilla.org: 
http://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/. Accessed: 
2013- 08-31. 
[22] Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Nishinaka, Y., Kishida, K. and 
Ye, Y . 2002. Evolution patterns of open -source software 
systems and communities. Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Principles of Software Evolution (New York, 
NY, USA, 2002), 76 –85. 
[23] Pham, R., Singer, L., Liskin, O., Figueira Filho, F. and 
Schnei der, K. 2013. Creating a shared understanding of 
testing culture on a social coding site. Proceedings of the 
2013 International Conference on Software Engineering  
(Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013), 112 –121. 
[24] R Core Team 2013. R: A Language and Environment for 
Statistical Computing.  
[25] Roberts, J.A., Hann, I. -H. and Slaughter, S.A. 2006. 
Understanding the Motivations, Participation, and 
Performance of Open Source Software Developers: A 
Longitudinal Study of the Apache Projects. Management 
Science . 52, 7 (2006), 984 –999. 
[26] Scacchi, W. 2007. Free/Open Source Software Development: 
Recent Research Results and Methods. Architectural Issues. 
M. V Zelkowitz, ed. Elsevier. 243– 295. 
[27] Shah, S.K. 2006. Motivation, Governance, and the Viability 
of Hybrid Forms  in Open Source Software Development. 
Manage. Sci.  52, 7 (Jul. 2006), 1000– 1014.  
[28] Stewart, K.J. and Gosain, S. 2006. The moderating role of development stage in free/open source software project 
performance. Software Process: Improvement and Practice . 
11, 2 (2006), 177– 191.  
 366