Program Analysis for Secure Big Data Processing
Julian James Stephen Savvas Savvides Russell Seidel Patrick Eugster
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
ABSTRACT
The ubiquitous nature of computers is driving a massive in-
crease in the amount of data generated by humans and ma-
chines. Two natural consequences of this are the increased
eorts to a. derive meaningful information from accumu-
lated data and b. ensure that data is not used for unintended
purposes. In the direction of analyzing massive amounts of
data (a.), tools like MapReduce, Spark, Dryad and higher-
level scripting languages like Pig Latin and DryadLINQ have
signicantly improved corresponding tasks for software de-
velopers. The second, but equally important aspect of en-
suring condentiality (b.), has seen little support emerge for
programmers: while advances in cryptographic techniques
allow us to process directly on encrypted data, programmer-
friendly and ecient ways of programming such data analy-
sis jobs are still missing. This paper presents novel data ow
analyses and program transformations for Pig Latin, that
automatically enable the execution of corresponding scripts
on encrypted data. We avoid fully homomorphic encryp-
tion because of its prohibitively high cost; instead, in some
cases, we rely on a minimal set of operations performed by
the client. We present the algorithms used for this transla-
tion, and empirically demonstrate the practical performance
of our approach as well as improvements for programmers in
terms of the eort required to preserve data condentiality.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.2 [ Software ]: Software Engineering| Design Tools and
Techniques ; C.2.0 [ Computer-Communication Networks ]:
General| Security and protection
Keywords
Cloud computing, big data, privacy
Financially supported by DARPA grant # N11AP20014,
Northrop Grumman Information Systems, Purdue Research
Foundation grant # 204533, and Google Award \Geo-
Distributed Big Data Processing".
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ASE’14, September 15-19, 2014, Vasteras, Sweden.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3013-8/14/09 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642937.2643006.1. INTRODUCTION
The cloud computing model has evolved as a cost-ecient
data analysis platform for corporations, governments and
other institutions. A rich set of tools like MapReduce [14],
Dryad [21], or Spark [39] | just to name a few | allow
developers to execute data analysis jobs in the cloud easily.
However, in order to take advantage of these possibilities, de-
velopers are faced with the decision of moving sensitive data
to the cloud, and placing trust on infrastructure providers.
Even with a trusted provider, malicious users and programs
and defective software can leak data.
1.1 Computing on encrypted data
Several existing cryptographic systems (\cryptosystems")
allow meaningful operations to be performed directly on en-
crypted data. Advances occurring regularly in fully homo-
morphic encryption (FHE) schemes (e.g. [19]) further in-
crease the scope and performance of computations on en-
crypted data. These cryptosystems present an opportunity
to maintain sensitive data only in an encrypted form in the
cloud while still enabling meaningful data analysis. Even
within an enterprise, maintaining data in an encrypted for-
mat helps prevent insider attacks and accidental leaks.
Unfortunately, such advancements in cryptography have
not translated into programmer-friendly frameworks for big
data analysis with acceptable performance. Currently, for a
big data programmer to eciently put existing homomor-
phic schemes to work she will have to explicitly make use
of corresponding cryptographic primitives in her data anal-
ysis jobs. Consider a simple program that nds the total
marks obtained by students: the programmer is burdened
by the task of identifying an encryption scheme suitable to
represent such an operation ( Paillier [26] in this example
with addition) and express the operation (summing) in cryp-
tographic terms (multiplication of encrypted operands fol-
lowed by a modulo division by the square of the public key).
To make this task even more dicult for the programmer,
big data analysis jobs are typically expressed in domain-
specic security-agnostic high-level data ow languages, like
Pig Latin [25] or FlumeJava [11], which are commonly com-
piled to sequences of several MapReduce tasks [14]. This
makes the explicit use of cryptographic primitives even harder.
Recent approaches to automatically leveraging partially ho-
momorphic encryption (PHE) | e.g., addition of values en-
crypted with Paillier cryptosystem via multiplication | for
secure cloud-based computing target dierent application
scenarios or work-loads. For instance, the MySQL-based
CryptDB [28] supports SQL queries on encrypted data yet
277
does not enable parallelization through MapReduce; Mr-
Crypt [36] only supports individual MapReduce tasks.
1.2 Approach
In this paper we present a program analysis and transfor-
mation scheme for the Pig Latin high-level big data analysis
language which enable the ecient execution of correspond-
ing scripts by exploiting cloud resources but without expos-
ing data in the clear. We implemented this program analysis
and transformation inside a secure Pig Latin runtime (SPR).
More specically, we extend the scope of encryption-enabled
big data analysis based on the following insights:
Extended program perspective: By analyzing entire data ow
programs , SPR can identify many opportunities for oper-
ating in encrypted mode. For example, SPR can identify
operations in Pig Latin scripts that are inter-dependent
with respect to encryption, or inversely, independent of
each other. More precisely, when applying two (or more)
operations to the same data item, many times the second
operation does not use any side-eect of the former, but
operates on the original eld value. Thus, multiple en-
cryptions of a same eld can support dierent operations
by carefully handling relationships between encryptions.
Extended system perspective: By considering the possibility
of performing subcomputations on the client side, SPR
can still exploit cloud resources rather than giving up and
forcing users to run entire data ow programs in their
limited local infrastructure, or defaulting to FHE (and
then aborting [36]) when PHE does not suce. For exam-
ple, several programs in the PigMix (I+II) benchmarks [3]
end up averaging over the values of a given attribute for
several records after performing some initial ltering and
computations. While the summation underlying averag-
ing can be performed in the cloud via an additive homo-
morphic encryption (AHE) scheme, the subsequent divi-
sion can be performed on the client side.
Considering that the amount of data continuously de-
creases as computation advances in most analysis jobs, it
makes sense to compute as much as possible in the cloud .
1.3 Contributions
The contributions of this paper are as follows. After pre-
senting background information on homomorphic encryp-
tion and Pig Latin, we
1. propose an execution model for executing Pig Latin
scripts in the cloud without sacricing condentiality
of data.
2. outline a novel data ow analysis and transformation
technique for Pig Latin that distinguishes between op-
erations with side-eects (e.g., whose results are used
to create new intermediate data) and without (e.g.,
lters). The results are semantically equivalent pro-
grams executable by SPR that maximize the amount
of computations done on encrypted data in the cloud.
3. present initial evaluation results for an implementa-
tion of our solution based on the runtime of Pig Latin
scripts obtained from the open-source Apache Pig [2]
PigMix benchmarks.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 presents background information on homomorphic en-
cryption and Pig Latin. Section 3 outlines the design of our
solution. Section 4 presents our program analysis and trans-
formation. Section 5 outlines the implementation of SPR.
Section 6 presents empirical evaluation. Section 7 discusses
limitations. Section 8 contrasts with related work. Section 9
concludes with nal remarks. A preliminary version of this
report outlining our approach and infrastructure appeared
at the HotCloud 2014 workshop [35].
2. BACKGROUND
This section presents background information on homo-
morphic encryption and our target language Pig Latin.
2.1 Homomorphic encryption
A cryptosystem is said to be homomorphic (with respect
to certain operations) if it allows computations (consisting
in such operations) on encrypted data. If E(x) andD(x) de-
note the encryption and decryption functions for input data
xrespectively, then a cryptosystem is said to be homomor-
phic with respect to addition if 9 s.t.
D(E(x1) E(x2)) =x1+x2
Dually a cryptosystem is said to provide additive homomor-
phic encryption (AHE). Similarly a cryptosystem is said to
be homomorphic with respect to multiplication or support
multiplicative homomorphic encryption (MHE) if9s.t.
D(E(x1)E(x2)) =x1x2
Other homomorphisms are with respect to operators such
as\"and\"(order-preserving encryption { OPE) or equal-
ity comparison \=" ( deterministic encryption { DET). Ran-
domized (RAN) encryption does not support any operators,
and is intuitively, the most desirable form of encryption be-
cause it does not allow an attacker to learn anything.
2.2 Pig/Pig Latin
Apache Pig [2] is a data analysis platform which includes
the Pig runtime system for the high-level data ow language
Pig Latin [25]. Pig Latin expresses data analysis jobs as se-
quences of data transformations, and is compiled to MapRe-
duce [14] tasks by Pig. The MapReduce tasks are then
executed by Hadoop [20] and output data is presented as
a folder in HDFS [33]. Pig allows data analysts to query
big data without the complexity of writing MapReduce pro-
grams. Also, Pig does not require a xed schema to op-
erate, allowing seamless interoperability with other applica-
tions in the enterprise ecosystem. These desirable properties
of Pig Latin as well as its wide adoption1prompted us to
select it as the data ow language for SPR.
We give a short overview of Pig Latin here and refer the
reader to [25] for more details.
2.2.1 Types
Pig Latin includes simple types and complex types . The
former include signed 32-bit and 64-bit integers ( intand
long respectively), 32-bit and 64-bit oating point values
1According to IBM [15], \ Yahoo estimates that between
40% and 60% of its Hadoop workloads are generated from
Pig [...] scripts. With 100,000 CPUs at Yahoo and roughly
50% running Hadoop, that's a lot[...] ".
278Unencrypted 
Data Encryption 
Service Untrusted Cloud Service Trusted Client 
UDFs 
Encrypted 
Data 
Unmodified 
Pig Service Program 
Transformation Execution 
Handler 1.2.3.
4.5.6.
7.Source 
Script Figure 1: Execution Model of SPR. Shading indicates components introduced by SPR.
(float, double), arrays of characters and bytes ( chararray,
bytearray), and booleans. Pig Latin also pre-denes cer-
tain values for these types (e.g., null).
Complex types include the following:
bags {...} are collections of tuples.
tuples (...) are ordered sets of elds.
maps [...] are sets of key-value pairs key#value.
Furthermore, a eld is a data item, which can be a bag,
tuple, or map. Pig Latin statements work with relations ;
a relation is simply a (outermost) bagoftuples. Relations
are referred to by named variables called aliases . Pig Latin
supports assignments to variables.
2.2.2 Operators and expressions
Relations are also created by applying operators to other
relations. The main relational operators include:
JOIN This same operator is used with various parameters
to distinguish between inner and outer joins. The syntax
closely adheres to the SQL standard.
GROUP Elements of several relations can be grouped accord-
ing to various criteria. Note that GROUP creates a nested
set of output tuples while JOIN creates a at set of output
tuples.
FOREACH...GENERATE Generates data transformations based
on columns of data.
FILTER This operator is used with tuples or rows of data,
rather than with columns of data as FOREACH...GENERATE.
Operators also include arithmetic operators (e.g., +, -,
\,*), comparisons, casts, and STORE andLOAD operators.
Pig Latin is an expression-oriented language. Expressions
are written in conventional mathematical inx notation, and
can include operators and functions described next.
2.2.3 Functions
Pig Latin includes built-in anduser-dened functions. The
former include several dierent categories:
Eval functions operate on tuples. Examples include
AVG, COUNT, CONCAT, SUM, TOKENIZE.
Math functions are self-explanatory. Examples include
ABSorCOS.
String functions operate on character strings. Exam-
ples include SUBSTRING orTRIM.User-dened functions (UDFs) in Pig Latin are classied
as: (1) built-in UDFs, or (2) custom UDFs. The former are
pre-dened functions that are delivered with the language
toolchain. Examples include \composed" functions like SUM.
In this paper we focus on the former kind of UDFs due to
the complexity involved in analyzing the latter.
2.2.4 Example
To understand the constructs of Pig Latin, we present a
simple word count example in Listing 1. In this example, a
relation input_lines is rst generated with elements called
line of type chararray read from an input input_file.
Next, the script breaks these lines into tokens, represent-
ing individual words. Then, occurrences of a same word
areGROUPed, and their respective number of occurrences
COUNTed. Finally the data in this table is STOREd in a le
output_file.
1input_lines = LOAD ’input_file’ AS
(line:chararray);
2words = FOREACH input_lines GENERATE
FLATTEN(TOKENIZE(line)) ASword;
3word_groups = GROUP words BYword;
4word_count = FOREACH word_groups GENERATE
group, COUNT(words);
5STORE word_count INTO ’output_file’;
Listing 1: Source Pig Latin script S1
3. EXECUTION MODEL
SPR is a runtime for Pig Latin that supports cloud-based
execution of scripts written in the original Pig Latin lan-
guage in a condentiality-preserving manner. The adversary
in our model can have full control of the cloud infrastruc-
ture. This means the adversary can see all data stored in
the cloud and the scripts that operate on data. In order
to preserve condentiality in the presence of such an ad-
versary only encrypted data is maintained in the cloud and
SPR operates on this encrypted data. However, SPR does
not address integrity and availability issues. (Correspond-
ing solutions are described in our previous work [34] which
inversely, however, does not address condentiality.)
Figure 1 presents an overview of the execution model of
SPR. Script execution proceeds by the following steps:
1. Program transformation. Script execution starts
when a user submits a Pig Latin script operating on un-
encrypted data (source script). SPR analyzes the script to
identify the required encryption schemes under which the
input data should be encrypted. For the transformed script
to operate on encrypted data, operators in the source script
279are replaced with calls to secure UDFs that perform the cor-
responding operations on encrypted data. E.g., an addition
a+bin the source script will be replaced by abmodn2,
withnthe public key used for encrypting aandb. Constants
are also replaced with their encrypted values to generate a
target script that executes entirely on encrypted data. De-
tails of this transformation yielding an encryption-enabled
script are presented in Section 4.
2. Infer encryption schemes. Using the input le names
used in the source script, the encryption service checks what
parts of the input data are already encrypted and stored in
the cloud. Some parts of the input data might already be
encrypted under multiple encryption schemes (to support
multiple operations) and other parts might not be avail-
able in the cloud at all. The encryption service maintains
aninput data encryption schema which keeps track of this
mapping between plain text input data and encrypted data
available in the cloud. Based on the input data encryption
schema and the required encryption schemes inferred in the
previous step, the encryption service identies the encryp-
tion schemes missing from the cloud.
3. Encrypt and send. Once the required encryption
schemes that are missing from the cloud is identied, the
encryption service loads the unencrypted data from local
storage, encrypts it appropriately and sends it to the cloud
storage. The encryption service makes use of several encryp-
tion schemes each implemented using dierent cryptosys-
tems. Implementation details of these encryption schemes
are presented in 5. Each of these encryption schemes has its
own characteristics. The rst scheme is randomized (RAN)
encryption which does not support any operators, and is
intuitively, the most secure encryption scheme. The next
scheme is the deterministic (DET) encryption scheme which
allows equality comparisons over encrypted data. Order-
preserving encryption (OPE) scheme allows order compar-
isons using the order-preserving symmetric encryption [9].
Lastly, additive homomorphic encryption (AHE) allows ad-
ditions over encrypted data, and multiplicative homomor-
phic encryption (MHE) allows us to perform multiplications
over encrypted data.
4. Execute transformed script. When all required en-
crypted data are loaded in the cloud, the execution handler
issues a request to start executing the target script.
5. UDFs. SPR denes a set of pre-dened UDFs that
handle cryptographic operations. Such UDFs are used to
perform operations like additions and multiplications over
encrypted data. The target script calls these UDFs using
standard Pig Latin syntax as part of the script execution
process.
6. Re-encryption. During the target script execution,
intermediate data may be generated as operations are per-
formed. The encryption scheme of that data depends on the
last operation performed on that data. For example, after an
addition operation, the resulting sum is already encrypted
under AHE. If that intermediate data is subsequently in-
volved in an operation that requires an encryption scheme
other than the one it is encrypted under (for example multi-
plying the sum with another value requires MHE), the oper-
ation cannot be performed. (The ability to apply additions
and multiplications in sequence is viewed as dening charac-
teristic of FHE.) SPR handles this situation by re-encrypting
Script analysis 
Encryption 
analysis 
Script 
transformation DAG MAF MET 
Target 
ScriptSource 
Script
Output Encryption 
Input Data 
Encryption Schema Operand Encryption 
Generates 
Data Artifacts Program Transformation 
Uses 
Updates Figure 2: Program transformation components and artifacts
the intermediate data. Specically, the intermediate data is
sent to the client where it can be securely decrypted and
then encrypted under the required encryption scheme (for
example the sum is re-encrypted under MHE), before sent
back to the cloud. Once the re-encryption is complete, the
execution of target script can proceed.
7. Results. Once the job is complete, the encrypted results
are sent to the client where they can be decrypted.
4. PROGRAM ANALYSIS AND TRANSFOR-
MATION
In this section we give a high level overview of how Pig Latin
scripts are analyzed by SPR and transformed to enable ex-
ecution over encrypted input data.
4.1 Running example
We use the Pig Latin script shown in Listing 2 as a run-
ning example to explain the analysis and subsequent trans-
formation process. This script is representative of the most
commonly used relational operations in Pig Latin and allows
us to explain key features about SPR. The script loads two
input les: input1 with two elds and input2 with a single
eld. The script then lters out all rows from input1 which
are less than or equal to 10 (Line 3). Lines 4 and 5 group
input1 by the rst eld and nd the sum of the second eld
for each group. Line 6 joins the sum per group with the
second input le input2 to produce the nal result which is
stored into an output le out(Line 7).
1A = LOAD ’input1’ AS(a0, a1);
2B = LOAD ’input2’ AS(x0);
3C = FILTER ABYa0 > 10;
4D = GROUP CBYa1 ;
5E = FOREACH DGENERATE group AS b0, SUM(C.a0)
ASb1;
6F = JOIN EBYb0, B BYx0;
7STORE Finto ’out’;
Listing 2: Source Pig Latin script S1
2804.2 Deﬁnitions
In order to describe our program analysis and transforma-
tion we rst introduce the following denitions.
4.2.1 Map of expression trees (MET)
All the expressions that are part of the source script are
represented as trees and added to the map of expression trees
(MET) as values. The keys of the MET are simple literals
used to access these expression trees. Figure 3a shows the
MET for the Pig Latin script in Listing 2. Keys of the MET
are shown in square brackets. Note that operands that are
not part of any expression are surrounded by a nop (no
operation) vertex and operands that are part of a group by
or join operation are surrounded by an assert_det (assert
deterministic) vertex. The assert_det vertex can be seen
as a simple operator that requires its operand to be present
in DET encryption.
a0!10!>![1]!a1!assert_det![2]!group!nop![3]!a0!sum![4]!b0![5]!x0![6]!assert_det!assert_det!
(a) Map of expression trees
A:LOAD  C:FILTER A BY [1] !D:GROUP C BY [2] !E:FOREACH D    GENERATE [3],[4]!F:JOIN E BY [5], !  B BY [6]!B:LOAD! (b) Data ow graph
Figure 3: MET and DFG for Pig Latin script in Listing 2.
Keys of MET are shown in square brackets.
4.2.2 Data ﬂow graph
We represent a Pig Latin script Susing a data ow graph
(DFG). More precisely, S=fV;Eg, whereVis a set of
vertices and Eis a set of ordered pairs of vertices. Each
v2Vrepresents a relation in S. Eache2Erepresents a
data ow dependency between two vertices in V. Note that
it follows from the nature of the Pig Latin language that
DFG is acyclic. For describing our analysis, we consider a
vertexv2Vrepresenting the Pig Latin relation Rto have
two parts: (a) the Pig Latin statement representing Rwith
all expressions replaced by their keys in the MET and (b)
the elds in the schema of R.
Programmatically a data ow graph Gexposes the follow-
ing interface
Iterator getIter() Returns an iterator representing the
list of relations in Gin topologically sorted order.
4.2.3 Annotated ﬁeld (AF)
We represent each eld in the schema of each relation by
an annotated eld abstraction. In other words there will
be one AF for every hrelation;fieldipair. The intution
behind using AFs instead of actual eld names is that in the
transformed program one eld in the source script may be
loaded as multiple elds, each under a dierent encryption
scheme. Each AF consists of the following three annotations.parent: AFs track their lineage using this parent eld.
The parent of an annotated eld could be another an-
notated eld or an expression tree in the MET. In cases
where an AF represents a eld which is newly gener-
ated as part of a Pig Latin relational operation ( GROUP
..BY, FOREACH etc.), the parent will be the expression
tree used to generate it. Otherwise, the parent of an
AF will be the corresponding AF in the vertex in the
DAG that comes before it.
avail: This annotation represents the set of encryp-
tion schemes available for the eld being represented.
At the begining of the analysis this property will be
empty. This will be lled in as part of the program
analysis.
req: This represents the encryption scheme that is re-
quired for this eld by our execution engine for encryption-
enabled execution.
4.2.4 Map of annotated ﬁelds (MAF)
We capture the mapping between hrelation;fieldipairs
and corresponding AFs using map of annotated elds (MAF).
The MAF for the Pig Latin script in Listing 2 is shown in
Table 1. Note that annotated elds are unique within a
Pig Latin script which allows us to implement the MAF as
a bidirectional map allowing lookups based on keys as well
as values.
Table 1: Map of annotated elds for Pig Latin script in
Listing 2.yKeys are pairs ofhrelation;fieldiandzvalues are
corresponding annotated elds. NErepresents no encryption.
KeyyVa
luezAfter analysis
A,a0 f0<null,NE,NE>
f0<null,{ALL},OPE>
A,a1 f1<null,NE,NE> f1<null,{ALL},NE>
B,x0 f2<null,NE,NE> f2<null,{ALL},DET>
C,a0 f3<f0,NE,NE> f3<f0,{ALL},NE>
C,a1 f4<f1,NE,NE> f4<a1,{ALL},DET>
D,gr f5<[2],NE,NE> f5<[2],{DET},NE>
D,a0 f6<f3,NE,NE> f6<f3,{ALL},AHE>
D,a1 f7<f4,NE,NE> f7<f4,{ALL},NE>
E,b0 f8<[3],NE,NE> f8<[3],{DET},DET>
E,b1 f9<[4],NE,NE> f9<[4],{AHE},NE>
F,b0 f10<f4,NE,NE> f10<f4,{ALL},NE>
F,b1 f11<f3,NE,NE> f11<f3,{AHE},NE>
F,x0 f12<f3,NE,NE> f12<f3,{ALL},NE>
4.3 Analysis
U
sing the programming abstractions dened above, we
describe the program analysis and transformation that we
perform. Before the analysis, as part of initialization, all op-
erators and UDFs to be used in the script are pre-registered
with the encryption scheme required for operands and the
encryption scheme of output generated. Some Pig Latin re-
lational operators also require elds to be in specic encryp-
tion schemes. For example, the eld or expression which is
the grouped eld of GROUP BY, require the eld or expression
to be available in DET encryption. Further the encryption
scheme of the new \group" eld generated by the GROUP BY
operator will also be available in DET encryption. For ex-
ample, the assert_det function that we introduced will be
registered with required encryption scheme as DET and out-
put encryption scheme also as DET. To keep the description
281Algorithm 1 Determining available encryption scheme for
elds in MAF fsfor a DFGG
met . MET for DFG G
procedure availableEnc (G;fs)
iter G:getIter();
whiler iter:next() do
anFields getAFs (fs;r )
for eachaf2anFields do
findAvail (af)
end for
end while
end procedure
function findAvail (af). af is Annotated Field
ifaf:parent isnull then
af:avail encService(met:getkey (af))
else ifaf:parent2met:keys() then
exprTree met:get(af:parent)
af:avail outenc(exprTree: root.operator )
else
af:avail af:parent:avail
end if
end function
1A = LOAD ’enc_input1’ AS(a0_ope, a0_ah,
a1_det);
2B = LOAD ’enc_input2’ AS(x0_det);
3C = FILTER ABYOPE_GREATER(a0_ope ,
’0xD0004D3D841327F2CCE7133ABE1EFC14’);
4D = GROUP CBYa1_det ;
5E = FOREACH DGENERATE group AS b0,
SUM(B.a0_ah) ASb1;
6F = JOIN EBYb0, B BYx0_det;
7STORE Finto ’out’;
Listing 3: Transformed Pig Latin script
simple, we encapsulate this static information as two func-
tion calls in our algorithm: outEnc(oper) which returns
the output encryption scheme of the operator oper andin-
Enc(oper) which returns the operand encryption scheme re-
quired foroper. These functions are summarized in Table 2.
The available encryption scheme for each AF is identied
by observing the lineage information available through the
parent eld of AFs and metadata about the encrypted input
le. Details of available encryption scheme analysis is pre-
sented by Algorithm 1. The available encryption schemes
for AFs part of the LOAD operation are set based on meta-
data about the encrypted le. For other than LOAD oper-
ators, the available encryption schemes for AFs depend on
their lineage. If the AF is derived by an expression, avail-
able schemes for the AF are determined by the deriving ex-
pression. For example, the available encryption scheme for
the AF representing eld b1inB = FOREACH AGENERATE
a0+a1 asb1;is determined by the expression a0 + a1 or
more precisely by the operator +. If the AF is not explic-
itly derived, but is carried forward from a parent relation,
then the AF simply inherits the available encryption schemes
of the parent AF. For example, the available encryption
schemes for the AF representing eld a0inB = FILTER
ABYa0 < 10; is same as the encryption schemes available
for the parent AF representing eld a0in relation A.Table 2: Description of functions used in program analysis
and transformation
Function name Description
getAFs (maf;r ) Returns list of annotated elds
which contain the relation ras
a part of their key in maf
outEnc(op) Returns the encryption scheme
in which the result will be after
performing the operation op
inEnc(op) Returns encryption schemes in
which the operands of operator
opmuch be specied
addToList( list;elem ) Addselem to the list of values
represented by list
replaceAF (af;fld ) Replaces all occurrences of the
annotated eld afin expres-
sions and relations with the
eldfld
insertVertex (v;bv) Inserts new vertex vbefore ver-
texbvinmet. The parent of v
is set to be the parent of bvand
the parent of bvis set to be v
Next we describe how the required encryption eld is pop-
ulated in each AF. As part of our initialization, once the
MAF is generated, we replace each eld in the MET by the
AF representing that eld. Once this is done, the required
encryption for each AF can be identied by iterating over
all leaf vertices of all expression trees in the MET. The re-
quired encryption scheme for each leaf vertex is the same
asinEnc(parentoperator ), whereparentoperator is the
operator for which the leaf vertex is the operand. This pro-
cedure is thus straightforward and we do not present this as
a separate algorithm.
4.4 Transformation
Next we describe how a Pig Latin script, represented as
S=fV;Eg, is transformed into the encryption-enabled tar-
get script. We describe the transformation process in mul-
tiple sections. In each section we give an overview of why
we perform a specic transformation and then describe the
transformation process itself.
4.4.1 Multiple encryption ﬁelds
A potential overhead for the client is having to re-encrypt
data in an encryption scheme appropriate for execution in
the cloud. We use multiple encryptions for the same col-
umn whenever possible to minimize such computations on
the client side. For example in Listing 2 column a0 is used
for comparison (line 3) and for addition (line 5). The na ve
approach in this case would be to load column a0 in OPE
to do the comparison and to re-encrypt it to AHE between
lines 3 and 5 to enable addition. But this puts a compu-
tational burden on the client cluster, and requires sending
data back-and-forth between the client and the cluster, thus
increasing latency. Such a re-encryption can be avoided if
we transform the source Pig Latin script such that both en-
cryption forms for a0 are loaded upfront as two columns. We
282Algorithm 2 Program Transformation
S . Pig Latin script S
met . MET
file . Input le used in LOAD
procedure transformMain (S)
.Process plain text input les loaded in script S
for eachinputfile2Sdo
transform (inputfile)
end for
end procedure
function transform (file)
initilize empty (list)
for eachptcolid2filedo
af AFFromCol (ptcolid)
findReq (list;af;ptcolid)
.list now contains all the encrypted columns
.corresponding to pt colid that needs to be
loaded
encFileLoader(list, le)
end for
end function
function findReq (list;parent af;ptcolid)
for eachaf2mafjaf:parent ==parentafdo
ifaf:req6af:avail then
insertVertex(re enc;af )
else
encfield encService(pt colid;af:req )
addToList( list;encfield)
replaceAF (af;encfield)
findReq (list;af )
end if
end for
end function
identify opportunities for such optimizations using the MAF
abstraction. We describe next how the dierent encryption
schemes to be loaded for a eld ai(aibeing a eld in the
source script and not an AF) can be identied. Once the req
eld is populated in MAF as part of analysis, we query the
MAF for all AFs where aiis part of the key. These AFs rep-
resent all usages of eld aiin the Pig Latin script. The set
of values of reqof these AFs and their child AFs represents
the dierent encryption schemes required for eld ai. The
transformation then generates the list of elds to be loaded
from the encrypted version of the input le using metadata
returned by the encryption service, and modies the MET
to use the newly loaded elds. This is described as function
findReq in Algorithm 2. Listing 3 shows the transformed
Pig Latin script for our example. Note that eld a0is loaded
twice, under two encryption schemes.
4.4.2 Re-encryption and constants
AFs where the reqencryption is not a subset of avail rep-
resent cases where a valid encryption scheme is not present
to perform an operation. In such cases, we wrap the AFs in
a specic reencrypt operation in the target script. This op-
eration contacts the encryption service on the trusted client
to convert the eld to the required encryption scheme. Con-
stants in MET are also transformed into encrypted form as
required for the operation in which they are used. Note that
Listing 3 shows the constant 10encrypted using the OPE
scheme to perform the comparison.5. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we provide details about our prototype im-
plementation of SPR.
5.1 Overview
SPR is implemented as 6084 lines of Java code with two
separate builds: (a) a client component which is deployed
in the trusted space and (b) a cloud component which is
deployed in the untrusted cloud (see Figure 1). The client
component can generate and read both public and private
keys used for encrypting and decrypting data as well as ac-
cess the plain text input. The cloud component can only
read the public keys used to encrypt data and has no ac-
cess to private keys or plain text input. We use MQ [7]
as the underlying messaging passing subsystem of SPR and
the GNU multiple precision arithmetic library GMP [5] to
perform fast arbitrary precision arithmetic operations. Both
these libraries are implemented in native code and we use
JNI to invoke the corresponding functions from Java. Our
current version of SPR works with Apache Pig 0.11.1 run-
ning on top of Hadoop 1.2.1.
5.2 Program transformation
Program transformation is the component responsible for
generating the transformed Pig Latin data ow graph that
works on encrypted data by performing the transformation
process described in Section 4.4. In particular, if a trans-
formed script contains re-encryption operations, the pro-
gram transformation component assigns a unique operation id
to each such operation. This operationidis included as part
of the re-encryption function in the transformed Pig Latin
script. Subsequently, the details needed to perform the re-
encryption (for example the encryption schemes involved)
are assigned to the operationidwhich is then registered
with the encryption service. When the script is executed,
the encryption service uses the operationidto retrieve the
information needed to perform the re-encryption.
5.3 Encryption service
The encryption service handles the initial data encryption
as well as runtime re-encryptions. Initial data encryption are
performed using Pig Latin scripts on the client-side where
data is available as plain text. Encryption is done using
UDFs that take each data item and convert it into a cipher-
text corresponding to the required encryption scheme. Re-
encryption requests are received by the trusted client over
TCP sockets. These requests are added into blocking queues
of worker threads. Worker threads process each request and
return a response.
Encryption schemes. We implement randomized encryp-
tion (RAN) using Blowsh [31] to encrypt integer values,
taking advantage of its smaller 64-bit block size, and use
AES [13] which has a 128-bit block size to encrypt everything
else. We use CBC mode in both of these cryptosystems with
a random initialization vector. We construct deterministic
encryption (DET) using Blowsh and AES pseudo-random
permutation block ciphers for values of 64 bits and 128 bits
respectively, and pad smaller values appropriately to match
the expected block size. We perform order-preserving en-
cryption (OPE) using the implementation from CryptDB.
We use the Paillier [26] cryptosystem to implement addi-
tive homomorphic encryption (AHE), and the ElGamal [18]
283cryptosystem to implement multiplicative homomorphic en-
cryption (MHE).
5.4 UDFs
The cloud component consists of custom UDFs and com-
munication channels. Re-encryption operations are imple-
mented as aggregation UDFs that take an entire relation as
argument. This allows us to pipeline re-encryption requests
as opposed to re-encrypting tuple by tuple. We also dened
cryptographic equivalents of built-in Pig Latin UDFs like
SUM(), or <.
6. EV ALUATION
This section evaluates our approach in terms of runtime
performance and programmer eort. We also share lessons
learned.
6.1 Synopsis
We evaluate four aspects of our approach:
(a) practicality to compute over encrypted data in terms
of latency,
(b) programmer eort saved by our automatic transforma-
tions with respect to manual handling of (partially)
homomorphic encryption,
(c) performance compared to existing solutions for query-
ing on encrypted data, and
(d) scalability by running queries on large data-sets TBs.
6.2 Practicality: PigMix
We ran the Apache PigMix [3] benchmark to evaluate the
practicality and performance of SPR . The evaluation was
carried out using a cluster of 11 c3:large nodes from Amazon
EC2 [1]. The nodes had two 64 bit virtual CPUs and 3.75
GB of RAM. Input data with 3300000 rows (5GB) was gen-
erated by the PigMix data generator script and encrypted
at the client side. We discuss these results here.
Figure 4 shows the results of the PigMix benchmark. On
average we observe 3 overhead in terms of latency, which
is extremely low compared to FHE (e.g., for simple mul-
tiplications we measured around 300000 slowdown with
HElib [4]) which is currently still at least 10000000. We
also observed that this overhead is correlated more towards
size of the input data and not the actual computation. Some
of the challenges we faced during the tranformation deals
with limitations of Pig Latin in dealing with constants bigger
than 32 bit integers or 64 bit longs. The range of numbers
that appear in the cipher text space may exceed what can
be represented using integers andlongs and we overcome
this by representing numeric constants as strings and con-
verting them to arbitary presicion objects like BigIntegers
within UDFs. More details are outlined in our workshop
report in [35].
6.3 Programmer effort: PigMix
We now compare the number of tokens in the Pig Latin
script written to be computed on plain text data with the
Pig Latin script generated by our transformation. This
gauges the additional work that a programmer would have
to do in order to explicitly enable her script to compute on
encrypted input data. We use the PigMix Pig Latin bench-
marks for this comparison. Table 3 summarizes this result.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 L6 L7 L8 L9 L10 L11 L12 L13 L14 L15 L16 L17 Time (sec) PigMix Script Pig SPR Figure 4: Latency of Pig Latin scripts in PigMix
Script Original Transformed % Increase
L1 85 100 15
L2 75 86 11
L3 89 99 10
L4 62 70 8
L5 84 95 11
L6 66 74 8
L7 68 91 23
L8 61 72 11
L9 41 46 5
L10 46 57 11
L11 76 89 13
L12 134 158 24
L13 76 81 5
L14 73 79 6
L15 73 82 9
L16 62 80 18
L17 101 139 38
Table 3: Number of tokens in original and transformed Pig-
Mix scripts
As can be observed, our transformation generates Pig Latin
scripts with 18% more keywords on average. For the scripts
used in the PigMix benchmark, our transformation produces
scripts which are between 5% and 36% more complex than
the original scripts. As can be understood from our analysis,
these additions are far from trivial.
6.4 Performance comparison: weather data
In order to compare our solution against the state of the
art CryptDB system, we chose an application that analy-
ses historical weather data set. The data set comprises of
station names, dates and temperatures recorded on those
dates on respective stations. The application issues common
queries against an encrypted version of this data set. We
compare the time taken by our solution to that of CryptDB.
Cognizant of the fact that CryptDB was designed to address
a dierent set of challenges than SPR we perform this com-
parison to understand how well our system and CryptDB
performs when size of data increases. CryptDB is built on
top of MySQL, a database that stores data in specialized
data structures like B+ trees and optimized for data re-
trieval using indices and supports transactions including up-
dates. In contrast, SPR is built on top of the Pig runtime,
284which specializes on reading from at les. Furthermore,
the Pig runtime depends on MapReduce, which has an in-
termediate stage which involves writing data to disk before
reducers read it remotely over TCP channels. Conversely,
by using MapReduce, Pig can leverage the processing power
and memory of multiple machines while CryptDB is con-
ned to a single node. We perform three comparisons: (1)
how our solution performs on a xed size cluster as size of
input data set varies, (2) how our solution scales by increas-
ing the number of nodes in the cluster and (3) what is the
monetary cost of performing the computation (in Amazon
EC2). The results presented here compare the latency of
running a query that nds the average temperature for each
station using encrypted data. We compare the time taken
by CryptDB (single node) with the latency of running equiv-
alent Pig Latin script on a Hadoop cluster with 4 nodes (3
worker nodes and 1 control node). We used m3.medium
nodes on Amazaon EC2 for all our evaluations. As can be
observed from Figure 7 SPRis able to exploit the parallelism
oered by multiple nodes and scales well. CryptDB was de-
signed for high throughput in terms of queries per second
and not for processing high volumes of data. This can be
observed by the increase in time taken for the queries over
CryptDB as the number of records increases. For 15 million
rows, SPR is 2.7 faster than CryptDB and shows much
slower increase in job completion latency as the number of
rows increases. Figure 5 shows how time taken by SPR
changes as the number of nodes in the cluster increases. We
show the time taken by CryptDB running on one node as a
base line. We can observe that running on encrypted data
shows trends comparable to regular Pig Latin jobs and la-
tency reduces as the number of nodes increases. It may seem
surprising that the time taken by the Pig Latin script run-
ning on one node was quite comparable to the time taken by
CryptDB. The reason for this is that for both CryptDB and
SPR the time taken is bound by the number of cryptographic
operations that the CPU has to perform; which is the same
for both systems. Furthermore, in order to nd the average
temperature, we nd the AHESUM andCOUNT of temperature
readings for each group. Because both the UDFs imple-
ments combiner andalgebraic interfaces, and the number
of distinct groups we have is not high, most of the output
generated by the map phase is combined before being pulled
by the reducer. Also, even with a single node, we have two
mappers and one reducer running simultaneously providing
some level of parallelism. These factors limit the overhead
caused by data transfers and the latency is predominantly
determined by the time taken by the CPU to perform a xed
number of operations.
We also look at the monetary cost of running our compu-
tation and compare it with the cost of running CryptDB. We
compute the cost by summing up the total amount charged
by Amazon for all the nodes used for running our experi-
ments. We present the calculated cost in Figure 8. As can
be observed, we incur a (surprisingly) similar overall cost
despite completing the job up to 2.7 faster.
6.5 Scalability: word count
In order to test the ecacy of our solution on big data, we
ran experiments using 1 TB of data obtained from Wikipedia
dumps [6]. Since the data was in XML format, we rst ran
a Pig Latin script to obtain the text section from the le.
Next, we tokenized and encrypted all the words, then exe-
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 
1 2 3 Time (s) #Nodes SPR CryptDB Figure 5: Comparison of
SPR and CryptDB run-
time latencies with varying
#nodes
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 
75 nodes 50 nodes Time (sec) Plain text Input Encrypted Input Figure 6: Latency to run
word count on encrypted
and plain text input
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 
3 6 9 12 15 Time (sec) #Records (× 1,000,000) CryptDB SPR 
Figure 7: Comparison of SPR and CryptDB runtime laten-
cies with varying #records
cuted our word count script on the encrypted words. Lastly,
we decrypted and stored the top 5 words. In addition to an
encrypted word count, we also ran our word count script on
the plain text. The time for SPR does not include the time
needed to encrypt the data, since it is assumed that the
user will have the encrypted data on the untrusted cloud.
We measure the latency of running word count on the en-
crypted input. We use Hadoop clusters of 50 and 75 nodes
and summarize the results in Figure 6. We observe that for
both jobs, reduction in latency as number of nodes increase
follows the same trend.
6.6 Threats to validity
In evaluating our system, we have considered several threats
to validity. Multi-tenancy and the virtualized nature of
Amazon EC2 can lead to variations in latency measure-
ments. We thus ran all our evaluations several times (5 typ-
ically) and took the average to counter variations. The vari-
ations in latency we observed in dierent runs of the same
Pig Latin scripts were relatively low (4%). For CryptDB we
observed a variance of up to (10%). We have tried to use
benchmarks that are representative, meaningful and used
by other publications. PigMix, for example is a standard
benchmark used by Apache on every new release of the Pig
runtime system. While the data sets we used for it are only
in the GB order, such sizes are not atypical for big data in
fact [32], and used also by others [36]. One factor to con-
2850 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
3 6 9 12 15 Cost ($) #Records (× 1,000,000) CryptDB SPR Figure 8: Comparison of SPR and CryptDB execution cost
sider with respect to big data analysis is that when volume
of data becomes very high, characteristics on input data may
heavily determine the time taken for completion.
7. DISCUSSION
Two big drawbacks of computing on encrypted data is
bloating of data size and additional CPU cycles required
to do more complicated arithmetic. For example, if we are
using Paillier with 1024 bit length keys, a 64 bit long may
get converted to a cipher text 2048 bits in length (an increase
of 32 times) and an addition in plain text is replaced by
multiplication of cipher text followed by a modulo operation
in Paillier. Unfortunately we cannot avoid paying a higher
price in terms of storage and computation based on state
of art cryptosystems. Another aspect of security that we
do not consider is that even though data is encrypted, an
attacker can still see data access patterns. This includes
frequency of data access, groups of data accessed together,
operations done on data etc.
8. RELATED WORK
Approaches to protect condentiality of data vary based
on adversary models. Dierential privacy[17, 16, 8] aims to
improve the accuracy of statistical queries, without reveal-
ing information about individual records. The server which
performs the query in this case is trusted with access to plain
text data. This is in contrast to SPR that assumes data and
computation reside in an untrusted server. sTile [10] keeps
data condential by distributing computations onto large
numbers of nodes in the cloud, requiring the adversary to
control more than half of the nodes in order to reconstruct
input data. Airavat [29] combines mandatory access control
and dierential privacy to enable MapReduce computations
over sensitive data. Both sTile and Airavat require the cloud
provider and cloud infrastructure to be trustworthy. Excal-
ibur [30] utilizes trusted platform modules to ensure cloud
administrators cannot modify or examine data. Compared
to SPR, Excalibur adds extra cost because the trusted plat-
form modules need to be installed and maintained. However,
SPR does not guarentee integrity. We plan to combine it
with our previous work ClusterBFT [34] to ensure integrity
as well as availability.
CryptDB [28] is a seminal system leveraging PHE for data
management. As mentioned earlier CryptDB is a database
system, focusing on SQL queries. CryptDB uses a trustedproxy that analyzes queries and decrypts columns to an
encryption level suitable for query execution. It does not
consider the more expressive kind of data ow programs as
in Pig Latin, or MapReduce-style parallelization of queries.
Monomi [37] improves performance of encrypted queries sim-
ilar to those used in CryptDB and introduces a designer
to automatically choose an ecient design suitable for each
workload. MrCrypt [36] consists in a program analysis for
MapReduce jobs that tracks operations and their require-
ments in terms of PHE. When sequences of operations are
applied to a same eld, the analysis defaults to FHE, noting
that the system does not currently execute such jobs at all
due to lack of available FHE cryptosystems. Thus several
PigMix benchmarks are incompletely covered for evaluation.
Many static [22, 12] and runtime tools [38, 27] exist to as-
sist programmers in discovering and xing vulnerabilities in
their code. However, these systems require the programmer
to create queries or assertions to state security properties
they want their programs to exhibit. This is not the case
with SPR. A user simply submits her Pig Latin script, and
after the transformations it meets our security properties.
Work has also been done on secure programming lan-
guages for distributed systems. These include languages
like DSL [23] and SMCL [24], which include type systems
that ensure that programs run securely. However, these
languages focus on other issues such as interaction between
dierent users, and (thus) do not support automatic paral-
lelization via MapReduce or a similar framework.
9. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented original data ow analysis and
program transformation used in SPR, a system able to per-
form big data analysis jobs on encrypted data, which allows
us to leverage untrusted cloud resources while at the same
time preserving condentiality. Our program transforma-
tions translate Pig Latin scripts into semantically equivalent
scripts that operate entirely on encrypted data. By auto-
matically transforming Pig Latin scripts, developer eorts
for achieving security are minimized.
We evaluated our approach through standard benchmarks
and applications and demonstrated its applicability and per-
formance. Our evaluations show that our approach scales
well and can handle big volumes of encrypted data whilst
retaining good performance. Furthermore, we gauge the
savings in terms of developer eort of our automatic ap-
proach by comparing scripts that operate on unencrypted
data with the transformed Pig Latin script which our sys-
tem generates.
We are currently investigating a number of optimizations
and further heuristics for selecting from dierent possible ex-
ecution paths in the transformed Pig Latin script. In partic-
ular we are investigating paths which perform re-encryption
of data at clients (in contrast to client-side termination or
costly re-encryption in the cloud as with FHE) and minimiz-
ing these re-encryptions themselves. To this end we are also
employing sampling to determine amounts of data at dier-
ent points in analysis jobs in order to better select between
dierent options.
10. REFERENCES
[1] Amazon EC2. http://amazon.com/ec2.
[2] Apache Pig. http://pig.apache.org.
286[3] Apache PigMix benchmark. https://cwiki.
apache.org/confluence/display/PIG/PigMix.
[4] HElib. https://github.com/shaih/HElib.
[5] The GNU Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library.
https://gmplib.org/.
[6] Wikipedia database download.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Database_download.
[7] Zero MQ. http://zeromq.org.
[8] A. Blum, C. Dwork, F. McSherry, and K. Nissim.
Practical Privacy: The SuLQ Framework. In PODS ,
pages 128{138, 2005.
[9] A. Boldyreva, N. Chenette, Y. Lee, and A. O'Neill.
Order-preserving symmetric encryption. In
EUROCRYPT , pages 224{241, 2009.
[10] Y. Brun and N. Medvidovic. Keeping Data Private
while Computing in the Cloud. In IEEE CLOUD,
pages 285{294, 2012.
[11] C. Chambers, A. Raniwala, F. Perry, S. Adams, R. R.
Henry, R. Bradshaw, and N. Weizenbaum. Flumejava:
easy, ecient data-parallel pipelines. In PLDI , pages
363{375, 2010.
[12] A. Chlipala. Static checking of dynamically-varying
security policies in database-backed applications. In
Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Conference on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
OSDI'10, pages 1{. USENIX Association, 2010.
[13] J. Daemen and V. Rijmen. The Design of Rijndael:
AES - The Advanced Encryption Standard. Springer
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 2002.
[14] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat. MapReduce: Simplied
Data Processing on Large Clusters. In OSDI , pages
137{150, 2004.
[15] I. DeveloperWorks. Process your Data with Apache
Pig, 2012.
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/
library/l-apachepigdataquery/.
[16] I. Dinur and K. Nissim. Revealing Information While
Preserving Privacy. In PODS , pages 202{210, 2003.
[17] C. Dwork and K. Nissim. Privacy-Preserving
Datamining on Vertically Partitioned Databases. In
CRYPTO , pages 528{544, 2004.
[18] T. ElGamal. A Public-Key Cryptosystem and a
Signature Scheme Based on Discrete Logarithms.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory ,
31(4):469{472, 1985.
[19] C. Gentry, A. Sahai, and B. Waters. Homomorphic
Encryption from Learning with Errors:
Conceptually-Simpler, Asymptotically-Faster,
Attribute-Based. In CRYPTO , volume 1, pages 75{92,
Aug. 2013.
[20] Hadoop. Hadoop. http://hadoop.apache.org/.
[21] M. Isard, M. Budiu, Y. Yu, A. Birrell, and D. Fetterly.
Dryad: Distributed Data-parallel Programs from
Sequential Building Blocks. In EuroSys , 2007.
[22] M. Martin, B. Livshits, and M. S. Lam. Finding
application errors and security aws using pql: A
program query language. SIGPLAN Not. ,
40(10):365{383, Oct. 2005.
[23] J. Mitchell, R. Sharma, D. Stefan, and J. Zimmerman.
Information-ow control for programming onencrypted data. In Computer Security Foundations
Symposium (CSF), 2012 IEEE 25th , pages 45{60,
June 2012.
[24] J. D. Nielsen and M. I. Schwartzbach. A
domain-specic programming language for secure
multiparty computation. In Proceedings of the 2007
Workshop on Programming Languages and Analysis
for Security , pages 21{30. ACM, 2007.
[25] C. Olston, B. Reed, U. Srivastava, R. Kumar, and
A. Tomkins. Pig Latin: A Not-So-Foreign Language
for Data Processing. In SIGMOD , pages 1099{1110,
2008.
[26] P. Paillier. Public-Key Cryptosystems Based on
Composite Degree Residuosity Classes. In
EUROCRYPT , pages 223{238, May 1999.
[27] B. Parno, J. M. McCune, D. Wendlandt, D. G.
Andersen, and A. Perrig. Clamp: Practical prevention
of large-scale data leaks. In Proceedings of the 2009
30th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , SP
'09, pages 154{169. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[28] R. A. Popa, C. M. S. Redeld, N. Zeldovich, and
H. Balakrishnan. CryptDB: Protecting Condentiality
with Encrypted Query Processing. In SOSP , pages
85{100, 2011.
[29] I. Roy, S. T. V. Setty, A. Kilzer, V. Shmatikov, and
E. Witchel. Airavat: Security and Privacy for
MapReduce. In NSDI , pages 297{312, 2010.
[30] N. Santos, R. Rodrigues, K. P. Gummadi, and
S. Saroiu. Policy-sealed data: A new abstraction for
building trusted cloud services. In Proceedings of the
21st USENIX Conference on Security Symposium ,
pages 10{10. USENIX Association, 2012.
[31] B. Schneier. Description of a new variable-length key,
64-bit block cipher (blowsh). In Fast Software
Encryption , pages 191{204. Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[32] M. Schwarzkopf, D. Murray, and S. Hand. The Seven
Deadly Sins of Cloud Computing Research. In
HotClouds , 2012.
[33] K. Shvachko, H. Kuang, S. Radia, and R. Chansler.
The Hadoop Distributed File System. In MSST , pages
1{10, 2010.
[34] J. J. Stephen and P. Eugster. Assured Cloud-Based
Data Analysis with ClusterBFT. In Middleware, pages
82{102, 2013.
[35] J. J. Stephen, S. Savvides, R. Seidel, and P. Eugster.
Practical Condentiality Preserving Big Data
Analysis. In HotCloud , 2014.
[36] S. Tetali, M. Lesani, R. Majumdar, and T. Millstein.
MrCrypt: Static Analysis for Secure Cloud
Computations. In OOPSLA , pages 271{286, 2013.
[37] S. Tu, F. Kaashoek, S. Madden, and N. Zeldovich.
Processing Analytical queries over encrypted data. In
PVLDB , pages 289{300, 2013.
[38] A. Yip, X. Wang, N. Zeldovich, and M. F. Kaashoek.
Improving application security with data ow
assertions. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22Nd
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP
'09, pages 291{304. ACM, 2009.
[39] M. Zaharia, M. Chowdhury, M. J. Franklin,
S. Shenker, and I. Stoica. Spark: Cluster computing
with working sets. HotCloud'10, 2010.
287