exploring the robustness of the effect of evo on intention valuation through replication yesugen baatartogtokh university of massachusetts amherst ma usa yesugen umass.edukaitlyn cook smith college northampton ma usa kcook93 smith.edualicia m. grubb smith college northampton ma usa amgrubb smith.edu abstract the development of high quality software depends on precise and comprehensive requirements that meet the objectives of stakeholders.
goal modeling techniques have been developed to fill this gap by capturing and analyzing stakeholders needs and allowing them to make trade off decisions yet goal modeling analysis is often difficult for stakeholders to interpret.
recent work found that when subjects are given minimal training on goal modeling and access to a color visualization called evo they are able to use evo to make goal modeling decisions faster without compromising quality.
in this paper we evaluate the robustness of the empirical evidence for evo and question the underlying color choices made by the initial designers of evo.
we conduct a pseudo exact replication n of the original evo study varying the experimental site and the study population.
even in our heterogeneous sample with less a priori familiarity with requirements and goal modeling we find that individuals using evo answered the goal modeling questions significantly faster than those using the control expanding the external validity of the original results.
however we find some evidence that the chosen color scheme is not intuitive and make recommendations for the goal modeling community.
index terms requirements goal modeling replication i. i ntroduction requirements engineering re is important for the development of software .
re methods allow developers to identify document and manage the specifications of software systems under consideration especially in the early stages of a project.
for example goal modeling approaches to re can help stakeholders reason about trade offs in the design of software systems and understand the dependencies of such systems .
yet these approaches have not seen expansive adoption among practitioners due to the complex nature of building models and understanding their analysis .
one approach to assisting users in understanding goal models has been the introduction of color to communicate whether elements in a goal model are satisfied or not and most goal modeling tools e.g.
have implemented this feature.
other tools have used colors to identify aspects of the model e.g.
root leaf nodes legal requirements .
when researchers validate these approaches they analyze them in the context of the larger tool and do not isolate the coloration as a factor.
we consider two approaches to color valuations in goal models.
a green red color scheme is quite common where green and red denote the colors of a traffic light and where blue denotes conflict .
a blue red color schemehas also been used where blue is satisfied red is denied and purple i.e.
blue red is conflict .
in the blue red scheme blue is used to assist color deficient users yet we hypothesize this choice makes the scheme less intuitive for a general audience.
while there is substantial research on the use of color in data visualizations there is little empirical evidence to validate the use of color in goal model analysis.
oliveira and leite provide a theoretical formulation for the use of the greenred palette based on rgb colormetrics .
baatartogtokh et al.
isolated the blue red palette in an experiment to evaluate whether the addition of colors affected users ability to answer goal model questions .
they found that the coloration feature called evo significantly improved the speed of subjects decision making without affecting quality.
this state of the art feature shows promise however the empirical findings supporting it are limited by the small sample size of the original study and may be compromised by hypothesis guessing due to the prominence of the researchers at the study site.
also the results may not extend externally because of the homogeneous characteristics of the sample.
thus our aim is to investigate the robustness of the original study findings and to strengthen the body of evidence about evo.
contributions.
in this paper we contribute a pseudo exact dependent replication of the experiment by baatartogtokh et al.
.
we change the experimental site and the study population with the goal of exposing and understanding sources of variability that influence the results .
we improve on the original study by increasing the size of our sample n increasing statistical power to detect smallor intermediate sized evo effects.
additionally we collect subjects color preferences and demographic information to understand whether the evo color palette is intuitive to users.
finally we conduct a meta analysis of baatartogtokh et al.
and the replication study in order to obtain a more precise and generalizable estimate of the effect of evo.
research questions.
we replicate the research questions of baatartogtokh et al.
called the smith experiment rq1 to what extent are subjects able to learn evo and then use evo to answer goal modeling questions?
rq2 how does evo compare with the control in terms of time and subjects perceptions?
ieee acm 47th international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee how do subjects rate the study experience and instrument?
we add two research questions to explore variations between studies and evaluate the original color choice rq4 to what extent do subjects associate blue and red with good and bad outcomes respectively?
rq5 how do subjects compare across studies?
what are the sources of variability if any that influence the results?
we confirm the results of baatartogtokh et al.
.
subjects answered questions significantly faster with evo than without without any evidence of impact on correctness.
we found no statistically significant differences in the impact of evo on completion speeds or answer correctness between the original experiment and our replication thus we contribute pooled more precise estimates of evo s impact on goal modeling.
in terms of color choice in evo we found that most subjects associate green with good outcomes and red with bad outcomes while only a few associate blue with good.
we argue that the chosen evo palette is not intuitive for users.
these results impact future re research and the development of goal modeling tools aimed at software practitioners.
organization.
in what follows we describe our replication design in sect.
iii and results in sect.
iv.
we explore implications in sect.
v and future directions in sect.
vii.
additionally we give a brief overview of goal modeling terminology in sect.
ii and discuss related literature in sect.
vi.
ii.
b ackground goal models.
a goal model represents a scenario as a directed graph where the nodes are stakeholders intentions and the links represent the relationships between intentions.
intentions are assigned to an actor in the scenario who is an entity involved in the activity.
fig.
shows a goal model fragment in tropos which was adapted from the original study bike model .
the model displays the city actor and its intentions.
intentions consist of four types goals tasks soft goals and resources.
these intentions and their default background color are shown in the legend in fig.
.
for example goals are yellow ovals and tasks are green hexagons.
note that the default color of each intention is not the construct under investigation in this study instead the default color representation is treated as the control.
model links consist of two general types decomposition and contribution.
decomposition links decompose an intention into sub intentions.
in an and decomposition all of the subintentions need to be satisfied in order for the parent intention to be satisfied.
in fig.
the city s root goal is have bike lanes which is and decomposed both have design plans and have build plans must be satisfied in order for have bike lanes to be satisfied.
only one fulfilled sub intention is needed to satisfy the parent intention of an orlink thus only one of no parking orbike lanes curbside must be satisfied to make have design plans satisfied.
by ordecomposing goals stakeholders can evaluate scenarios and make trade off decisions.
contribution links indicate that a source intention influences the destination intention of the link.
contribution legend fig.
fragment of bike model goal model legend.
links are denoted as or where the number of symbols indicates the strength of the influence.
for example the link towards cost justification in fig.
will propagate partial negative evidence whereas the link to the same node will propagate full negative evidence.
intention valuations.
goal models can be assigned evidence pairs which represent the level of evidence for the fulfillment of a given intention.
evidence pairs are represented by s d wheresrepresents the level of evidence for the satisfaction or fulfillment of an intention and drepresents the level of evidence against the satisfaction or fulfillment of an intention.
each ofsanddcan be assigned one of three values fdenoting full evidence pdenoting partial evidence or ?denoting no evidence.
these combinations of evidence pairs form the five named values satisfied f ?
partially satisfied p ?
partially denied ?
p denied ?
f and none ?
?
as well as four conflicting values f f f p p f p p .
these values can be assigned by the user in the model.
in fig.
the user has assigned the task temporary construction plan the value satisfied f ?
because the actor cityhas already completed the task.
during analysis the initial valuations are propagated throughout the model.
in this study we investigate how the use of color affects subjects ability to review and interpret the evidence pair assignments of a model.
evo.
as introduced in sect.
i evo evaluation visualization overlay assigns colors to each of the evidence pairs used for intention valuations .
the color blue means that an intention is more satisfied while red means that the intention is more denied.
thus as shown in fig.
satisfied is colored blue partially satisfied is colored light blue partially denied is colored light red and denied is colored red.
none is assigned grey.
the purpose of assigning colors through evo is to make evaluating a goal model simpler.
thus the base colors of intentions are overlayed with colors that represent their valuations.
intentions without assignments retain their base colors.
fig.
shows the intentions from the model in fig.
that have assigned evidence pairs where each intention is sliced showing it with and without evo.
two additional evo modes can be used to review a time based simulation.
the time mode merges all time points into one view shown as colored stripes over an intention in the order that they 809fig.
legend of evidence pairs with evo.
fig.
fig.
intentions without left and with right evo.
occur.
the percent mode also uses colored stripes where each stripe corresponds to the percentage of the simulation that the intention is assign each evidence pair value.
iii.
m ethodology since we replicate the work of baatartogtokh et al.
we do not repeat the original study design in this paper but give a brief overview of it and relevant differences.
this study is in compliance with the acm publications policy on research involving human participants and subjects and was approved by the research ethics board at the university of toronto protocol id and the institutional review board at smith college protocol id .
our supplemental materials are available online1.
study rationale.
first we explain our study rationale and trade offs .
while a theoretic replication see sect.
vi could have provided more insight into the use of the technique we argue that the risks introduced in sect.
i need to be mitigated first.
the original experiment was conducted at a women s liberal arts college with an undergraduate population of that is known for its tight knit community.
subjects may have gained insight about the research through prior presentations and posters at the college leading to hypothesis guessing.
additionally students are instructed in goal modeling at the undergraduate level.
as such it is important to replicate the study at an independent co educational institution with a larger potentially more heterogeneous student body.
we thus chose to maintain the original study design and replicate it in a different population.
we were able to reuse the study materials and deliver the same training since the exact materials could be used and we do not have the possibility of instructor bias.
there were some differences in the study instrument which we discuss later in this section.
study context.
our study was conducted in early at the university of toronto st. george campus.
subjects were required to be proficient in english and not have a known color vision deficiency i.e.
colorblindness .
we updated the inclusion criteria for our context requiring that subjects be computer science cs majors or specialists and have completed a second semester cs course with training on programming and data structures i.e.
csc111h1 or csc148h1 1see for supplement.table i study protocol.
trial arms sequences period ebk xsm xsm ebk esm xbk xbk esm consent inclusion criteria and goal modeling training 1training evo bike evosummer controltraining evo summer evobike control 2summer controltraining evo bike evobike controltraining evo summer evo collect demographic information and debrief which is the same level of study required for the original study at smith college.
we recruited subjects through the cs undergraduate mailing list and targeted course specific mailing lists for eligible classes.
we also posted flyers in the building where the software engineering se research lab is located see supplement1for recruitment materials .
subjects completed the instrument in a meeting room in the se research lab with one researcher available to answer questions.
the researcher sat facing away from the subject s screen to reduce subject apprehension.
all subjects who completed the survey received a cad amazon.ca gift card which was distributed via email in weekly waves.
experimental procedure.
the protocol for the in person lab session is shown in tbl.
i. subjects were automatically randomly assigned to a trial arm i.e.
sequence .
we first verified the subjects study eligibility prior knowledge and color preferences before having the subjects complete training in goal modeling.
in periods and each subject answered the twelve questions listed in tbl.
ii relating to either the summer or bike models see for models .
in this crossover design we varied both the experimental objects i.e.
bike or summer model and whether evo had been applied to the model or not i.e.
control .
immediately prior to using the evo treatment subjects were trained in evo.
for example ebk xsm see tbl.
i was trained in evo and used evo to answer the bike questions in period then answered the summer questions in period without access to evo.
xsm ebk swapped the order of ebk xsm but used the same experimental objects for each treatment.
esm xbk learned evo in period but answered summer questions with evo while xbk esm completed the same in period .
all trial arms concluded the session with a short debriefing.
differences in study instrument.
we made the improvements recommended by baatartogtokh et al.
.
we allowed subjects to select black or dark purple as the color option to represent full conflict f f and updated q4 and q8 in tbl.
ii.
we also asked subjects to briefly describe the context in which they became familiar with any goal modeling languages however these responses were limited and not meaningful.
this holds for the context of the university of toronto as goal modeling is not introduced at the undergraduate level.
we collected additional demographic information from subjects including program and year of study gender international student status country of primary education and their self described cultural identity.
this additional information allowed 810table ii summer and bike questions used in the smith and replication experiment.
page num summer model bike model p1 q1 what is the initial satisfaction value of pass tryouts ?
what is the initial satisfaction value of prevent dooring incident ?
p1 q2 what is the initial satisfaction value of exercise ?
what is the initial satisfaction value of bike lane usage ?
p1 q3 is the initial state of the model more satisfied denied or conflicted?
is the initial state of the model more satisfied denied or conflicted?
p2 q4 smith experiment for each of the elements listed below how many times over the simulation does the element become fully satisfied?
smith experiment for each of the elements listed below how many times over the simulation does the element become fully satisfied?
replication experiment for each of the elements listed below how many time point s over the simulation is the element fully satisfied?
replication experiment for each of the elements listed below how many time point s over the simulation is the element fully satisfied?
a have summer activity b pass tryouts c exercise a bike lane curbside b temporary construction plan c public support p2 q5 how does join soccer team generally evolve over the simulation?
how does public support generally evolve over the simulation?
p2 q6 for each of the following satisfaction values at which time point in the simulation do the most number of elements have the value.
note in the event of a tie choose the later time point higher number .
a fully satisfied b fully denied c any conflicted valuefor each of the following satisfaction values at which time point in the simulation do the most number of elements have the value.
note in the event of a tie choose the later time point higher number .
a fully satisfied b fully denied c any conflicted value p2 q7 which intentions are partially denied at time point ?
which intentions are partially satisfied at time point ?
p3 q8 which intention would you choose to satisfy to make exercise fully satisfied?
smith experiment which intention would you choose to satisfy to make prevent unloading in bike lane fully satisfied?
replication experiment which intention would you choose to satisfy to make access to parking fully satisfied?
p4 q9 on the previous page we ask the question .
you answered q8 choice .
please explain your answer to this question.on the previous page we ask the question .
you answered q8 choice .
please explain your answer to this question.
p4 q10 how would assigning drive to and play soccer the value fully satisfied influence the model?how would assigning parking curbside and temporary construction plan the value fully satisfied influence the model?
p5 q11 click here for a pdf to compare three different scenarios of the summer model.
should you choose to join a book club community garden or soccer team?click here for a pdf to compare different scenarios of the bike lanes model.
how should you construct the bike lanes?
p6 q12 on the previous page we asked you to compare three different scenarios of the summer model and answer the question .
you answered .
please explain your answer to the previous question.on the previous page we asked you to compare different scenarios of the bike lanes model and answer the question .
you answered .
please explain your answer to the previous question.
us to monitor the diversity of our study population relative to that in baatartogtokh et al.
e.g.
with respect to gender and to assess whether randomization appropriately balanced study subjects between the four trial arms see sect.
iv a for details.
finally we asked subjects about colors that they associate with good and bad outcomes see rq4 in sect.
iv e .
data processing and outcomes.
we used two primary outcomes for assessing the use of evo collected in periods and of tbl.
i a the speed in seconds that it took subjects to complete the goal modeling questions higher is worse and b the number of correct responses given to those questions higher is better .
the time calculation consisted of adding the times for pages p1 p2 p3 and p5 see left most column of tbl.
ii.
to calculate the score we first performed qualitative coding on questions q9 q10 and q12 see tbl.
ii using the agreed rubric see supplement1 .
questions q9 and q12 validated the responses to q8 and q11 respectively and were excluded from the score calculation.
two researchers independently coded each of the responses.
we achieved an inter rater reliability 84for the summer questions and 87for the bike questions cohen s kappa coefficient .
a third researcher joined the discussion to resolve disagreements.
next we added together the number of correct responses to the remaining questions.
questions q4 and q6 were each scored out of points one point for each subquestion.
subjects final scores were thus adjudicated out of possible points.
additional secondary outcomes included the subjects quantitative assessment of the study instrument and materials.subjects completed four optional material evaluations one for the initial training completed at the end of period tbl.
i one each for the summer and bike models at the end of the relevant study periods and one for the evo training materials at the end of the period in which the training occurred .
for example ebk xsm evaluated the initial training materials at the end of period the evo training materials immediately after the training and the bike model materials at the end of period and the summer model materials at the end of period .
each set of materials was evaluated based on the difficulty of a understanding the scenario description b understanding the goal model and c answering the goal modeling questions.
ratings went from no difficulty to complete difficulty .
statistical analysis.
the target sample size was n subjects with individuals per trial arm following the recommendations made in baatartogtokh et al.
.
subject demographics were summarized using medians and interquartile ranges for numeric characteristics or frequency distributions for categorical characteristics and their balance across the trial arms were assessed using kruskal wallis tests or fisher s exact tests respectively.
the primary outcomes were evaluated using mixed effects models with adjustment for the study period in which the measurement was taken the experimental object and any other characteristics found to be imbalanced between the four trial arms see supplement1 for full model specifications .
the subjects evaluations of the experimental materials were also assessed using linear mixedeffects models with additional adjustment for the sequencing 811of the experimental objects.
we considered the study period and the experimental object to be potential modifiers of the effect of evo we tested for this by including interactions between each of these factors and the intervention and then evaluating these interactions using likelihood ratio tests .
other secondary outcomes were analyzed descriptively.
we used fisher s exact tests to examine differences in subject characteristics between our study and that of baatartogtokh et al.
.
we then reanalyzed the primary outcome data from baatartogtokh et al.
using the mixed effects models described above and combined both sets of study results using a one step fixed effects meta analysis of the individual subject data see supplement1for details .
we tested for the presence of effect heterogeneity by including interactions between evo and the study site.
in the absence of significant heterogeneity we reported pooled estimates and confidence intervals for the effects of evo.
all statistical tests are two sided and all p values and confidence intervals are presented at their nominal level without adjustment for multiple testing.
we take 05as an indication of statistical significance throughout.
iv.
r esults in this section we first give an overview of our subject characteristics and then answer each of our research questions.
a. subject characteristics sixty one students at the university of toronto participated in the experimental study with of these individuals included in the primary analysis and one excluded due to non response see supplement1for details .
thirty three of the subjects .
self identified as male and .
were international students.
subjects most commonly reported canada subjects of the sample china .
the united states .
and india .
as the location for the majority of their primary education.
most subjects indicated complete familiarity with english but had limited previous exposure to requirements engineering or goal modeling languages .
indicated no familiarity with any of istar tropos or grl.
these attributes were all balanced between the four trial arms see supplement1for a table of characteristics and pvalues for balance .
there were likewise no significant differences in the speed at which each of the groups completed the goal modeling kw p or evo kw p training modules nor in the number of questions that they answered correctly on the corresponding comprehension checks kw p 91for goal modeling p 31for evo training .
a vast majority of the subjects received a perfect score on the color vision test and all individuals passed i.e.
received a score of or greater out of as required per the study s inclusion criteria.
we find no significant variation in the baseline characteristics of the four trial arms indicating that the groups are broadly comparable and that no adjustment for baseline characteristics is necessary.b.
rq1 learning and applying evo to goal modeling tasks given the baseline comparability of the four trial arms we combine data from all subjects when evaluating whether they could successfully learn and apply evo from the provided training materials.
the median time to review these materials was .
minutes interquartile range .
to .
minutes with a subsequent .
minutes iqr .
to .
minutes spent completing the six evo training questions.
all but one subject passed the evo training module defined as answering five or more questions correctly and subjects .
received a perfect score.
all subjects were included in subsequent analyses.
further as we discuss in rq2 all subjects achieved a passing score when using evo to answer questions about the bike and summer models.
subjects generally found the evo training materials to be clear.
when asked to rate the difficulty they encountered understanding the scenario understanding the model and answering the training questions subjects median responses were .
.
and .
respectively on a scale of no difficulty to complete difficulty forty four subjects of the who provided difficulty ratings .
rated all three components at .
or below on the scale.
see sect.
iv d for a discussion of the perceived difficulty of the remaining study materials.
as part of the training subjects were asked to document questions they had about evo.
six subjects responded.
subjects asked meta questions about the chosen colors and their relationship with element types and text colors.
two subjects asked questions about distinguishing between the different evo modes i.e.
percent time though subsequent materials labeled which model was represented.
rq1 in the initial training almost all subjects were able to learn and use evo to answer questions.
most subjects finished the training in under six minutes and rated it as low difficulty.
c. rq2 comparison of performance with evo vs. control here we consider the two primary outcomes for the assessment of evo the time in seconds that it took subjects to complete the goal modeling questions listed in tbl.
ii capturing subjects ability to make decisions quickly and the number of correct responses provided to those questions capturing their overall comprehension of the model.
completion time.
subjects completed the goal modeling questions in as little as .
seconds or as much as .
seconds with the median completion time across all experimental objects experimental conditions and periods being .
seconds or .
minutes see fig.
.
completion times were significantly faster during period than during period indicating the presence of a learning effect mean difference .
seconds confidence interval .
to .
p tbl.
iii .
however the magnitude of this learning effect did not significantly differ between the bike and summer models lrt p or between the evo and control conditions lrt p indicating that there were no significant carryover effects due to either experimental object or experimental condition sequencing see supplement1for details .
812fig.
distribution of completion times for the experimental goal modeling exercises shown separately within each experimental object i.e.
bike or summer model period and experimental condition i.e.
evo or control .
the median completion time under the evo experimental condition was .
seconds .
minutes and under the control condition was .
seconds .
minutes almost a four minute difference or reduction in median completion time.
after controlling for both the study period and the experimental object encountered we find that subjects use of evo was associated with significantly faster completion times subjects answered questions .
seconds .
minutes faster on average with evo than without evo ci .
to .
p see tbl.
iii .
there was weak but suggestive evidence of task inequivalence between the bike and summer models with the bike model questions taking subjects an average of .
seconds longer than the summer model questions ci .
to .
p .
the time benefits of evo did not however significantly differ between these two experimental objects lrt p .
number of correct responses.
although subjects tended to complete goal modeling questions faster when using evo there was no meaningful change in their understanding of the model as measured by the number of correct responses.
fig.
displays the complete distribution of subject scores across all experimental objects periods and experimental conditions.
the median number of correct responses was out of under both experimental conditions iqr for both evo and control to .
taking scores of and above to indicate satisfactory performance on the goal modeling exercise i.e.
of model questions correct we see that all subjects achieved satisfactory performances while using evo out of the subjects also achieved satisfactory performances under the control condition.
after accounting for both the study period and the experimental object we estimate that the odds of correctly answering a goal modeling question are the same for evo as for control adjusted odds ratio .
ci .
to .
p see tbl.
iii .
there were no statistically significant learning effects across the two study periods adjusted or .
ci .
to .
p nor significant differences in the effect of evo between periods and i.e.
carryover effects lrt p .
there were also no significant differences in fig.
distribution of correct responses to the experimental goal modeling questions shown separately within each experimental object i.e.
bike or summer model period and experimental condition i.e.
evo or control .
responses are scored out of points the dashed line indicates a satisfactory performance of or more correct responses.
the odds of a correct response between the bike and summer models adjusted or .
ci .
to .
p .
subjects perspectives.
in our qualitative analysis subjects said that they preferred the color view over the non color view.
subjects mentioned that evo made the model easier to read or understand mentioned that it was faster quicker for answering questions and mentioned it was better for seeing the model at a glance .
one subject preferred the non color view finding the colors distracting while another did not have a view preference stating that evo was good for a quick glance but was overstimulating at times.
rq2 we find significant evidence that using evo is associated with faster completion times but found no evidence of any impacts on correctness.
a supermajority of subjects preferred the evo over the control for its speed and ease of use.
d. rq3 study experience and subjects perceptions subjects assessed four facets of the study materials the initial goal modeling training materials the evo training materials and the two experimental objects i.e.
the bike and summer models .
results regarding the evo training materials were summarized previously in sect.
iv b the remainder of the materials are discussed below.
goal modeling training materials.
all subjects provided quantitative assessments of the initial training sequence.
however two subjects reported having misinterpreted and reversed the difficulty scale when providing ratings of these and all other materials.
we removed these individuals from the analysis so that we had complete material assessments from subjects .
in period .
a sensitivity analysis that includes the two subjects with errors is available online1.
subjects found the goal model in the initial training sequence moderately challenging to understand with a median difficulty rating of .
out of iqr .
to .
.
the goal modeling scenario and corresponding goal modeling questions were somewhat more accessible with median difficulty ratings of .
iqr .
to .
and .
iqr .
to .
respectively.
813table iii mixed effects analysis of the experimental goal modeling exercise.
time to complete questions odds of a correct response mean difference in sec.
l .
u .
p valueaodds ratio l .
u .
p valuea treatment control evo .
.
.
period .
period period .
.
.
experimental object .
.
summer bike .
.
l .
and u .
refer to the lower and upper bounds respectively of the wald confidence interval for the corresponding effect estimate.
ap values calculated using wald tests on the slopes from the generalized linear mixed effects models.
table iv perceived difficulty of the study instrument and goal modeling tasks with and without the use of evo.
bike modelasummer modelaeffect size of evob evo control evo controladjusted diff.
in mean ratings ci p value a understanding the scenario description2.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
.
.
b understanding the model2.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
.
.
c goal modeling questions3.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
to .
.
.
.
.
asubjects rated difficulty on a scale from no difficulty to complete difficulty .
summaries refer to the subjects ratings of the bike study materials and are reported as median iqr .
they are calculated using all available information taken over both study periods i.e.
combining bike ratings across individuals who saw the bike model first and individuals who saw the summer model first.beffect sizes and p values were calculated using a mixed effects model that adjusted for the experimental object i.e.
bike or summer model the study period and whether the subject saw the bike or summer model first.
confidence intervals are wald confidence intervals and p values are from wald tests of the model slopes.
this is in line with our observation in sect.
iv a that a supermajority of subjects in our replication study had no prior familiarity with goal modeling such that the initial training sequence represented their first encounter with the field.
experimental materials.
one subject opted not to complete the period materials assessment so that we had complete and error free ratings from subjects .
in period and subjects in period .
subjects generally found the experimental tasks to be less difficult than the initial training sequence across each of the three dimensions subjects were asked to rate understanding the scenario description understanding the corresponding goal model and answering the goal modeling questions the median difficulty rating was .
out of in period iqr .
to .
and .
out of in period iqr .
to .
there were no significant differences in mean difficulty ratings across the two periods mean difference in ratings .
points ci .
to .
p see supplement1 .
however the bike model did pose a greater challenge to subjects than the summer model.
under the default coloring scheme subjects found the bike scenario and goal model to be more difficult to understand than those for the summer experimental object and the bike model questions to be more difficult to answer than the summer questions see tbl.
iv .
the difficulty of the bike model also carried over into how the subjects perceived the other study materials with those who saw the bike model in period finding the study materialsto be significantly more challenging than those who saw the summer model in period mean difference in difficulty rating .
points out of ci .
to .
p .
building on the qualitative results from sect.
iv c we find that the use of evo meaningfully impacted subjects ratings of the experimental materials and their difficulty see tbl.
iv .
subjects found the scenario descriptions and models to be significantly easier to understand when encountered with evo among subjects who faced the same goal model in the same study period those who saw the model with evo rated the scenario .
points less difficult to understand ci .
to .
p and the goal model .
points less difficult to understand ci .
to .
p on average than did those who saw the model with the default coloring scheme.
they also rated the corresponding goalmodeling questions as significantly easier to answer mean difference in ratings .
point decrease in difficulty ci .
to .
p .
rq3 subjects generally found the study instruments and experience to be moderately though not overly challenging with the initial training materials rated as the most difficult to understand.
subjects found the bike model materials to be significantly more challenging than the summer model materials with carryover effects on their perception of the remaining study instruments.
after controlling for these differences and carryover effects we found that subjects rated the experimental materials significantly easier to understand 814and use effectively when they saw the materials with evo.
e. rq4 color associations and preferences prior to beginning the experiment subjects were asked to list the color s that they associated with positive outcomes i.e.
good things happening and with negative outcomes i.e.
bad things happening .
each of the following colors was identified by at least one subject as having positive associations green identified by .
of the sample yellow gold .
blue .
pink .
red .
orange .
purple .
and white .
.
responses for colors associated with negative outcomes were less varied.
.
of the subjects identified red as a negative color .
identified black gray and .
identified each of yellow orange blue and green.
notably every individual who named red as a negative color also named green as a positive color only four individuals .
did not self report a green positive red negative visual scale.
two of these subjects completed their primary education in china one in romania and one in canada.
the subjects identified culturally as chinese romanian and westernized asian respectively.
in the color blind friendly palette used by evo blue coloring indicates fulfilled intentions what one might consider to be positive outcomes and red coloring indicates denied intentions what one might consider to be negative outcomes .
this kind of visual alignment in which blue is positive and red is negative was voluntarily mentioned by only two subjects .
both of whom also listed green as a positive color.
see sect.
v c for further discussion.
rq4 we found most subjects associate red with bad outcomes.
green had the most prevalent association with good outcomes with only a couple of subjects selecting blue.
f .
rq5 comparison and meta analysis of the smith experiment and replication experiment the present study was undertaken in order to replicate the work of the smith experiment in a different educational context and subject population with the goal of exploring the robustness of the original study s findings.
tbl.
v provides a formal comparison of the two study populations as well as the conclusions reached by each of the two studies.
as expected subjects in the replication study had less a priori familiarity with requirements engineering and with goal modeling than their counterparts at smith university of toronto students were .
less likely than smith students to report familiarity with any of istar tropos or grl .
vs. .
fe p .
subjects at the university of toronto were also significantly less likely to report complete familiarity with english fe p .
other key demographic differences include the high proportion of male subjects in the replication study at .
of the sample while smith college only admits individuals who identify as women.
the smith experiment did not collect information on subjects location of primary education or color preferences.
despite the heterogeneity of the two study populations we find no statistically significant differences in the effect of evo a time to complete experimental goal modeling questions.
b odds of a correct response to a question.
fig.
forest plots of two studies investigating the effect of evo on a speed and b comprehension of an experimental goal modeling task.
the size of each blue square represents the relative weight of each study and the black diamond represents the combined effect estimate.
the gray vertical line represents no effect.
on the speed with which subjects completed the goal modeling questions lrt p or on the odds that they answered the goal modeling questions correctly lrt p see full table online1 .
the pooled effect sizes are shown in fig.
.
after accounting for both period i.e.
learning effects and the experimental object we again find that individuals using evo answered the goalmodeling questions significantly faster than those using the default color scheme mean difference .
seconds ci .
to .
p without any significant effect on the likelihood that they answered those questions correctly adjusted or .
ci .
to .
p .
this absolute reduction in mean completion time translated to an estimated .
to .
reduction in the time spent on the goal modeling task depending on the study study period and experimental object subjects encountered see supplement1 .
rq5 despite significant differences in the study populations at the university of toronto and smith college we found no significant differences in the benefits provided by evo.
combining data from the two studies produced more precise estimates of evo s impact on speed and comprehension these estimates also generalize to a more diverse student population.
v. d iscussion a. study training and debriefing during the training modules and debriefing subjects asked questions and made recommendations.
we discussed the evo 815table v comparison of the two studies included in the meta analysis.
a study population and characteristics smith experiment replication experiment p valuea country united states canada institutional descriptionsmall women s private liberal arts collegelarge coeducational public research university sample size subject characteristics complete familiarity with englishb29 .
.
some familiarity with rec17 .
.
.
some familiarity with istar .
.
tropos or grld identify as male e33 .
ap values calculated using fisher s exact test.
bsubjects rated familiarity on a scale from no familiarity to complete familiarity .
reported proportions are the percent of subjects who answered .
creported proportions are the percent of subjects who gave a score greater than .
dreported proportions are the percent of subjects who gave a score greater than for at least one of the listed languages.
einformation not collected by baatartogtokh et al.
.
b results smith experiment replication experiment comparison rq1 to what extent are subjects able to learn and apply evo?
passed evo training .
passed evo training similar result achieved a perfect score achieved a perfect score rq2 how does evo compare to control in terms of completion time?
significantly faster completion of bike p and summer p modelssignificantly faster completion holding model and period constant time benefit .
min.
p similar result replication also estimates magnitude of gain correct responses?
correct response rate not significantly different for bike p or summer p modelodds of correct response not significantly different holding model and period constant or .
p similar result replication also estimates magnitude of difference subject preferences?
prefer evo .
prefer evo similar result rq3 how do subjects rate the study experience and instrument?
qualitative analysis only significantly less difficult when encountered with evo p novel replication result rq4 to what extent do subjects associate blue resp.
red with good resp.
bad outcomes?
.
subjects self reported this visual scale novel replication result training specific questions in sect.
iv b. after the goal modeling training subjects asked a question.
most subjects asked for further clarification on the contribution links and how valuations were assigned to the model.
specifically twelve subjects asked about the difference between symmetric and asymmetric contribution types while six asked about the strength of the influence i.e.
vs. in contributions.
one asked what it meant to invert evidence and another asked for contribution link specific examples.
seven subjects were confused about how evidence pairs or links are assigned to the model with one asking if they are allowed to make subjective decisions.
one questioned the choice of valuations used in the model.
three subjects asked what it means for there to be a conflicting evidence pair in the model.
seven subjects also asked about how valuations are propagated throughout the model.
another subject asked how an individual is able to make decisions with evidence pairs if they are able to prioritize one goal over the other.
during debriefing subjects response rate left substantive comments for the developers of the goal modeling language and tool .
five subjects left comments about improving the study materials in some way e.g.
figure size video captioning .
in tbl.
vi we list common recommendations i.e.
recommendations that occurred three or more times in the dataset.
as mentioned above almost all subjects preferred the color view yet ten recommended changingthe actual colors used.
twelve recommended changes to the visualization of the precent and time modes.
although anecdotal we observe from this data that subjects have trouble understanding contribution links but we cannot separate between whether the problem lies in the difficulty of understanding the foundational language or inadequacies in the training provided in this study.
future replication studies of evo should improve the training materials and videos to better explain contribution links.
we also recommend investigating improvements to the underlying notation.
b. recommendations for tool developers given the recommendations in tbl.
vi especially those also present in the smith experiment we recommend that tool developers investigate their impact.
for example adding ticks to the percent time mode is a straight forward change yet it is uncertain whether it would improve readability or make the model cluttered.
subjects proposed improving the visualization of links which could be addressed using color as suggested by varying line thickness or patterns i.e.
dashed solid lines to indicate contribution strength or with different labels for link types.
finally subjects recommended adding goal prioritization highlighting and model slicing.
given the recent work on presence conditions in goal models model slicing appears to be feasible and should be explored to allow users to focus in on an individual actor or on a set of links in the model.
816table vi common recommendations for improvement.
evo improvements change the color palette not intuitive .
change the conflict colors only.
add numbers to percent time mode.
add ticks to percent time mode.
goal modeling improvements add goal prioritization highlighting or model slicing.
improve visualization of links maybe with color .
make contribution links type difference more intuitive.
change the shape or default color of intentions.
make model text more readable.
bracketed numbers indicate counts of occurrence.
indicates recommendations not present in baatartogtokh et al.
.
at a more foundational level subjects suggested modifying the shape or default color of intentions.
intention types are represented using two encodings shape as the primary visual variable and color as the secondary variable.
in contrast intention valuations are represented solely as text unless evo is enabled upon which color becomes the primary variable.
this may cause confusion with the secondary variable for type as there is an overlap in the meaning of an intention s color which may reduce the the cognitive effectiveness of goal modeling.
we recommend changing the intention type colors to further differentiate between intention type and valuation so that encodings do not overlap with each other.
while prior research advises using color as a secondary encoding evo s reliance on it as a primary variable introduces tradeoffs that require further investigation.
c. blue vs. green in rq2 see sect.
iv c we found that all but two subjects preferred evo to the control yet in sect.
v a ten subjects recommended changing the colors in evo.
as introduced in sect.
i most goal modeling tools use green to denote good outcomes.
in rq4 sect.
iv e we found that most subjects in our study associate green and not blue with good outcomes.
while we may suspect that these preferences may differ in populations with high prevalence of green red color blindness the default colors of evo need to be revisited.
the blue red palette is more visible for color vision deficient users but less intuitive for the rest of the population.
d. recommendations for researchers the replication package created by baatartogtokh et al.
was thorough but incomplete.
the repository did not have a data dictionary for the final data files or rubric for the qualitative analysis so we created both.
the statistical analysis spanned multiple python and r files which made it confusing to understand and update.
we recommend minimizing the complexity of data aggregation procedures.
as already mentioned in sect.
v a subjects had significant problems understanding the contribution link types.
while this was mentioned in the original experiment it seemed more prominent in our replication.
in hindsight we should have updated the training module that discussed contribution links however explaining the syntax and semantics of twelvedifferent contribution types in tropos seems to be a possible area of future research.
we recommend that future experiments similar to ours use only the four symmetric contribution types.
e. implications for practitioners this study is part of a larger effort to improve the applicability and adoption of goal modeling and is one part of the improve and measure cycle.
our replication allows for a higher level of confidence in the benefits of evo for the goal modeling community including tool developers.
our findings reveal the need to balance intuitiveness and inclusiveness in choosing colors for highlighting elements in goal models.
thus far our evaluation of evo is limited to undergraduate students.
while this is not ideal we have limited access to industrial collaborators and welcome the future involvement of practitioners.
yet by studying student outcomes we can improve goal modeling tools for future industrial deployment.
students represent the next generation of industrial practitioners and by training students in goal modeling we can have future industrial impact.
in particular we believe that evo s ability to reduce the cognitive load of using and making decisions with goal models enhances learning which in turn makes the industrial adoption of goal modeling more realistic in the future.
f .
threats to validity conclusion validity.
to reduce researcher bias separate authors conducted the in person session data preparation and statistical analysis.
the lab environment and handouts were kept consistent to minimize variation in subject experience.
we found no significant differences in trial arms based on measured subject attributes and training performance see sect.
iv a for details however there may be other unmeasured factors or sources of heterogeneity in subjects comfort with goal modeling.
see sect.
iii for our detailed discussion of statistical analysis that may affect conclusion validity.
internal validity.
we mitigated fatigue effects by allotting untimed break points for subjects.
as in the original study the study design carries the risk of carryover and learningby practice effects.
additionally there is the instrumentation effect as the bike model was detected to be harder than the summer model.
we mitigated these threats by controlling for these differences in our statistical analysis.
construct validity.
we discuss potential threats from the dependence between our replication and the original study.
both studies used the same method of measuring subjects perceptions of evo so there is a threat of mono method bias.
a future evaluation using different methods would help ensure that the results of this replication are not due to similar biases from the original.
there may be instrumentation bias as we used the same training materials and questions as the original study and so potentially replicated any limitations or biases.
however we mitigated this threat by making the changes listed in sect.
iii.
finally there is the risk of hypothesis guessing and evaluation apprehension as our subjects were novices.
817external validity.
the experimental setting is not reflective of how stakeholders would use goal modeling and evo in reality as the models and scenarios were simple and not personalized due to constraints on time.
as our subjects are undergraduate students with no prior experience in re and goal modeling our results do not reflect how experts would use evo.
vi.
r elated work color and reasoning in goal modeling.
the green red color scheme was first used in goal modeling to highlight the valuations of urn models in the jucmnav tool .
this same color scheme was used for istar evaluation labels in openome .
in the context of quantitative non functional requirements oliveira and leite used the green red color scheme and colormetrics to calculate an exact hue based on the propagated valuations in the model and colored links to indicate the polarity of propagation.
outside of analysis color has also been used to identify aspects of a goal model such as root and leaf nodes for istar models in openome .
in pistar users can assign each intention any color of their choice .
sartoli et al.
mapped colors to the model elements where purposes are purple and obligations are green .
perera et al.
introduced level wise value evaluation with colors indicating which level or phase of development a design choice was made at .
as mentioned in sect.
ii varnum et al.
introduced evo and the blue red color scheme with the aim of making tropos evidence pairs easier to interpret .
benayed et al.
extended evo to introduce four more palettes and a customizable palette option to improve the accessibility of evo which was explored in through a user study.
the experimental validation of evo by baatartogtokh et al.
is the basis for our replication study.
visualizations in se.
this study may impact the broader field of software visualizations .
to aid decisionmaking for future software development prior work used colors to represent properties such as code size within a 3d visualization of software release histories helping stakeholders better understand the system .
feigenspan et al.
used color to highlight program backgrounds to improve code comprehension and found that subjects favored the use of color though color choice is important.
building on these insights our findings suggest that users preferentially view green rather than blue as indicative of positive outcomes providing further guidance for color choices in se visualizations.
this preference may also extend to other types of visualizations such as dependency graphs e.g.
.
replications in se.
replications are an important but overlooked aspect of empirical software engineering .
sj berg et al.
found only of surveyed experiments to be replications.
in a subsequent study focused on replications da silva et al.
found an increase in replications after the publication of sj berg et al.
with the majority being internal replications .
as mentioned in sect.
iii se researchers have long discussed the merits of replication types.
basili et al.
and shull et al.
argue for using referencematerials and conducting exact replications while miller and kitchenham argue for theoretic replications using different methods and materials to explore the original hypotheses.
we heed kitchenham s warning and based our study on a strong experimental design with a detailed study guide see thus our results enable the original and future researchers to continue building a theory of the impacts of evo.
we contributed to theory building by extending the external validity of the original findings.
future theoretic replications would complement our analysis.
mendonc a et al.
proposed the fire approach consisting of two cycles an internal cycle to improve on the original study and an external cycle to independently validate the findings.
g omez et al.
proposed five elements that vary between se experiments and their replication site experimenters apparatus operationalizations and population properties .
our study used a different site and different population properties while keeping the apparatus experimental objects and operationalization the same.
in subsequent work juristo et al.
differentiate between close replications i.e.
pseudo exact and differentiated replication .
finally wieringa argued that researchers should differentiate between replications that extend statistical inference from samples to populations and those replications that use cases to test the underlying theory under analysis with this study being the former.
vii.
c onclusions and future work in this paper we replicated the experiment by baatartogtokh et al.
.
we conclude that using evo to answer goal modeling questions is associated with faster completion times but found no evidence of any impacts on correctness.
subjects had a positive response to evo and preferred it over the control.
we also found no significant differences between the results of the original experiment and our replication allowing us to calculate pooled estimates of evo s impact.
in particular subjects using evo completed the goal modeling questions .
minutes between .
and .
faster on average than the control.
additionally we found that most subjects associated green with good outcomes while only a few associate blue the default color in evo with good outcomes.
thus we recommend changing the default color palette of evo to align with subject expectations and other goal modeling tools.
in future work the evo experiment should be replicated with trained goal modelers and practitioners to verify if the results hold among non novices as it is unclear if experts would benefit from the use of evo as well as different experimental objects i.e.
larger models .
we also recommend a head to head comparison of the blue red and the green red palettes with color vision normal and deficient users.