get me in the groove a mixed methods study on supporting adhd professional programmers kaia newman sarah snay madeline endres manasvi parikh andrew begel carnegie mellon university pittsburgh pa usa university of michigan ann arbor mi usa university of massachusetts amherst massachusetts usa klnewman abegel andrew.cmu.edu ssnay manasvi umich.edu mendres umass.edu abstract understanding the work styles of diverse programmers can help build inclusive workplaces enabling all software engineers to excel.
an estimated .
of programmers have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder adhd a condition characterized by differences in attention and working memory.
prior work has just begun to explore the impact of adhd on software development finding that inadequate support may negatively impact team productivity and employment.
this prevents software organizations from benefiting from adhd related strengths.
to investigate these impacts we conducted a two phase mixed methods study.
first we qualitatively analyzed threads posts and comments from r adhd programmers the largest public forum dedicated to the adhd programmer community.
we constructed a mapping that reveals how adhd programmers apply personal strategies and organizational accommodations to address software task specific challenges.
second we conducted a large scale survey of adhd and non adhd professional programmers to validate how our qualitative data generalize to the worldwide developer population.
our results show that adhd programmers are .
to .
times more likely to struggle more frequently than neurotypical developers with all challenges we consider but especially with time management and design.
our findings have implications for inclusive and effective tooland policy building in software workplaces and motivate further research into the experiences of adhd programmers.
index terms neurodiversity adhd software engineering accommodations i. i ntroduction attention deficit hyperactivity disorder adhd a condition involving differences in attention and working memory has been linked to strengths and challenges such as cognitive dynamism and difficulty finishing work efficiently .
adhd is of increasing relevance in software engineering in terms of how the community works to build effective diverse workplaces and support marginalized groups .
many software developers have adhd .
of respondents in the stack overflow developer survey reported having a concentration and or memory disorder e.g.
adhd etc.
.
adhd developers have under addressed challenges compared to their neurotypical peers common software workplace tasks or tools such as virtual meeting calls open office plans or pull request notifications can be ill suited to neurodivergent e.g.
adhd programmers focus productivity or wellbeing .
when unsupported similar challenges in other fields lead to negative outcomes such as underperformance or frequent job switching .unfortunately support for adhd employees is often insufficient accommodations are rarely requested even if needed and difficult to obtain .
in one survey out of .
neurodivergent professional programmers desired accommodations but only requested them .
asking for accommodations can be risky legal protections against discrimination may not guard against more insidious inequities such as implicit bias or firing employees for nominally legitimate reasons .
in addition accommodations for particular needs can violate privacy due to their specificity making information about them and how to obtain them harder to navigate.
specific accommodations are usually created from an understanding of barriers and the strategies used to overcome them .
there is not yet a complete understanding of the associations between adhd developer strategies accommodations and challenges how they impact specific software tasks or how they generalize.
this knowledge would allow companies to develop and deploy targeted interventions for software tasks.
although there has been recent growth in researching neurodivergent programmers prior work mostly focuses on other groups e.g.
autism or dyslexia does not separate out adhd software engineers as their own participant group or does not identify software task specific challenges or relationships between them and support options .
understanding the challenges and strategies of adhd developers may inform interventions that better support their needs without requiring disclosure.
studying the problemsolving strategies of developers is valuable for tool building and it may also help policy building gendermag a framework for understanding how gender diverse users interact with software has helped companies identify and fix inclusiveness issues .
supporting neurodiverse programmers may also lead to organizational level productivity gains diverse teaming across multiple attributes has been shown to increase productivity in software contexts .
due to the efficacy of diverse software teams and the prevalence and potential strengths of adhd software engineers understanding how to support their unique work styles is merited.
an effective investigation into the experiences of adhd programmers would both uncover developer experiences from intersectional backgrounds and also lead to insights that generalize to a broad range of developers.
we thus carried outa two phase mixed methods study .
we first qualitatively analyzed data from the subreddit r adhd programmers to gather detailed subjective experiences.
the anonymity of online forums permits relatively safe community building and disclosure around sensitive topics .
we then conducted a large scale survey of professional programmers to see if these experiences generalize to programmers with and without adhd.
in this work we focus on programmers workplace challenges and strengths personal strategies and organizational accommodations.
our contributions are a qualitative analysis of posts and comments from the forum r adhd programmers words .
a survey of professional programmers of varying selfreported neurotypes including with adhd.
a mapping between adhd programmers workplace challenges and the accommodations and strategies they use.
this includes the first breakdown by software task and the first academic investigation into existing accommodations for adhd software engineers.
we find that while challenges impact adhd programmers at significantly higher rates they also impact non adhd programmers.
as a result organizational support may lead to generalizable productivity gains.
ii.
b ackground neurodiversity describes the range of variation in human cognition .
the majority cognitive profile is called neurotypical minority neurotypes including adhd and autism areneurodivergent .
some minority neurotypes co occur e.g.
of autistic people also have adhd .
adhd is present in of the global population .
people with adhd have documented strengths including hyperfocus episode of long lasting highly focused attention entrepreneurship and creativity .
these strengths have been measured objectively not only did people with adhd report significantly more creative achievements in the real world but they also scored higher on a validated test of divergent thinking when competing with others with a medium to large effect size .
however people with adhd struggle disproportionately with challenges such as distractions organization and job loss which can prevent them from leveraging their strengths in the workplace .
for example one study found that adhd adults experienced significantly more job switching than neurotypical adults .
another found that adhd adults were affected significantly more by distractors during a letter search task .
we follow the social model of disability which posits that difficulties faced by disabled people such as those with adhd are impacted by social and environmental barriers.
to address difficulties we advocate for removal of these barriers.
we now overview existing work on challenges faced by adhd employees and support in a non software context.
research has found that adhd related challenges can be reduced by environmental managerial and behavioral practices .
this includes both personalstrategies and organizational accommodations.
as an example of the former one study found that adhd participants used routines and checklists to aid with distractions time management and organization .
another study described strategies such as choosing environments that were best suited to one s adhd symptoms and using timers .
at the organizational level support helps mitigate distractions.
this includes providing a private work space headphones or flexible schedules so that employees can choose quieter times .
incentivizing task completion and delegating tedious work can help support adhd employees .
to mitigate for difficulties with communication and time management research suggests that managers communicate job tasks clearly including defining timelines and creating a list of job related responsibilities .
accommodations for adhd have been shown to be effective in non software contexts for example one review found that providing a list of tasks to choose from rather than assigning tasks directly increased engagement for adhd students in multiple studies .
the intersection of adhd and software is less studied.
liebel et al.
conducted a case study interviewing adhd professional developers .
for a comparison see viii.
iii.
r esearch questions and methodology we carried out a two phase mixed methods study of adhd programmers.
we qualitatively analyzed posts from r adhd programmers and then checked if our findings generalize via a survey of professional programmers.
developed using previous literature and initial readings of this subreddit we directed our analysis around four research questions rq1 what challenges do adhd software engineers have and which software tasks are impacted?
rq2 what strategies and accommodations do adhd software engineers use to address challenges at work?
rq3 which strategies or accommodations may help with which work challenges?
rq4 do non adhd programmers also think these strategies and accommodations would be helpful?
we now overview each phase s methodology.
supporting material including our full qualitative codebook survey instrument and analysis scripts are in our replication package.
a. phase qualitative analysis of archival data dataset.
we desire a nuanced understanding of the adhd programmer experience in a natural setting.
we thus analyzed posts and comments from r adhd programmers a public forum where adhd programmers engage in community discussion.
as of august this forum has members making it in the top in size on reddit.
to the best of our knowledge we are the first to analyze this forum academically and it is the largest public community of adhd programmers.
we collected posts in late using the pushshift api which is commonly used to create qualitative datasets .
we 1our replication package including our final codebook is available at i. job related r adhd programmers posts by category and the analyzed posts.
posts can be in multiple categories.
post content posts document ids in analysis challenges strategies disclosure .
accommodations .
scraped using rq related keywords such as career roles e.g.
employee parts of the software process e.g.
debugging and adhd related vocabulary e.g.
hyperfocus .
this led to posts of which were software job related via manual annotation by the authors .
we defined software jobrelated using three intersecting criteria employment related words in a software context e.g.
job boss agile phases in the job cycle e.g.
interviewing job searching being fired or posts soliciting comments about software employment.
the first four authors categorized these job related posts into four non mutually exclusive categories challenges accommodations disclosure and strategies.
of these challenges and strategies were the most common see table i .
we focus this work on challenges strategies and accommodations as we found these topics were relevant for software engineeringspecific intervention.
we intend to publish our findings on disclosure in another venue that paper will not include challenges strategies or accommodations.
we used separate analyses to model disclosure motivations and outcomes.
in addition the papers differ in methodology and data used.
we chose posts spanning all non mutually exclusive categories challenges accommodations strategies disclosure to facilitate initial codebook development.
the remaining posts were sampled from the software job related posts in a stratified manner i.e.
random posts from each category since the categories were imbalanced in the overall sample table i .
this follows best practice and helps ensure that our codebook would generalize to a random sample.
we reached thematic saturation i.e.
we were not discovering new codes after posts lending confidence that our sample size was sufficient.
we performed an in depth qualitative analysis of all job related posts and their comment threads words max avg.
16comments per post .
analysis.
our thematic analysis followed deterding and waters s twenty first century approach .
to build and apply our codebook we used a three pass process one to identify relevant quotes via semantic unitization one to apply toplevel codes and one to fully analyze the data.
posts had passes by at least two authors.
we applied code instances to quotes using atlas.ti a qualitative analysis software.
when building the codebook authors coded the same documents independently and met weekly to resolve conflicts and refine definitions in a process of negotiated agreement .
when our codebook did not change for three meetings in a rowtable ii.
demographics overview of our survey population.
gender neurotype adhd other nd nt total man .
.
.
.
woman .
.
.
.
nonbinary .
.
.
.
other na .
.
.
total .
.
.
min max median age in years full years of professional experience i.e.
reached saturation the authors started annotating posts alone discussing edge cases.
we achieved high top level inter rater reliability irr krippendorff s .
lending confidence to our categorical consistency.
following best hci research practice we did not calculate irr for lower level codes despite using negotiated agreement we use codes to discover themes rather than as our final product.
final codebook.
we identified lower level codes organized into top level groups including w orkchallenge coping mech i.e.
a personal strategy a developer uses to mitigate challenges w orkstrength and a ccommoda tion .
we define an a ccommodation as any support that needs approval from someone higher up in an organization.
this is explicitly not a legal definition commenters used various colloquial definitions and we wanted to capture all support adhd developers may desire or receive.
axial coding.
we mapped strategies and accommodations to challenges using axial coding which involves reassembling codes into abstracted categories to develop relationships between concepts .
the first three authors organized codes into a mapping based on challenges abstracted codes into broader categories and ensured relationships were grounded in the original coding via code co occurrence see figure .
b. phase quantitative analysis of a large scale survey survey design.
to triangulate validate and expand on our qualitative results we designed a minute online survey.
we made item likert style questions derived directly from our main qualitative themes e.g.
work challenges strategies accommodations and strengths .
we consulted with hci and neurodiversity outreach experts to ensure the quality and sensitivity of our survey.
we did not include all qualitative codes or relevant software tasks as it would have made the survey prohibitively long.
instead we prioritized common themes and concepts.
while we have software tasks in our codebook we only have in our survey code review debugging brainstorming meetings design and documentation.
though we included adhd specific questions we designed our survey to be completable by people of all neurotypes to better contextualize the adhd experience.
we also included a validated assessment of positive mental health we theorized that mental health may moderate challenge frequency.
survey recruitment.
we primarily recruited via public github emails.
we used the github rest api2to identify top contributors from the top repositories across languages.
after duplicate filtering we had emails.
our broad recruitment allowed us to reach adhd programmers as they make up a minority of developers.
we sent emails in batches of per week to ensure quick response to comments or concerns.
github recruitment is wellestablished in software engineering surveys of professional developers .
we discussed the ethics of recruiting via public github emails when choosing this strategy especially around a potential violation of their terms of service.
following prior arguments we consider the principles of beneficence and respect for persons outlined in the belmont report and believe that on balance our work s potential to benefit inclusive software development through insights on neurodiverse programmers outweighs the low costs to github users e.g.
an unwanted email .
during the first .
weeks of recruitment we advertised using posters in three us metro areas on an email list of programmers interested in our research and by word of mouth.
these approaches resulted in a low yield n .
we considered other strategies such as mturk or prolific but ultimately decided on github because of data quality concerns .
we offered an optional drawing for or an equivalent amount proportional to the recipient s minimum wage .
participants submitted our survey out of who started a completion rate .
through self consistency filters and removing two responses with hate speech we had valid responses.
we recruited from may to june .
analysis.
we organized our statistical analysis around three groups those with adhd those who are neurodivergent but do not have adhd other nd and neurotypicals nt .
for other nd we had a narrow definition excluding conditions not always considered neurodivergent e.g.
depression tinnitus .
we performed all statistics in an r notebook .
to analyze high level differences between neurotypes we used the 2test of independence a non parametric test appropriate for categorical data .
however for likert type questions on challenge or strength frequency we theorized there may be confounds beyond neurotype.
we use ordinal logistic regression olm to determine whether changing a predictor variable significantly affects the response .
we use olms rather than linear regression because likert type items are ordered.
though it is appropriate to treat likerttype data as interval data in some cases we treated them as ordinal because we do not aggregate responses and responses are not numerical .
olms rely on the proportional odds assumption in which model coefficients must be consistent across the different levels of the response variable .
we tested for this assumption to ensure the validity of our models.
all model results reported in this work satisfy this assumption.
we used the r packages mass polr and brant .
we chose predictors based on related work and our qualitative analysis.
for challenge models we used neurotype years of experience positive mental health work from home status and reported task competency.
for strengths we used neurotype years of experience and positive mental health.we used a significance threshold of p .
.
as we generated p values for dozens of models we used the benjaminihochberg bh adjustment to correct for multiple comparisons within research questions and avoided trying factors in models which have no backing from theory.
all results reported in this work survived correction unless otherwise noted.
iv.
s urvey population contextualization table ii contains our survey demographics.
all respondents were at least and had worked at a job that required software development.
the most common job titles in our sample were software engineer or software developer .
participants were from countries across seven regions north america n europe central asia east asia pacific latin america south asia middle east north africa and sub saharan africa .
for self reported neurotype .
had adhd .
were neurodivergent without adhd other nd autistic and .
were neurotypical nt .
adhd participants were also autistic.
our findings are intersectional as we combine all adhd participants in one group see vii .
adhd diagnosis prevalence varies by culture socioeconomic status and gender and many are undiagnosed .
we thus combined diagnosed and self diagnosed adhd participants were diagnosed while were selfdiagnosed.
we include an analysis of challenges and strengths of diagnosed programmers in our replication package.
diagnostic status does not impact our high level findings.
however .
of statistical tests with significant differences in the diagnosed group were not significant for the combined group.
also odds ratios i.e.
effect sizes in this paper are generally lower than if we had only considered diagnosed programmers.
v. r esults challenges and solutions we identified and validated challenge types that are faced disproportionately by adhd developers.
these challenge types are challenges involving cognition challenges involving time challenges involving distractions challenges involving communication and challenges involving alignment .
we identified each challenge in our qualitative analysis ofr adhd programmers and then validated that they impact adhd developers disproportionately via our survey.
in fig.
we propose a mapping between these challenges and relevant personal strategies and organizational accommodations as determined by our axial coding see iii a .
we focus on challenges related to work outcomes.
we leave an investigation of mental health challenges to future work.
in the rest of this section we address rqs see iii .
we first overview each challenge and discuss which software tasks are most impacted.
table iii summarizes our qualitative and quantitative results by challenge.
some tasks identified qualitatively were not included in the survey and were thus not possible to validate see iii b .
we then detail strategies and accommodations used by adhd programmers.organizational accommodations environment changeassistive technologyjob coaching modified .
deadlines work hours different job taskswritten communicationstructured feedbackadjusted training mat.additional notespersonal strategies adjust stimuliselfmedicationadhd medication increased .
communication medication self regulationtake control better aligned jobfinding noveltyleveraging strengthsdeadlines as motivationexternalizing .
time work hours take breaksbody doublingtask viztask chunkingexternalizing .
info procedure practice challenges boring taskmisaligned task jobwaiting for program runsdistractionscontext switching verbal communicationexternal pressureinertiatime managementconsistent performanceabstraction memory fig.
.
our axial coding of challenges personal strategies and organizational accommodations relevant to adhd programmer experiences.
the five challenge types are cognition memory abstraction time time management consistent performance inertia distractions waiting for program runs distractions context switching communication external pressure verbal communication and alignment boring task misaligned job task .
we connect these five challenge types to personal strategies and organizational accommodations that can be used to mitigate them.
symbols indicate additional challenges for which a strategy or accommodation is also used.
practice and modified deadlines are connected to the communication challenge in the context of the interview process.
leveraging strengths refers to seeking jobs company environments and working cultures that align with and incorporate the strengths of adhd programmers see v e .
a. challenges involving cognition memory and abstraction building software is memory intensive clear mental models are essential for designing software systems .
in our qualitative results adhd programmers reported struggles with short or long term memory posts and task abstraction posts e.g.
not seeing the big picture beyond the details or being overwhelmed by of the magnitude of a system.
impacted software tasks.
in our survey adhd developers reported challenges with memory more frequently than nt developers during meetings design code review reading documentation and brainstorming see table iii .
these validate our qualitative results for instance daily standups can be hell because i have no idea what i was since the last standup d59 or document id see table i .
similarly adhd developers perceive abstraction more challenging during design debugging code review documentation and meetings.
for example one commenter struggled with breaking down the logic of each ticket without being paralyzed by branches on branches of tangential thoughts d91 .
strategies.
in our qualitative analysis we identified primary strategies that adhd developers use to support memory and abstraction see fig.
procedures externalizing information practice task visualization and task chunking.
in our survey the most commonly used strategies by adhd programmers were task chunking taking meeting notes task visualization and procedures see table iv .
we delve into our qualitative results below.
adhd developers chunk tasks to keep track of which level of abstraction to focus on.
they also externalized information by recording meetings taking notes and writing code comments.
this helped programmers recall context prepare for interviews or remember meeting content.
are you interviewing on zoom?
make a. .
.
poster of all the things you might need to talk about during the interview and put it behind yourwebcam on the wall d83 .
practicing leetcode was used to memorize content for technical interviews.
task visualization was helpful for abstraction especially when translating from design to implementation.
talking out my ideas and showing process through pictures.
.
.
help me collect my thoughts.
.
.
translate it into syntax d47 .
task ordering procedures also helped memory and abstraction.
these ranged from to do lists to workflow integrated programs such as issue trackers gnu emacs org mode or notes apps.
have a mental list of common pitfalls .
.
.
i read over the changes once looking only for potential concurrency problems then paying attention to names d92 .
accommodations.
in our qualitative analysis we identified accommodations provided to adhd developers to help with memory and abstraction heavy tasks additional notes and adjusted training .
some developers desired support in acquiring meeting notes including written recaps after 1s detailing action items expectations and deadlines d96 .
accommodations were also sometimes needed for permission to record meetings.
programmers also received extra or modified training to help with task abstraction.
instead of being given a huge and dry book they paid for a more interactive online course.
d5 both of these accommodations validated in our survey additional notes desired granted and adjusted training materials desired granted .
adhd developers struggle with memory and task abstraction especially in meetings software design code review and technical interviews rq1 .
strategies include breaking tasks into smaller pieces externalizing information and following procedures rq2 rq3 .
accommodations include extra notes or modified training rq2 rq3 .
b. challenges involving time time management and inertia effective time management is essential for software engineering .
adhd developers reported struggles withtable iii.
work challenges for adhd programmers from our qualitative data left three columns triangulated with our survey right two columns .
associated se tasks are software tasks that co occur with a challenge in our qualitative data ordered by prevalence.
bolded tasks are validated by our survey.
significant tasks for adhd developers were more challenging for adhd developers than nt developers in our survey bh adjusted p .
05when holding other variables constant see iii b .
for each we report an odds ratio or .
this is the odds of an adhd participant rating themselves more highly on a question s scale as compared to a nt participant.
for example the odds of an adhd developer struggling more frequently with time management during software design is .
times that of a nt developer.
some qualitative tasks were not in our survey and are thus not possible to validate see iii b .
survey questions are modified for space.
challenge indicative quote associated se tasks survey questionsignificant tasks for adhd developers task or memory i am supposed to be able to sit in long meetings and remember all the information afterwards despite there being no notes or recordings.
d41 meetings interviews documentation design code reviewhow often do you struggle with memory during each software task?meetings .
design .
code review .
reading documentation .
brainstorming .
abstraction i ve had many experiences of going down a rabbit hole with a jira ticket spending days to come up with a pull request and then had to throw it all away because i misunderstood the requirements.
d13 coding code review interviews version control documentation design meetings refactoring requirements elicitation testinghow often do you struggle with getting lost in the small details of each software task?design .
debugging .
code review .
reading documentation .
writing documentation .
meetings .
time management one of my biggest issues is i get sucked in to my projects so much that i lose track of time.
it s even worse when i am trying to debug something.
d26 meetings interviews agile debugginghow often do you struggle with time management during each software task?design .
brainstorming .
code review .
writing documentation .
debugging .
reading documentation .
meetings .
inertia i am always present at the meetings but when i have to develop and deliver code sometimes i beg myself in the chair.
.
.
i postpone everything until the deadline.
d85 version control codinghow often do you struggle with starting or continuing each software task?writing documentation .
code review .
reading documentation .
debugging .
distractions it is such a bad habit of mine to cmd tab to chrome and open facebook in a new tab while things compile and get sucked in.
d66 meetings interviews debugging code reviewhow often do you struggle with getting distracted during each software task?meetings .
writing documentation .
code review .
reading documentation .
design .
brainstorming .
communication my boss called me in today for some feedback.
we don t have good communication and as he pointed out.
.
.
we always have misunderstandings that trigger uncomfortable feelings.
d9 meetings interviews agilehow often do you struggle tocommunicate at your workplace?overall .
disliked or boring tasks at this point i can t even practice leetcode anymore i look at the problem and my brain goes to sleep like yeah that s boring... and i literally can t do it.
.
.
d43 meetings interviews documentation agile refactoring codinghow motivated are you to complete rote or simple programming tasks?overall .
adjusted .
participants in the other nd group also struggled more frequently with communication or .
p .
.
no other questions in this table were significant for participants in the other nd group.
the adjusted inverse odds ratio here describes adhd participants odds of being less motivated .
time management and related challenges in our qualitative analysis posts mentioned time management explicitly mentioned inertia i.e.
trouble starting or finishing tasks and mentioned inconsistent performance.
impacted software tasks.
in our survey adhd developers struggled more frequently with time management during design brainstorming code review documentation writing debugging documentation reading and meetings p .
.
in our qualitative analysis commenters mentioned time management alongside meetings interviews agile and debugging.
one of my biggest issues is i get sucked in to my projects so much that i lose track of time.
it s even worse when i am trying to debug something.
i could easily get stuck on a problem for hours without realizing how much time has passed.
.
.
d26 in our qualitative analysis inertia was a general problem that cropped up with new projects or tasks due to overwhelm or almost finished ones due to the end stages of a project or task being boring .
in our survey adhd developers reported struggling more frequently than nt developers with inertiaduring writing documentation code review reading documentation and debugging.
it may be that writing documentation is especially hard to start because the process of coding was not traceable and hard to finish because it is subjectively tedious.
with less supportive managers consistent performance could impact stand ups with some developers sleeping through meetings or afraid to report during low performance weeks.
however as some programmers comfortably hit deadlines but had inconsistent performance week to week it could become a non issue.
i told my tech lead i slack off a lot.
.
.
he didn t notice because i deliver high quality work at a blistering pace.
.
.
if slacking off .
.
.
helps me in my work and keeps me satisfied he doesn t mind if i do it d25 .
strategies.
we identified primary strategies in our qualitative analysis used by adhd programmers to help with timerelated challenges body doubling using deadlines externalizing time taking breaks and adjusting work hours.
the most common strategies reported by adhd developers in our survey were taking breaks coworking or body doubling using routines or deadlines and timers see table iv .
we describe our qualitative results below.
developers often took breaks oradjusted their schedule to better manage their time.
one commenter encouraged another to walk away from your desk for a few minutes.
if possible go to an area that is visually thematically environmentally different.
.
.
and clear your head d69 .
several strategies helped increase motivation.
for example coworking sometimes referred to as body doubling was used as motivation to work and increase productivity.
something you could try is finding a focus buddy in your team.
.
.
where you set up games competitions accountability d68 .
deadlines were also used as motivation gamifying work and making it more exciting.
if i have a meeting at then i only have hr before that to get a task done.
it becomes a challenge to see if i can complete that task d13 .
commenters said that externalizing time e.g.
using timers helped them stay in a flow state.
one common method was the pomodoro technique which combines work sprints with breaks .
min work the timer rings minutes mandatory break.
.
.
i made a little bash script that time my cycles and notify me when it s break time or work time d15 .
the use of adhd medication and task chunking was also reported to help with managing time see v a and v c .
accommodations.
we qualitatively identified time related accommodations used by adhd programmers that we validated in our survey see table iv adjusted schedules desired granted relaxed deadlines desired granted and help from personnel e.g.
job coaches or therapists desired granted .
some programmers desired or were granted changes in work hours or vacation time.
for example one commenter advised another that .
.
.
it s not unreasonable to ask for a flexible working hours as an accommodation d7 .
developers also desired or were granted delayed or incremental deadlines .
as with task chunking incremental deadlines motivate programmers to start or complete work.
since adhd programmers can .
.
.
struggle with driving progress on long term projects when they don t have clear milestones .
.
.
asking for an accommodation for more structured work might be helpful d96 .
a few commenters also mentioned personnel or job coachingas a helpful accommodation.
if your company will pay for job coaching as an accommodation it s almost always the best way to go because a job coach will partner with you to codesign new tools strategies for task initiation that are tailored for you d96 .
given the diverse work improvements that can be explored via job coaching this accommodation may generally benefit challenges beyond time management.
adhd developers struggle with time management and inertia especially during software design writing documentation and code review rq1 .
strategies include working with others and using deadlines as motivation rq2 rq3 .
accommodations include flexible work hours adjustable deadlines and job coaching rq2 rq3 .c.
challenges involving distractions focus and environment sustained focus and flow is essential for software productivity .
in our qualitative analysis we found that adhd programmers experience distractions posts trouble context switching posts and losing focus while waiting for program runs posts .
we found three categories of distractions environmental e.g.
audio or visual noise virtual e.g.
notifications and internal i.e.
wandering thoughts .
impacted software tasks.
distractions were mentioned most frequently alongside meetings as well as interviews debugging code review and design.
one commenter mentioned .
.
.
last august i got a job but they said i couldn t pay attention in meetings and got fired.
d38 context switching was mentioned most frequently alongside meetings as well as code review interviews and version control.
it s a huge pet peeve of mine when someone asks me to jump on a quick call.
.
.
i ll need to schedule the call and have to interrupt what i was and after the call i have to get back into my flow state again d81 .
waiting for program runs was challenging during testing and version control.
compilation.
running tests.
starting up your dev server.
seconds is effing forever for me.
whatever i was thinking is just gone or i alt tab and fall down a rabbit hole d66 .
compared to nt developers adhd developers in our survey reported more frequent distractions during meetings documentation code review design and brainstorming p .
.
adhd developers also reported more trouble with context switching at work or .
p .
.
strategies.
we identified strategies adhd developers use to mitigate distractions adjusting stimuli prescribed medication and self medication.
in our survey the most common way adhd developers adjusted stimuli were adding stimuli e.g.
listening to music or fidgeting blocking distractions and changing their environment .
of respondents with adhd used prescribed medication.
we did not survey self medication as prior work has uncovered barriers to medication for adhd developers and how they may compensate .
we now describe the primary actionable strategies we identified in our qualitative analysis.
commenters often adjusted stimuli to avoid getting distracted.
this included adding stimuli blocking noise or modifying work environments.
having something to keep me busy in a way that doesn t pull my attention from the meeting is a must.
a notebook where i can take notes or doodle is great.
d13 a common method for blocking distractions in our sample was noise cancelling headphones especially in the context of open office plans.
i have noise cancelling headphones and can work with them no matter how loud it is around me.
d5 to help with waiting for program runs some commenters built scripts that remind them to return to their work when it finished.
when i need to run a cli command that takes a while i just add say all done check your terminal at the end and the computer literally tells me to go check d66 see externalizing time v b .
commenters also externalized information to remain ontask find a job that did not have as many distractors and increase communication about their need to not be disturbed see v a v e and v d for details on these strategies .
accommodations.
we identified primary accommodations that adhd developers desire and are granted to help with distractions.
in our survey the most commonly desired and granted accommodations for adhd developers for these challenges were adjusted working spaces desired granted and assistive technology desired granted .
in our qualitative analysis commenters desired or were granted adjusted environments in the form of quiet offices blocked distractions e.g.
pull request notifications or work location.
some commenters preferred working from home to block distractions while others preferred working in person to be motivated by others around them i.e.
body doubling .
commenters also mentioned assistive technology such as headphones sit stand desks or captions to mitigate distractions.
for example one commenter s company offers a larger monitor to help maintain focus d1 .
programmers with adhd struggle with distractions especially during meetings writing documentation orwaiting for software execution rq1 .
developers added stimuli e.g.
fidgeted blocked stimuli e.g.
with headphones and used medication rq2 rq3 .
helpful accommodations included adjusted working environments and assistive technology rq2 rq3 .
d. challenges involving communication misunderstandings communication within and between software teams is essential for effective development .
we found that adhd programmers struggle with misaligned communication posts and pressure from others posts .
in our survey both adhd and other nd programmers struggled with communication more than did nt programmers p .
table iii .
impacted software tasks.
in our qualitative analysis verbal misunderstandings were reported during meetings interviews and collaborative tasks e.g.
code review or mob programming .
the tasks were assigned verbally which is my weakest form of communication.
.
.
i spent months constructing an elaborate test suite for one project after i thought i was given the request to do so only to be told that it was entirely unnecessary d34 .
commenters also reported that external pressure e.g.
timed tasks or confusing demands hurt performance during interviews and code review on the spot with someone i don t know i m not going to do as well d47 .
strategies.
in our qualitative analysis we identified primary strategies used by adhd programmers to mitigate for challenges with communication taking control increasing or adjusting communication and self regulating medication use.
adhd developers increased communication to clear up misunderstandings and communicate needs.
i have a sign with sorry i m busy that i put on my desk.
.
.
.
when i m focused and people want to talk to me i try to explain they should only drag me from my hyperfocus when it s urgent.
d24 .
in our survey of adhd participants used frequent communication to aid with misunderstandings.
commenters also took control in meetings to clear up misunderstandings or make them run efficiently.
if i m feeling lost .
.
.
interrupt and ask a lot of questions.
.
.
they appreciate being heard and neither of us suffer the consequences of miscommunication so i m not shy about it d23 .
accommodations.
we identified communication related accommodations used by adhd developers.
commenters from our qualitative data desired or received accommodations for written communication andstructured feedback from bosses as it was easier to interpret and act on.
written communication such as using emails or instant messages instead of meetings wherever possible d68 removed the need to parse and recall speech.
the use of a different mode of communication generalized in our survey desired granted .
adhd programmers struggle with communication in meetings and interviews often due to misunderstandings during verbal conversations rq1 .
strategies include explicitly communicating needs or using written communication rq2 rq3 which were supported by the accommodations of an adjusted communication mode or structured feedback rq2 rq3 .
e. challenges involving alignment misaligned tasks jobs we refer to activities with social environmental or physical barriers for adhd developers as misaligned .
posts mentioned misaligned tasks and mentioned misaligned jobs.
impacted software tasks.
in our qualitative analysis feelings of misalignment were expressed during timed technical interviews daily standup and refactoring with commenters finding them stressful repetitive or inefficient.
misaligned jobs had rigid schedules required intense attention to details or heavily surveilled employees.
for me everyone leaves a bit after my mid day with on and off meetings between 1ish.
.
.
i am at peak dysfunction around that time always have been d13 .
we also found that boredom was common during misaligned tasks especially during meetings or documentation writing.
boredom can lead to lower productivity and adhd makes a challenge for things like documentation or highly repetitive low effort tasks d34 .
this validated in our survey adhd developers were less motivated to complete rote or simple tasks than nt developers p .
.
strategies.
we identified strategies that adhd developers use to help with alignment finding novelty and obtaining a better fitting job.
one of these validated in our survey of adhd participants have chosen a job based on work style fit vs. of nt p .
see table iv .
we also identified strengths that adhd developers can better leverage when in an aligned environment including creativity and hyperfocus.
in our qualitative analysis commenters sought novelty to mitigate boredom.
alternating wfh and office is a spectacular way to keep your brain thinking oh yay i m moving!
d46 .
commenters also sought better aligned jobs often leaving current jobs to do so.
such jobs had flexibility in taskallocation and scheduling work from home support limited distractions and general good engineering practices.
leveraging strengths.
we identified strengths of adhd developers that are supported by aligned environments creativity working with novelty crisis management breadth of knowledge hyperfocus and better aligned tasks.
commenters reported creativity during brainstorming and problem solving.
surveyed adhd developers reported more creativity during programming tasks vs. nt or .
p .
.
commenters also thrived with novelty noting it can give .
.
.
those with adhd a large competitive advantage d21 .
crisis management was also a strength.
i actually get better as the situation gets worse.
it s the reason why i always get promoted to manager director d12 .
commenters also reported breadth of knowledge as a strength.
a jack of all trades help understand why and how their task fits into the big picture d2 .
at aligned jobs commenters reported the ability to hyperfocus on a specific task increasing productivity.
i love to cnc program.
.
.
where it will take someone a day to release thing i usually have .
done.
.
.
i hyperfocus on it and get what needs to be done and i have a lot of fun d76 .
adhd developers in our survey reported hyperfocusing more during software tasks than nt programmers or .
p .
.
in terms of aligned tasks adhd developers reported more skill at brainstorming vs. nt or .
p .
.
both adhd or .
p .
and other nd or .
p .
reported more skill at debugging.
we note that participants that only had adhd did not report higher debugging ability associating this result with autistic participants.
these were expected results the creativity of people with adhd may lead to skill with brainstorming and attention to detail and systematizing have been linked to autism .
overall adapting software workplaces and assigned tasks to highlight strengths and remove blockers for adhd developers may be beneficial for both developers and their workplaces.
accommodations.
our survey validated one accommodation used for challenges involving alignment different task assignment desired granted .
in our qualitative analysis some commenters negotiated with their manager for more challenging work.
many commenters also desired modified technical interviews.
while some worried that asking would impact their hiring chances others said yes you can and should ask.
.
.
i had people at my company ask for a different style of assessment and it s fine d43 .
adhd programmers encounter jobs that are misaligned with their working styles e.g.
emphasize simple tasks have rigid schedules rq1 .
this can cause developers to switch jobs or desire different tasks including for interviews rq2 rq3 .
vi.
r esults adhd vs. non adhd d evelopers though the frequency or qualia of challenges experienced by adhd developers may differ for non adhd developers always most of the time about half the time sometimes neverchallenge frequencies by neurotype memory and meetings communicationdistractions and meetings inertia and writing documentation time management and designabstraction and design motivation for rote programming tasksadhd other nd nt median median medianfig.
.
frequencies for software task pairs from each challenge type that were the most challenging for adhd programmers vs. nt p .
or .
communication by software task was not asked about in our survey and thus stands alone.
our survey may have generalizable insights.
the curb cut effect when interventions for one disadvantaged group benefit a broader population occurs in many contexts .
we focus on how identified challenges affect non adhd programmers and strategies and accommodations could be introduced for more widespread support rq4 .
although all identified challenge types were experienced more frequently by adhd developers p .
they were also relevant for nt and other nd.
fig.
shows the frequencies by neurotype for the challenge task pairs that impacted adhd developers the most disproportionately.
notably the median frequency for nt and other nd was consistently sometimes or about half the time indicating that nonadhd developers experience these challenges a non trivial amount of the time.
therefore providing organizational support could be beneficial for more than just adhd developers.
table iv shows strategy frequency by neurotype.
some techniques such as blocking distractions coworking or medication were used more frequently by adhd developers p .
.
however many strategies were common regardless of neurotype such as task chunking of nt or taking breaks of nt .
even if more common for adhd developers nt developers were also likely to block distractions or add stimuli e.g.
fidgeted .
this suggests supporting these strategies may allow software companies to leverage a potential curb cut effect leading to broader productivity gains.
we have preliminary evidence that organizational support could also generalize of nt participants desired at least one organizational accommodation.
while some accommodations were desired more by adhd programmers e.g.
different job task or communication mode p .
others were desired by developers at all neurotypes at similar rates.
for example of nt participants desired an adjusted schedule compared to of adhd participants p .
see table iv .
implementing such accommodations as publiclyaccessible support options may thus benefit developers regardless of neurotype.
we discuss potential next steps in viii.table iv .
percent of adhd other nd o. nd and nt survey participants that use each strategy or desire each accommodation ordered by prevalence across all responses.
items used or desired significantly more by a group are bolded and marked teal while those used or desired less are tan 2 test bh corrected p .
.
strategy overall adhd o. nd nt task chunking blocking distractions adding stimuli choosing a better fitting job taking breaks changing environment frequent communication recording taking meeting notes task visualization regular routines deadlines timers e.g.
pomodoro coworking or body doubling prescribed medication outlined procedures desired accommodation none adjusted schedule different job tasks relaxed deadlines different communication mode adjusted working space additional notes or materials assistive technology help from personnel extra or modified training in iii we inline the percent of accommodations granted for adhd developers.
all were granted at a lower rate than desired.
vii.
t hreats to confirmability and validity qualitative threats.
our qualitative findings may not be credible to adhd programmers or other researchers .
to mitigate this we triangulate with prior work between authors and with our survey.
in addition before our analysis we read hundreds of posts on r adhd programmers familiarizing ourselves with the community via prolonged engagement .
our qualitative results may not transfer to other contexts due to negativity bias in online communities unique reddit aspects e.g.
region skew and low self efficacy seen among adhd populations .
we mitigate this by validating our results through a large scale survey of professional programmers where we ask about strengths and measure wellbeing which can inform how people cope with disability .
finally qualitative results must have a traceable process .
we collected meeting notes records of analysis passes and codebook versions.
we do not publicly release our data for ethical reasons but we include all processes related documents including codebooks in our replication package.
quantitative threats.
we use our survey to validate our qualitative findings in a different context.
however our survey may not generalize due to self selection bias and data quality.
for example participants with non standard adhd related experiences might be more likely to participate.
we note that key sample demographics align with those of github partially mitigating this concern.
to ensure data quality we use previously validated measures when possible and also employ consistency and time related data quality checks.
our participant groupings may also impact our statistical results.
due to the intersectional nature of our qualitative data we combine diagnosed and self diagnosed adhd programmers and do not consider multiple diagnoses.
we gain confidence in our approach by conducting several additional analyses with different groupings where we find minimal impacts on our overall conclusions.
for the interested reader we include these additional analyses in our replication package.
viii.
d iscussion we contextualize our results with regard to related work on neurodivergent developers and general challenges faced by software developers.
we then discuss broad categories of interventions grounded in our findings and future work.
a. comparison to related work we consider related work at the intersection of adhd and professional programming.
morris et al.
identified challenges disproportionately impacting neurodivergent programmers via a survey of software engineers neurodivergent .
they found that .
of neurodivergent participants desired but had not asked for or received accommodations.
while participants had adhd they grouped all neurodivergent participants in their analysis.
some identified challenges were similar to ours including difficulties focusing on tasks and with workplace communication.
common strengths found between our work and theirs were hyperfocus and creativity divergent thinking .
however many identified themes were different e.g.
challenges with handling changes in routine and a strength in detecting patterns in code .
in a study on substance use in software newman et al.
found that out of participants had adhd and used medication e.g.
adderall as a strategy at work reporting improved productivity at most software tasks .
kasatskii et al.
found a significant effect of visual noise and adhd symptoms on debugging efficiency but the effect was not direct .
in a qualitative study with participants gama et al.
found that agile practices such as effort estimates may reduce efficiency for adhd developers .
liebel et al.
studied the challenges strategies and strengths of adhd developers in a case study of interviewees.
several of the challenges and strategies we identified replicate those in the case study including distractions time management medication and taking breaks.
we also identified new challenges e.g.
abstraction and waiting for program runs and strategies e.g.
task chunking and using deadlines as motivation .
we are also the first to identify software task specific challenges for adhd programmers to research accommodations for adhd programmers to map strategies and accommodations to challenges they may mitigate for and to generalize these findings via a large scale survey.b.
contextualization with general software challenges for all challenge types we find evidence from our survey that adhd developers are affected more frequently than neurotypical developers.
these broad challenge types may affect developers generally meaning that interventions which support adhd developers could lead to widespread benefit .
memory is vital for navigating large codebases.
limitations of human memory can impact software engineering and development tools can be used as aids .
working in a distracting environment can also challenge neurotypical programmers.
in a control trial ma et al.
found that both automated and interpersonal distractions can lead to increased physiological stress during software development .
developers can also struggle with time management.
one study on time pressure in software engineering found that time pressure often caused by errors in cost estimation can lead to decreased software quality .
poor communication within software teams or unaligned task allocation can decrease team productivity.
our survey demonstrates that these challenges impact adhd programmers disproportionately.
we also found that they can impact adhd programmers in unique ways.
for example while communication can be a challenge for software teams in general the preference for written communication is more associated with adhd general works focus on the amount of communication rather than the modality .
similarly a distraction for someone with adhd such as a passing thought might not be a distraction for someone neurotypical prior work focuses on environmental distractions .
c. interventions and future work given adhd developers strengths and challenges we provide recommendations for interventions that may help them excel.
since official accommodations can be risky to obtain and are underused we propose general interventions that have the potential to not only help adhd software engineers but also software engineers at large.
we propose changes to workplace structures such as incremental deadlines and information scaffolding flexibility in task allocation work hours and work from home status time blocking and asynchronous communication for meetings and publiclyavailable assistive technology such as headphones or stim objects i.e.
fidget toys .
many of these align with software engineering best practices.
for example asynchronous communication is important for global software teams and incremental deadlines often used in agile aid with cost estimations and scope creep .
we recognize that certain environments may not admit all changes e.g.
a startup may not be able to flexibly allocate tasks .
however we believe that at least one could be implemented in most environments.
based off our findings we propose technological interventions targeting increasing flow i.e.
periods of focused work which is identifiable via log data .
tools which notify programmers upon program run completion could mitigate for unnecessary context switching some forum commenters built their own.
in ide games could also help with wait times as gamification and fidgeting have been shown to improvefocus and learning for people with adhd .
finally ai summarization in meetings e.g.
in could be used to assist working memory.
distractions during meetings was the most frequent challenge for both adhd and non adhd developers making it salient to target for widespread change.
future work may benefit from objective measures of behavioral outcomes with our identified support mechanisms.
in this work we use subjective measures and experiences of adhd developers observational or experimental work is needed to see if identified support translates to outcomes e.g.
improvements in accuracy or time efficiency .
for tool or policybuilding we recommend using participatory design to determine what tools adhd developers find useful.
ix.
c onclusion adhd is common among software developers.
however adhd developers can struggle disproportionately with certain software tasks and support options are not well understood.
we conducted a mixed methods study of adhd professional programmers a qualitative analysis of reddit posts and comments and a survey of professional programmers.
we propose the first software task specific mapping between adhd developers challenges strategies and accommodations.
we are also the first to study adhd developer accommodations finding that many could support both adhd and neurotypical programmers alike.
our findings have implications for tools and policies supporting adhd programmers along with potential lightweight changes for software workplaces.
these include changes to workplace structures e.g.
incremental deadlines work environment flexibility e.g.
work from home support time blocked meetings publiclyaccessible assistive technology e.g.
noise canceling headphones task allocation flexibility e.g.
allowing developers to choose tasks and prioritized written communication .
we believe that software workplaces that invest in this way could see increased productivity in not just adhd developers but more generally.
we hope our work leads to more inclusive software environments for developers of all neurotypes.