can an llm find its way around a spreadsheet?
cho ting lee thesis submitted to the f aculty of the virginia polytechnic institute and state university in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of master of science in computer science and applications naren ramakrishnan chair chang tien lu john simeone may 2nd arlington virginia keywords llms data cleaning end user programming copyright cho ting leecan an llm find its way around a spreadsheet?
cho ting lee abstract spreadsheets are routinely used in business and scientific contexts and one of the most vexing challenges data analysts face is performing data cleaning prior to analysis and evaluation.
the ad hoc and arbitrary nature of data cleaning problems such as typos inconsistent formatting missing values and a lack of standardization often creates the need for highly specialized pipelines.
w e ask whether an llm can find its way around a spreadsheet and how to support end users in taking their free form data processing requests to fruition.
just like rag retrieves context to answer users queries we demonstrate how we can retrieve elements from a code library to compose data processing pipelines.
through comprehensive experiments we demonstrate the quality of our system and how it is able to continuously augment its vocabulary by saving new codes and pipelines back to the code library for future retrieval.can an llm find its way around a spreadsheet?
cho ting lee general audience abstract spreadsheets are frequently utilized in both business and scientific settings and one of the most challenging tasks that must be accomplished before analysis and evaluation can take place is the cleansing of the data.
the ad hoc and arbitrary nature of issues in data quality such as typos inconsistent formatting missing values and lack of standardization often creates the need for highly specialized data cleaning pipelines.
within the scope of this thesis we investigate whether a large language model llm can navigate its way around a spreadsheet as well as how to assist end users in bringing their free form data processing requests to fruition.
just like retrieval augmented generation rag retrieves context to answer user queries we demonstrate how we can retrieve elements from a python code reference to compose data processing pipelines.
through comprehensive experiments we showcase the quality of our system and how it is capable of continuously improving its code writing ability by saving new codes and pipelines back to the code library for future retrieval.