code today deadline tomorrow procrastination among software developers zeinabsadat saghi thomas zimmermann souti chattopadhyay department of computer science university of southern california los angeles ca usa department of informatics university of california irvine ca usa abstract procrastination the action of delaying or postponing something is a well known phenomenon that is relatable to all.
while it has been studied in academic settings little is known about why software developers procrastinate.
how does it affect their work?
how can developers manage procrastination?
this paper presents the first investigation of procrastination among developers.
we conduct an interview study with n developers across different industries to understand the process of procrastination.
using qualitative coding we report the positive and negative effects of procrastination and factors that triggered procrastination as perceived by participants.
we validate our findings using member checking.
our results reveal negative effects of procrastination on developer productivity.
however participants also reported eight positive effects four impacting their satisfaction.
we also found that participants reported three categories of factors that trigger procrastination task related personal and external.
finally we present techniques reported by our participants and studies in other domains that can help developers mitigate the impacts of procrastination.
these techniques focus on raising awareness and task focus help with task planning and provide pathways to generate team support as a mitigation means.
based on these findings we discuss interventions for developers and recommendations for tool building to reduce procrastination.
our paper shows that procrastination has unique effects and factors among developers compared to other populations.
index terms developer experience procrastination productivity i. i ntroduction procrastination delaying tasks until later is relatable to most of us.
psychologists and neuroscientists have explored how procrastination manifests presenting various perspectives on procrastination.
while steel defines procrastination as a voluntary delay of an intended course of action despite expecting to be worse off for the delay wolters et al.
frames it as a failure of self regulatory behavior towards a desired goal .
this psychological phenomenon has been studied mostly in an academic setting where studies report to of college students occasionally procrastinate and of college students chronically procrastinate .
studies also report the various impacts of procrastination among students such as higher stress and depression as well as lower grades and performance .
while there have been anecdotal reports from software developers on procrastination and how to overcome the related challenges procrastination among software developers has not been studied in detail.
software development is a unique and important area to explore procrastination.
developers oftenwork long hours on abstract and complex tasks that require high focus which puts high cognitive load and stress on developers enabling procrastination.
development tasks involve frequent collaboration among people with varying interests and skills and so towards building and maintaining massive intertwined software systems procrastination by one can affect all others and the product.
understanding procrastination in software developers is important as it might affects developers productivity mental health and well being as well as the software produced by these developers.
it is becoming increasingly important to study human aspects of software development such as happiness work life balance burnout and adhd in the face of high pace development under immense pressure of job security and uncertainty posed by ai advances.
the goal of this paper is to study the factors that instigate and the consequences of procrastination and gather helpful strategies and techniques to mitigate the negative effects of this process while letting developers reap the positive effects.
our investigation involves asking three core questions rq1 how does procrastination affect developer s work?
rq2 what factors trigger developer s procrastination at work?
rq3 how can developers manage procrastination?
understanding the effects of procrastination rq1 on developers work is the essential first step as existing research in other domains shows both negative and positive outcomes but lacks exploration of its unique impacts on developers.
exploring the factors that trigger procrastination rq2 builds on this by examining factors specific to software development as studies have shown that procrastination varies across work contexts .
finally rq3 helps us to find actionable strategies and insights for the developers to mitigate procrastination.
to answer these questions we conducted semi structured interviews with developers across seven industries.
we validated our findings by member checking with the developers.
our participants identified various perceived negative effects of procrastination but also point to some positive effects section iv .
procrastination has the highest negative impact on performance affecting the quality of code and the ability of the team to deliver features on time.
however it also has some positive effects on satisfaction and wellbeing.
participants also identified several factors that trigger procrastination which we categorized into three groups taskrelated e.g.
vague tasks can lead to procrastination personal ieee acm 47th international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee the mental and physical state of developer and external e.g.
communication issues with team members section v .
finally we discuss mitigation strategies that help with procrastination section vi that are reported by our participants and identified by other disciplines like behavioral science and clinical psychology including overlap .
these include identifying triggers and approaching day to day tasks with a new perspective.
based on these findings we discuss how developers can apply these mitigation strategies how tool builders can assist in managing procrastination and the productivity implications of procrastination on developers.
ii.
r elated work a. developer s work life the demanding nature of software development has prompted extensive studies on developers health and worklife balance.
research highlights the importance of developers mental state and happiness .
graziotin et al.
found that unhappiness negatively affects the development process and outcomes .
benlian reported that agile practices while human centric can lead to fatigue and reduced well being.
sarkar et al.
revealed severe and frequent fatigue among developers.
liebel et al.
studied adhd among engineers and proposed workplace recommendations.
similar to adhd and burnout procrastination also impacts well being but remains unexplored in software development.
b. procrastination in other domains even though procrastination in software development has not been studied academic procrastination among students has been well researched .
a study by zer et al.
among university students found that procrastination decreases life satisfaction.
however hen et al.
discovered that while academic procrastinators desire to change their habits they do not report significant feelings of discomfort when procrastinating.
although research indicates that procrastination generally reduces academic success the findings differ for academic staff.
asio noted that academic staff members often procrastinate but this behavior does not negatively correlate with their productivity at work.
vere sov a found stress teachers experience is highly related to procrastination.
a study by liu et al.
on full time employees in multinational corporations revealed that life satisfaction age and parental status are predictive factors of procrastination.
literature often discusses two types of procrastination.
active procrastination is intentionally delaying a task especially when deadline pressure causes satisfaction .
whereas passive procrastination is an unintentional delay that leads to negative effects like reduced productivity .
in this paper we explore both types of procrastination among software developers.
we will identify its effects contributing factors different types and potential mitigation strategies.
iii.
m ethodology we conducted a qualitative study and collected data from professional developers through semi structured interviews.we then analyzed the data using qualitative coding and validated our findings by member checking with the participants.
it is important to note that our findings are based on participants perceived effects and the factors that trigger this behavior.
a. identifying list of factors from literature we reviewed recent literature on procrastination focusing on its definitions and influencing factors in computer science and psychology.
searches were conducted in acm digital library psycinfo and google scholar using keywords related to procrastination factors and definitions.
we included english language articles from the past ten years published in high quality venues and relevant keywords in the title and abstract.
a forward and backward citation search was also performed.
we reviewed papers on the definition of procrastination and seven on factors.
based on the categorization by nickdoost et al.
we grouped the literature factors into task characteristics task interest level unclear task task workload task urgency skill proficiency internal mental state physical state fear of failure other obligations external distractions .
additionally two researchers identified new factors task ambiguity importance and learning requirements that they hypothesized to trigger procrastination in software development.
b. semi structured interviews we conducted minute online interviews to gather data on participants procrastination habits and insights.
these sessions were recorded transcribed and de identified.
participants completed a screening survey on demographics attention disorders e.g.
adhd and procrastination factors.
participants received a usd amazon gift card as compensation.
interview design given that procrastination extends beyond work life the interviewer reminded participants to focus on their role as developers.
participants were assured of confidentiality and consent for audio recording was obtained.
initial questions aimed to understand the participant s work role as a developer typical project timelines motivation and the impact of deadlines.
in the core section participants were first asked to define procrastination using real life examples.
concepts of active and passive procrastination from the literature were introduced and participants reflected on these types.
then using the obtained list of factors from iii a we asked participants whether these factors affect their procrastination at work defining it as putting off work until a later time for clarity.
the interview concluded with a summary of participants overall perception of their procrastination habits and any mitigation techniques they had attempted all questions in supplementary .
some main questions are shown below how do you define procrastination in the context of work as a developer?
what makes you choose active procrastination?
what type of tasks are you more likely to procrastinate on?
21205table i participant demographic information pt age job title expwork settingindustry p1 sw dev intern hybrid software p2 sw engineer in person marketing p3 sw engineer remote software p4 eng manager remote ins.
p5 sw dev hybrid fin.
p6 sr res engineer remote software p7 app.
scientist in person e commerce p8 sr staff sw eng remote software p9 res scientist hybrid a e p10 data engineer hybrid a e p11 sw engineer in person software p12 38data eng.
manager3 in person a e p13 data engineer hybrid a e p14 data engineer hybrid fin.
p15 applied scientist hybrid software pt participant id exp years of experience ins.
insurance technology fin.
personal finance a e automotive energy how does procrastination affect your productivity?
have you ever attempted to overcome procrastination?
the interview questions and recruitment strategies were approved by the university s institutional review board irb .
participants we recruited participants women men strategically for a balanced gender experience work settings and industry distribution as these factors have been associated with procrastination .
in our study we recruited developers from different roles that are involved in the development lifecycle and not just programming.
they were recruited via convenience and snowball sampling.
table i lists details of the participants average age was years eight participants had years of software development experience and seven had 6years.
our exclusion criteria eliminated participants with self reported cognitive disorders and those with 3years of experience as we posit they may have confounding factors driving their procrastination.
c. data analysis open coding one researcher de identified and cleaned the transcript after each interview and two researchers coded them using the open coding method with no prior codes or factors.
two researchers updated the codebook after analyzing each interview.
for example in one instance p4 mentioned let s start on the negative side.
i think other people are kind of waiting for you if the other team is waiting for you to do something.
this response was coded as causing dependency during thematic analysis this was categorized under negative effects as the participant emphasized the negative aspect of their experience.
to check the reliability of codes two researchers performed irr through multiple rounds of coding on randomly selected units of transcription until they reached an agreement of .
p .13e .
due to limited data availability we coded one participant at a time.
to mitigate this limitation we performed subsequent rounds of irr onunits of transcripts randomly selected from participants in all subsequent rounds we reach a .
.
after the 15th interview we noticed that we reached data saturation as no new information or themes emerged from the interview.
analysis to address the research questions the researcher used inductive thematic analysis with open coding inductive coding followed by axial coding to identify the themes .
irr is used in the open coding step of thematic analysis to rigorously generate reliable codes which combats interpretability bias in inductive coding.
we only used irr for the open inductive coding step of thematic analysis and didn t use irr in the theme generation step codebooks and themes in supplementary .
it is worth mentioning that differentiating between prioritization and procrastination can be challenging as both involve decisions about task management and timing.
however they stem from different motivations and lead to different outcomes.
during detailed interviews we were able to recognize participants motivations and clearly distinguish these two behaviors.
rq1 to answer rq1 we looked into how literature defines various dimensions of a developer s work life.
previous studies have shown that factors such as mental health and productivity significantly impact developers work life .
building on this research we examined the effects of procrastination on five dimensions of work crucial to software development adopted from the space framework developers satisfaction and overall well being activity communication and collaboration performance and efficiency and flow space .
we conducted a qualitative analysis and found codes representing the impact of procrastination on developers work lives codes indicated negative effects and codes indicated positive effects.
two researchers then grouped these codes into five dimensions through axial coding.
in the second round the researchers independently analyzed the negative effects merging similar effects to finalize distinct effects.
for example codes like guilt self loathing shame anddisappointment were combined into emotional distress .
similarly two researchers performed independent axial coding on positive effects and reached eight final themes for positive effects.
for instance the chance to explore and alternative solution merged into finding better ideas because both these codes indicated procrastination give a chance to find a better solution by exploring other options.
rq2 to answer rq2 as a result of open coding we identified codes from interviews representing factors that triggered participants procrastination.
then two researchers performed axial coding on the codes and came to thematic codes presenting various factors of procrastination.
further two researchers categorized these factors into three groups task related personal and external factors.
rq3 to find the mitigation techniques two researchers coded participants responses to our mitigation strategy questions and identified codes.
researchers merged techniques with similar contexts and agreed on the final techniques.
validation after conducting the qualitative analysis we performed member checking with our participants.
our initial 31206findings on the effects and factors of procrastination as well as the types of procrastination were sent to the participants for feedback.
all participants agreed with the results and seven participants responded with additional positive feedback stating they found our results insightful see supplementary .
iv.
h ow does procrastination affect work?
in the interviews participants elaborated on their understanding of procrastination and its positive and negative effects on their work.
in this section we discussed the effects in detail negative effects are indicated with times and positives with .
a. negative effects of procrastination on participants s work we examine the negative effects of procrastination which were discussed in the interviews.
table ii lists negative effects with definitions and examples.
the ptscolumn uses a dot plot to show which participants mentioned each effect the first row represents p1 p5 the second row p6 p10 and the third row p11 p15.
the freq column shows the total mentions per effect e.g.
timespersonal life disruption was cited six times by p2 and p5.
effects are grouped into five work dimensions indicated by row separators.
we discuss the negative impact of procrastination for each dimension.
satisfaction well being.
all participants mentioned suffering from timesemotional distress stemming from a nagging discomfort personal disappointment guilt or frustration .
beyond the impact on personal values p11 mentioned feeling social shame that impacted their perception of how others judge them i don t know where shame is coming from other than my sense of feeling i should be this and not being able to fulfill that.
participants experienced high levels of timesanxiety stress due to procrastination.
seven participants reported it led to experiencing a huge amount of stress due to not starting the task sooner .
p2 mentioned it could be stressful like coming up to the deadline for the thing that you re procrastinating .
it was a lot.
stress and anxiety created a downward spiral intensifying each other and ultimately causing not being able to finish the task .
three participants mentioned frequent procrastination at work could convert to the habit of delaying things and over time it reduced their timeswork life balance .
p2 said if you re delaying stuff enough and you re it too often then you just kind of become lackadaisical.
performance.
out of participants mentioned four negative effects of procrastination on the performance dimension.
participants mentioned that procrastination caused timesreduced individual performance at work for writing lowquality code or delayed delivery .
further six participants directly associated procrastination with reduced performance evaluation ratings .
p2 explained the relation between procrastination and performance stating i think affects the quality.
and that in turn affects productivity.
because if something has less quality i ll have to work more on it.
seven participants reported procrastination caused timesmore technical debt through delays and unresolved dependencies hindering test or other dependent tasks and leaving issues unresolved .
eight participants highlighted procrastination s role in timesteam performance degradation .
three participants described how one member s procrastination delayed team tasks negatively impacting the team or business .
p4 a manager shared that procrastination in some team members caused the whole team to wait to give feedback on the designs for subsequent tasks.
participants who experienced these delays shared that the team has to work a lot harder to finish the task to avoid missing a deliverable and eventually hurting the image of the team in other s perception.
five participants reported that procrastination at work results in timesmissed deadlines .
participants emphasized the notion that procrastination created a chain of delays where subsequent tasks and overall projects become late or aren t going to be met!
.
p11 summarized the effect of procrastination on performance stating y ou hear of people getting lower ratings for not having a significant impact through the year might be a direct result of procrastinating on important projects.
activity.
seven participants directly linked their procrastination to timesproducing less code .
eventually they didn t have enough time to implement everything necessary for the task writing fewer lines of code they committed .
participants noted that this resulted in finishing fewer features or not completing the number of story points they committed to.
beyond these procrastination affects team activities like code reviews.
p9 explained in this if you re procrastinating on reviewing someone s code you re not leaving a lot of comments.
p11 associated procrastination with all the that didn t get done resulting in reduced activity.
communication collaboration.
participants noted that procrastination timesstrained team culture and created a negative social reputation for the procrastinator which all generates an obstacle in having effective and good communication with team members or reduced collaboration opportunities with other teams .
participants further linked procrastination to lowered quality of team communication due to causing stress inconsistent update .
p2 elaborated as going to be communicating better if not as stressed because of procrastination .
delayed delivery of a task or waiting until the last minute can cause timesweakening of trust between coworkers .
p4 shared i know from now on this person is going to take longer to get back on something.
p12 shared how he felt people lose trust in his contributions when he procrastinates during a collaboration.
efficiency flow.
participants mentioned negative effects on their efficiency and flow.
nine participants cited the need to make a timescompensatory effort for delays caused by procrastination.
when participants procrastination made them 41207table ii negative effects times ofprocrastination grouped into five dimensions of work .
negative effect definition example pts freq satisfaction well being emotional distressexperiencing feelings of guilt shame frustration and dissatisfaction.
i generally don t feel good if i miss a deadline and knowing that i do my best to meet them.
anxiety stress increased levels of anxiety and stress resulting from close deadlines and incomplete tasks.
the negative effect is that i feel more anxious so the increase the level of anxiety.
lower work life balancenegative repercussions on personal life manifesting as poor work life balance.
the effect is on me especially and as regards my personal life.
performance reduced indiv.
performancelower individual performance such as low quality code and performance ratings.
you know it s kind of like becomes a performance issue and that person is going to have a lower performance.
more technical debtcreating unresolved issues or dependencies that complicate future project stages.
in that situation i think it is a dependency and things are getting left behind.
reduced team performancethe aggregated impact on team performance and morale when individual delays affect group projects.
there are some consequences for the team and the business.
missed deadlinesdirect outcomes of procrastination lead to delayed deliverables and failure to meet deadlines.
effect is the delay on the deliverable.
the one thing that everything becomes late activity less produced codereduced number of delivered code or features that need to be delivered by the deadline.
sometimes i produce less code finish fewer features.
communication collaboration strained team culturestrained relationships and disrupted team dynamics due to inconsistent task completion and delay in delivery.
procrastinating and not getting anything done for no reason or multiple times in a row is definitely going to affect their image and reputation particularly.
weakening of trustdestruction of trust among team members and supervisors due to recurrent procrastination.
trust also gets a little hurt.
efficiency flow compensatory effortthe necessity to make additional efforts to compensate for delays caused by procrastination.
and you wind up pulling late nights and working extra hours and the whole process is not particularly fun.
workflow disruptionbreaks or interruptions in the flow of work due to delaying tasks.
if i delay it it might interrupt something else that i have to do cascading delaysa cascading effect where initial delays lead to further delay in the project timeline.
if i m procrastinating and i can t finish the task then that story has to get moved to the next sprint financial implicationsincreased cost allocation to tackle missed deadlines.
.
.
.
because this deadline was missed.
we missed this many millions of dollars in hypothetical revenue inefficient spending less time than needed on a task during work hours they had to spend their non work time to meet the deadline.
participants had to put in all nighters stay up later at work with coworkers and stay at work after pm .
p12 indicated that compensation for the delay was at the expense of his personal time as well.
nine participants shared how procrastination caused timesworkflow disruption .
some participants reported that procrastination interrupted their flow while others shared how procrastination eventually prolonged the flow by making more work for later .
p11 shared his struggles with maintaining flow due to procrastination i m missing out on not sustaining tasks for an hour or two hours at a time.
five participants found procrastination caused timescascading of delays throughout the project .
participants mentioned that delaying one task creates a domino effect of delays and sometimes the gets moved to the next sprint.
this decreases the efficiency of the sprint and overall project progress.
four participants shared that procrastination caused timesnegative financial implications including missed deadlinesleading to financial consequences and less revenue for the organization .
b. positive effects of procrastination on work.
table iii lists the eight positive effects of procrastination along with their definition and examples.
here we discuss the positive of procrastination along each dimension.
satisfaction well being.
overall out of participants mentioned one of the positive effects in this dimension.eight participants reported improvement in their mental state when they procrastinated by taking breaks .
taking breaks helped to avoid burnouts caused by complex and long term projects.
it also improved their mood brought happiness and refreshed their mind .
p11 summarized this effect stating taking a step away from this and delaying your work on it can actually allow you to come back with a fresh mindset.
four participants found procrastination beneficial when used as a short term stress relief technique.
participants highlighted the role of following the immediate feelings and impulses to procrastinate in increasing their overall satisfaction and well being.
when faced with stressful scenarios 51208table iii positive effects ofprocrastination grouped into five dimensions of work .
positive effect definition example pts freq.
satisfaction well being taking breaks mental and physical recovery due to long tasks.
maybe i ll have a better day of working if we stay like an extra couple minutes at lunch short term stress relieftemporary relief from stress through brief avoidance of the task.
i have noticed the benefits would probably be more of a destressing kind of tool .
.
.
short term de stressing.
time for personal taskscompleting personal responsibilities contributing to a better work life balance.
meanwhile someone else is the work.
so i m procrastinating.
but like i m benefiting from it indirectly.
increased confidenceenhanced self confidence by managing delayed tasks in a short time near the deadline.
you get to realize how like how good you are at working things really quickly.
performance better creativity having more time for reflection exploration and generating ideas.
during an eight hour day aside from a lunch break taking a five to ten minute break every hour can be very beneficial.
activity avoiding unnecessary workdelays in addressing a task leads to the issue resolving itself saving effort and resources.
somebody makes a decision that overrides what you were going to build anyway where there s unstable decision making in a company like that can resolve itself.
communication collaboration socializing at workengaging in conversations and building relationships at work.
if we are really talking about interesting topics and to me that is kind of procrastination for work that needs to get done.
efficiency flow near deadline efficiencyincreased short term efficiency close to the deadline.
definitely if there is a deadline it s gonna be peak efficiency.
or complex tasks participants delay starting the task to gain short term happiness .
however they noted that in the long term probably won t be good as it decreases productivity with p7 acknowledging initial comfort turning into frustration as deadlines loomed and tasks remained incomplete.
three participants stated procrastination helped them to focus on tasks.
and have time for equally important things from the personal side even at the expense of delaying the task at work .
two participants claimed a task in a short amount of time gives them some self confidence of being capable of the task.
performance.
five participants mentioned the positive impact of procrastination on their performance at work.
five participants credited procrastination with better creativity for their problem or solution approach .
participants found procrastinating on a task earned them more time to think a lot about before actually writing the code and explore other ideas .
participants also shared that procrastinating by switching to a familiar task triggered a novel solution in their minds .
p10 illustrated working on task a in the back of brain thinking maybe could do task b like this like this and already sort of an idea!
activity.
five participants recognized that procrastination helps to avoid unnecessary work on tasks they didn t actually need that feature the group solved the problem themselves or the task was no longer a big priority .
additionally delaying tasks due to unstable decisionmaking or unclear project scope turned out to be beneficial as it helped avoid re stuff .communication collaboration.
three participants found procrastination increases socializing at work .
p15 elaborated if you re procrastinating and engaging in conversation with your coworkers you re socializing and improving your social connections.
participants found spending extra time during breaks to talk to team members or having lunch together helped build their network and have a super engaged team.
efficiency flow.
eight participants experienced increased short term near deadline efficiency as their deadlines approached .
p7 explained when he procrastinated and near the deadline tries to be as efficient as possible spends more time on that.
arrow circle righ summary our findings revealed that procrastination has both negative and positive effects.
it negatively impacted developers well being leading to lower performance reduced code quality and fewer delivered features.
however some participants highlighted benefits such as enhanced creativity and near deadline efficiency.
v. w hat factors trigger procrastination at work ?
to understand how we can mitigate the negative effects of procrastination while preserving positive ones we need to first identify the factors that trigger procrastination.
during the interview participants identified and elaborated on new factors that triggered procrastination.
from the qualitative analysis we identified distinct factors which we grouped into three categories as shown in table iv.
task related factors.
all participants noted that their bol interest in the task influenced procrastination.
three par61209table iv procrastination factors with their categories .
category factors frequency task related task interest level 15p subjective importance 13p task difficulty level 13p task vagueness 12p task complexity 9p skill proficiency 7p dependency on others 3p personal mental state 12p physical state 11p uncertainty 9p fear of failure 5p personal responsibilities 4p fear of judgment 5p deadline pressure 3p external distractions 11p work relationships 3p task hierarchy 5p communication issues 9p the frequency of each factor during the interview and the number of participants is shown next to each factor in parenthesis with and p deceptively bolded factors reported by participants and are not found in the literature section iii a .
ticipants procrastinated more when they lacked interest or intrinsic motivation with p5 stating i like coding more than writing so i procrastinate less on coding.
additionally participants procrastinated more on tasks they considered of low bol subjective importance or value .
p13 observed i ve seen a pattern that if the task is not as important as they make it sound then i tend to procrastinate sometimes.
participants procrastinated differently based on bol task difficulty .
some participants procrastinated on easy tasks that they were confident they could finish quickly or had done before .
two participants mentioned they started working early on tasks they have not done before or are not good at as it was difficult to estimate how long the task would take.
whereas six participants mentioned that they procrastinated on both too hard and too easy tasks.
p11 clarified if the task is super easy or the task is super hard i think i m more likely to procrastinate it.
when a task was too easy participants delayed working on it as they could make a good time estimation and were confident they could finish it in time .
whereas if the task was too difficult they delayed it until another developer joined or they lost interest in the task .
participants mentioned bol vagueness in task definitions or project scope triggered procrastination.
participants specifically mentioned that committing to a task with undefined goals or unclear project scope is unwise.
participants tended to delay working on vague tasks until further information was provided as p15 indicated that i was procrastinating and just waiting for other people to give me some guideline or instruction.
additionally p12 highlighted vagueness is more prevalent in the initial phases of the project since everything is not well defined.
eight participants tended to procrastinate more on time consuming and complex tasks that needed more effort like reviewing the whole code base or finding more information on task .
five participants mentioned that whether they delayed a task was affected by their bol skill proficiency e.g.
the level of their knowledge of the task or skill in the task.
p5 indicated that he found himself procrastinating more on tasks where little knowledge of what while p15 procrastinated on tasks that did not align with her background.
four participants mentioned that the learning requirement was another factor when the number of resources for learning was high or thecontent was complex to learn they postponed it to a later time.
participants mentioned they procrastinate on a task that doesn t impact or help a lot of users .
additionally procrastination in two participants depended on deadlines.
for instance p1 mentioned because there are no fixed deadlines and no strict deadlines then delaying stuff too .
another participant mentioned if the task had a faraway deadline he had a safe feeling of still having more time until deadline that triggered him to delay .
three participants postponed tasks that had bol dependencies on others .
as p13 explained when needs help from someone tends to delay just because it depends on somebody else.
personal factors.
participants noted distorted bol mental state gave rise to procrastination.
participants mentioned not being in the mood to do a task or having stress and anxiety provoked procrastination.
p5 clarified that procrastination in such situations is the shutdown kind of procrastination.
like too stressed.
can t deal with this .
compromised bol physical health was also noted by nine participants as procrastination factor.
sickness and fatigue set off procrastination as p13 explained it s not a task i can do right now because i have had less sleep i can t focus.
so i tend to procrastinate.
bol uncertainty about how to approach a task also initiated procrastination for seven participants.
the uncertainty stemmed from not knowing how to start the task how long it will take or when participants don t know what to do to finish the task .
five participants reported procrastinating due to bol fear of failure from missing deadlines or making mistakes .
p1 noted when fears may not accomplish right away leaves it for tomorrow and like the day after.
bol personal duties like parenting personal crises and family time were also cited as factors by five participants.
four participants mentioned bol fear of judgment from colleagues as a trigger such as concerns about being criticized for their knowledge or task performance .
surprisingly four participants justified procrastinating until the deadline as they respond positively and well to bol deadline pressure .
participants intentionally procrastinated to create urgency as pressure brought a sense of enjoyment or fun to burn through and get it all done .
external factors.
participants noted bol distraction form various sources prompted procrastination like browsing on 71210social media platforms colleagues dropping by their desks and prolonged chat during lunch breaks .
additionally participants found working remotely caused more distraction hence more procrastination .
bol relationship dynamics among team members influenced nine participants procrastination.
lack of compatible relationship between participants and team members or the manager increased the likelihood of procrastination.
participants elaborated more on this factor by indicating that conflicts over task implementation or task priority led to prolonged unclear projects which in turn increased procrastination .
five participants cited that bol task hierarchy i.e.
assigned by high ranking individuals were prioritized to avoid delaying critical work or to gain visibility from those individuals .
p10 implied i m more likely to procrastinate something that gives me less visibility to leadership.
so if a leader is more likely to notice the work that i did i m not going to procrastinate that .
bol bad communication with colleagues elicited procrastination in three participants.
participants mentioned that consistent direct communication prevented procrastination .
p4 experienced less procrastination in the office as he could easily go to talk to his colleagues about tasks.
procrastination types.
by clustering the factors that trigger procrastination we identified three additional procrastination types that further refine active and passive procrastination.
task aversion.
we observed that participants often engaged in procrastination when they were adverse to a task.
this aversion could stem from several aspects of the task lack of interest the task s nature perceived value or lack of immediate rewards.
task avoidance.
participants reported avoiding and delaying task due to overwhelming anxiety or fear of failure driven by internal pressures affecting their mental state rather than strategic or logical reasoning.
strategic procrastination.
participants also engaged in strategic procrastination intentionally delaying tasks not due to distractions or lack of motivation but as a deliberate strategy to enhance productivity.
arrow circle righ summary we identified task related personal and external factors triggering procrastination which manifested in three forms.
developers avoided tasks that misaligned with their interests aversion delayed complex tasks to recover mentally avoidance and prioritized high visibility tasks while strategically delaying others strategic .
vi.
h ow can developers manage procrastination ?
with an understanding of the triggers and effects of procrastination we investigate strategies and techniques to manage this phenomenon.
we asked participants what strategies do you use to mitigate procrastination at work?
participants identified procrastination mitigation techniques which we further categorized into awareness task focus task planning and team support groups section iii .
the mitigation techniques are presented in table v along with their implications and specific productivity dimensions prod.
the techniqueshelp userin the source column indicates participants who mentioned along with the total frequency of mention elists literature from other domains supporting some of the techniques discussed in section vii a. awareness.
shield altprogress patterns.
three participants mentioned that keeping track of their progress helped discover the onset of procrastination and modify their behavior.
p11 elaborated that by keeping his progress pattern can look back and say at one o clock when did this was procrastinating and maybe can learn from that in the future.
shield altproactive measures suggested by four participants suggests being conscious of procrastination before committing to it.
p2 and p10 indicated proactively controlling the effect stating once i m aware that i m procrastinating i m always trying to figure out how to prevent that from happening again in the future .
finally shield altinforming others of the delay caused by procrastination helped mitigate the future consequences as mentioned by three participants.
the notification allows other team members to devise new strategies to see if they can still do something about it .
p10 emphasized y ou have to communicate very early on that the deadline will be missed and then justify why.
as long as you can do those things you can keep your job.
task focus.
shield altdaily task planning.
following a daily personalized task list helped participants to avoid procrastination by prioritizing tasks and avoid deviating toward prevalent tasks .
p7 highlighted that he has a schedule that prevents him from delaying things.
shield altinterest performance trade off.
five participants prevented procrastinating on a task they don t like by balancing it with other tasks they like in their daily schedule .
p3 mentioned uninteresting tasks during the energetic times of the day helped limit procrastination.
p7 illustrated let s say of your tasks are very likable not that much.
y ou choose one task you like and one you don t each day.
if you start it for a while you get used to it.
shield alttimeboxing fake deadlines.
five participants mitigated procrastination by applying the time boxing and creating artificial deadlines closer than the actual deadline to avoid the perception of having plenty of time.
p2 exemplified that if the actual deadline is three weeks from now i write down that i can only work on this for the next two weeks that helps with the procrastination.
shield altremoving distractions.
six participants noted they mitigated procrastination by achieving focus and removing distractions .
participants physically removed the sources of distraction reducing the temptation to engage with it .
p4 stated when he got distracted by his phone would literally just throw phone in a drawer and say now i can t open that drawer until this task is done.
task planning.
shield altbreaking tasks into smaller ones.
five participants used task decomposition especially on large development tasks to manage tasks better and reduce stress .
decomposing one deadline into smaller ones ensured that meeting each new deadline didn t allow enough time 81211table v identified mitigation techniques of procrastination from the interviews and existing techniques from other domains techniques implications prod.
sources freq.
awareness progress patterns tracking progress at work improves performance by identifying past time losses and easing deadline pressure.s p user proactive measures identifying and preventing procrastination early often through increased self awareness.
self coaching improves well being and overall work satisfaction.s user emgmt bs inform others of the delay informing team members promptly when procrastination occurs helps prevent damage to team communication and dynamics.c user cognitive learning increase the awareness of neural mechanism of procrastination and reduce the pressure of procrastination.s enr neuropsychological preventionimproves well being by addressing academic procrastination through self regulation and reward for success.s enr cognitive behavior therapy helps reframe negative thoughts by self administered psychological intervention improving time management and procrastination.s eclp paradoxical interventions coherence therapyinvolve encouraging procrastination intentionally to increase self awareness and disrupt avoidance patterns facilitating behavior change.s ecop task focus daily task planning enhances developers performance by improving focus prioritization and task management reducing stack of undone tasks near the deadline.p user eap interest performance tradeoffminimizes procrastination by balancing disliked tasks with enjoyable ones maintaining motivation and ensuring the completion of less appealing tasks.a user emgmt timeboxing fake deadline creates a sense of urgency improving focus and ensuring tasks are completed more efficiently.p user eap removing distractions helps developers achieve flow by minimizing interruptions and maintaining focus.
e user eob task planning task decomposition helps developers manage large tasks by breaking them into smaller parts reducing overwhelm clarifying priorities and enabling steady progress.e user avoid task dependency enables developers to work independently reducing delays minimizing bottlenecks and ensuring smoother progress despite procrastination.e user interdependence joining a workgroup can reduce procrastination by fostering teamwork and motivation while consistent communication improves collaboration and workplace dynamics.c eep thorough project planning thorough project planning with clear goals timelines and responsibilities enhances focus ensures steady progress and reduces overwhelm.s user eap team support adaptive deadlines communicating with developers on setting deadlines can help by reducing stress and anxiety associated with rigid timelines which can otherwise lead to missed deadlines.s user update meetings these meetings foster accountability enhance collaboration and provide social interaction motivating individuals to stay on track and complete tasks efficiently.e user interruption management minimizes unplanned disruptions helping maintain flow prevent procrastination and sustain focus during work.e user eob seeking help seeking help for chronic procrastination helps find the best mitigation strategies or find a new work approaches that reduce their procrastination individually.c user mgmt management bs applied behavioral science nr neuroscience clp clinical psychology cop counseling psychology ap applied psychology ob organizational behaviour to procrastinate .
additionally each completing subtask motivated them with immediate rewards.
as p8 shared his experience of using this strategy during my day there is a small payoff like the function works the query works sure the whole feature might not be done yet but i found some immediate satisfaction.
shield altavoid task dependency.
reducing dependency between tasks across the team was reported to be helpful by three participants.
participants tried not to define the project in a sequential way which helped them procrastinate less since they were working independently .
shield altthorough project plan.
a well structured project plan helped two participants with procrastination.
following a plan reduced vagueness and uncertainty leading to limited procrastination.
team support.
shield altadaptive deadlines.
four participants pointed out realistic and communication based deadlines mitigated procrastination.
as p6 emphasized a developer who is getting deadlines from their managers should be able to very clearly communicate the workload to their manager and come up with the right timeline .
shield altupdate meetings.
update meetings in the form of weekly agile meetings or one on one meetings with the man ager reduced procrastination for nine participants.
participants mentioned this technique motivated them and was an effective way to track their progress .
shield altinterruption management.
unplanned social interruption was a factor of procrastination which three participants managed by addressing them directly with coworkers.
if a coworker is talking to me a lot i might have a conversation with them telling them hey we can talk after work is done.
shield altseeking help.
six participants sought help to tackle procrastination.
help from experts resolved obstacles in tasks and improved personal performance .
arrow circle righ summary developers mitigate procrastination by task decomposition for better planning setting fake deadlines to maintain focus and communicating early to seek help on technical and performance issues.
being self aware of procrastination habits and tracking one s activities like the amount of code written can help limit procrastination.
vii.
d iscussion we discuss how developers can apply mitigation techniques opportunities for new tools to manage procrastination within 91212teams and other implications on education and productivity.
we also discuss procrastination across demographic factors and novelty of our findings.
a. interventions for developers to deal with procrastination awareness techniques to enhance awareness of procrastination rely on individual self awareness and informing team members of any resulting delays.
in other domains shown in table v like applied behavior science or neuroscience techniques exist to increase individual awareness by educating people or for neuropsychological preventions .
in the management domain managers are suggested to be proactive toward their employees procrastination .
research has explored tools that automatically track and identify changes in developer activities with some offering visual interfaces to explore these activities .
annotating progress and perceived procrastination in activity visualization tools can facilitate reflection and highlight high risk activities.
task focus various smart to do lists and daily planners calendars integrated into ides or github can assist developers in task management.
ai powered calendars can automatically schedule tasks based on user patterns but developers must ensure these schedules align with team deliverables.
frameworks like the eisenhower matrix and smart goals help further balance personal interests with deliverables.
timeboxing using the pomodoro technique which is also prevalent in applied psychology domain is accessible for developers directly on their ides.
studies about managing and removing distractions table v for developers have led to specialized tools like dimming irrelevant windows or ai based music recommenders can help maintain focus.
task planning a well crafted plan helps prevent procrastination by addressing bottlenecks from dependency issues task orders and technical debt.
popular software management platforms such as jira for bug and issue tracking and github for version management facilitate project planning using calendar and gantt charts.
in addition research from applied psychology emphasized the effectiveness of tracking a daily task plan to avoid procrastination on unpleasant tasks in a day .
research on task decomposition has shaped tools and solutions to reduce dependencies and conflicts.
even though some of our participants mentioned being dependent on someone else for a task as procrastination factor education psychology domain showed being a part of a team in students is an effective mitigation technique of procrastination .
team support enhancing team support in software development involves fostering positive open communication both among team members and across organizational levels.
research on interruption management in software engineering and organizational behavior domains suggests that subtle signaling methods such as using a desklight or wearing headphones can minimize disruptions from colleagues.
additionally practices like knowledge sharingand pair programming can help developers recognize when and from whom to seek assistance.b.
recommendations for future tool builders not all mitigation strategies have sufficient tool support.
for instance the shield altprogress pattern mitigation strategy is more effective when developers track their progress alongside selfreported procrastination episodes.
tools that allow developers to track perceptions of procrastination along with their activity will help to more effectively identify and mitigate procrastination triggers.
alternatively tracking the cognitive activity e.g.
eeg heart rate of developers along with their development activities could help to identify if they are distracted anxious stressed or bored.
certain tools are more effective for specific procrastination types.
for example when a skill mismatch causes aversion due to lack of interest emphasizing the shield altbenefit of the task can help.
conversely when avoidance stems from feeling overwhelmed shield altseeking help and shield alttask decomposition are more effective.
tools should balance task interest and performance by incorporating varied tasks and using ai driven recommenders to adapt schedules based on developers skills interests and performance enhancing motivation and productivity.
c. connection between our findings and literature table vi comparing ourfindings with research in other domains our findings psyc mgmt edu gov stu emp adu org emp stu stu negative effects emotional distress anxiety stress times lower work life balance reduced indiv.
performance times times reduced team performance times missed deadlines team culture trust compensatory effort flow disruption times positive effects emotional relief boost confidence avoid unnecessary work better creativity near deadline efficiency psyc psychology mgmt management edu education gov governance stu student emp employee adu adults org organization table vi compares the negative and positive effects we found with those found in other domains.
five negative effects table ii and three positive effects table iii not shown in this table are unique to software development as we didn t find any sources discussing those effects in the literature across all columns .
the nine negative and five positive effects in the comparative table are marked with to indicate alignment and timesto indicate contradiction with listed