finding the missing piece permission specification analysis for android ndk hao zhou1 haoyu wang2 shuohan wu1 xiapu luo1 y ajin zhou3 ting chen4 ting wang5 1the hong kong polytechnic university 2beijing university of posts and telecommunications 3zhejiang university 4university of electronic science and technology of china 5pennsylvania state university abstract the android research community has long focused on building the permission specification for android framework api s which can be referenced by app developers to request the necessary permissions for their apps.
however existing studies just analyze the permission specification for java framework api s in android sdk whereas the permission specification for native framework api s in android ndk remains intact.
since more and more apps implement their functionalities using nativeframework api s and the permission specification for these api s is poorly documented the permission specification analysis for android ndk is in urgent need.
to fill in the gap in this paper we conduct the first permission specification analysis for android ndk .
in particular to automatically generate the permission specification for android ndk we design and develop psgen a new tool that statically analyzes the implementation of androidframework and android kernel to correlate native framework api s with their required permissions.
applying psgen to android systems including android .
.
and .
we find that psgen can precisely build the permission specification.
with the help of psgen we discover more than native framework api s that are correlated with at least one permission.
index t erms android kernel ndk permission i. i ntroduction android sdk and ndk provide java framework api s and native framework api s respectively for apps to access the functionalities of android framework and android kernel.
java framework api s are implemented in the framework s .jar files which are used by apps to call the interfaces of java system services .
native framework api s are developed incorc code and are implemented in the system s .so libraries which are employed by apps to invoke the interfaces of native system services or access the kernel .
to prevent unauthorized apps from accessing the sensitive functionalities in android framework and its kernel android adopts a permission based security model.
for example the system services of android framework that implement sensitive functionalities enforce permissionchecks to examine whether the calling apps have gained the required permissions.
if not the permission denied exception will be thrown which may cause apps to crash .
therefore in order to properly invoke the framework api s whose execution leads to permission checks apps must apply the corresponding authors.for the required permissions .
to do so developers should know what permissions are required by the framework api s used by their apps and request them in the apps.
unfortunately the correlations between framework api s and their required permissions are not well documented in the api