a behavioral notionofrobustnessforsoftwaresystems changjian zhang school ofcomputer science carnegie mellon university pittsburgh usa changjiz andrew.cmu.edudavidgarlan school ofcomputer science carnegie mellon university pittsburgh usa garlan cs.cmu.edueunsuk kang school ofcomputer science carnegie mellon university pittsburgh usa eskang cmu.edu abstract software systems are designed and implemented with assumptions about the environment.
however once the system is deployed the actual environment may deviate from its expected behavior possiblyunderminingdesiredpropertiesofthesystem.toenable systematic design of systems that are robust against potential environmental deviations we propose a rigorous notion of robustness forsoftwaresystems.inparticular therobustnessofasystemisdefined as the largest set of deviating environmental behaviors under whichthesystemiscapableofguaranteeingadesiredproperty.we describeanewsetofdesignanalysisproblemsbasedonournotion of robustness and a technique for automatically computing robustness of a system given its behavior description.
we demonstrate potential applications of our robustness notion on two case studies involving network protocols andsafety critical interfaces.
ccs concepts softwareanditsengineering designingsoftware formal softwareverification softwaresystemmodels softwarereliability softwaresafety .
keywords softwarerobustness formalmethods labelledtransitionsystems compositional reasoning acm referenceformat changjian zhang david garlan and eunsuk kang.
.
a behavioral notion of robustness for software systems.
in proceedings of the 28th acm jointeuropeansoftwareengineeringconferenceandsymposiumonthefoundationsofsoftwareengineering esec fse november8 virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa 12pages.
.
introduction softwaresystemsaredesigned implemented andvalidatedwith certainassumptionsabouttheenvironmentinwhichtheyaredeployed.theseassumptionsinclude forexample theexpectedbehavior of a human user the reliability of the underlying communicationnetwork orthecapabilityofanattackerthatmayattempt to compromisethe security of thesystem.
esec fse november virtual event usa copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
may deviate from its expected behavior either deliberately or erroneously due to a change in the operating conditions or a fault in one of its parts.
for instance a user interacting with a computer interface may inadvertently perform a sequence of actions in an incorrect order a network may experience a disruption and fail todeliveramessageintime oranattackermayevolveovertime and obtain a wider range of exploits to compromise the system.
in these cases the system may no longer be able to satisfy those requirementsthat reliedon the original assumptions.
in well established engineering disciplines such as aerospace civil andmanufacturing deviationsoftheenvironmentfromthe norm are routinely and explicitly analyzed and systems are designed to be robustagainstthesepotentialdeviations .
in software engineering however a standard notion of robustness seems tobemissing althoughasimilarconcepthasbeenstudiedincertain domains.
for example in distributed systems and networks thenotionoffaulttolerancehasbeenlongstudied e.g.
butdoesnotgeneralizetoothertypesofsoftwaresystemswhere environmental deviations are not limited to network failures or delays.incontrolengineering asystemissaidtoberobustifsmall deviations on an input result only in small deviations on an output .thisnotionofrobustness however isintendedforsystems whose behaviors are modeled using continuous dynamics and not particularly suitablefordiscretebehaviors observedin software.
in this paper we propose an approach for designing robust systemsbased ona mathematically rigorous notionofrobustnessfor software.
in particular we say that a system is robustwith respect to apropertyand a particular set of environmental deviations if the systemcontinuestosatisfythepropertyeveniftheenvironment exhibits those deviations.
furthermore we define the robustness of asoftwaresystemasthesetofalldeviationsunderwhichasystem continuestosatisfythatproperty.basedonthesedefinitions we propose an analysis technique for automatically computing the robustness of a systemgiven itsbehavioral description.
we argue that robustness itself is a type of software quality that canberigorouslyanalyzedand designedfor.thegoalofatypical verification method is to check the following given system m environment e andproperty p does the system satisfythe property under this environment i.e.
m e p ?
our notion of robustness enablesformulationofnewtypesofanalysesbeyondthis.forinstance wecouldaskwhetherasystemisrobustagainstaparticular setofenvironmentaldeviations giventwoalternativesystemdesigns both satisfying p we could rigorously compare them by generatingdeviationsagainstwhichonedesignisrobustbutthe other isnot and givenmultiplesystemproperties some ofthem more critical than others we could compare the environmental deviationsunderwhich the systemcanguaranteethem.
1this work is licensed under a creative commons attribution international .
license.
esec fse november virtual event usa changjian zhang davidgarlan andeunsukkang weenvisionthatournotionofrobustnesscanbeusedtosupport design activities across various domains.
in this paper we demonstrate the application of our approach in two different domains human machine interactions where we adopt the well studied models of human errors from the industrial engineering and humanfactorsresearch andshowhowourmethodcanbeused to rigorously evaluate the robustness of safety critical interfaces against such errors and computer networks where our method is used to rigorously compare the robustness of network protocols againstdifferent types of failures in theunderlyingnetwork.
the contributionsof thepaper areasfollows a systematic approach to designing systems that are robust againstpotential environmental deviations section a formal notion of robustness for software systems section3 andasetofanalysisproblemsthatevaluatesystem designs withrespectto their robustness section algorithmic techniques for automatically computing the robustnessofasystemandgeneratingsuccinctrepresentations of robustness section and a prototype implementation of the robustness analysis and demonstrate our approach on two case studies involving human machineinterfacesandnetworkprotocols section .
motivating example this section illustrates how our proposed notion of robustness may be used to support a new type of design analysis and aid a systematic development of systems that are robust against failures orchanges in theenvironment.
analysis under thenormativeenvironment.
as a motivating example consider the design of a radiation therapy system similar to the well known therac machine .
state machines in figure 1describe three components in the system including the treatmentinterface mi whichallowstheoperatortocontrolthe device by performing interface actions e.g.
xfor setting the beam modetox ray the beamsetter mb whichdeterminesthecurrent modeofradiationtherapy electronbeamandx ray whichdelivers roughly times higher level of current than the former and spreader ms whichisputinplaceduringthex raymodeinorder to attenuate the effect of the high power x ray beam and limit possibleoverdose.theoverallbehaviorofthetherapysystem as modeledhere iscapturedbythecompositionofthestatemachines m mi mb ms .
the radiation therapy system is associated with a number of safetyrequirements oneofwhichstatesthatthespreadercanbe removed only when the beam is delivered in the electron mode.
this requirement may formally be stated as the following property in linear temporallogic ltl g beamdelivered outofplace ebeammode wherebeamdelivered isapropositionthatholdswhen mienters thestatewiththesamename andsimilarlyforotherpropositions .
during a normal treatment process a therapist is expected to perform the following tasks select the correct therapy mode for thecurrentpatientbypressingeither xore confirmthetreatment databypressing enterandthenfinallyinitiatethebeamdeliverytothe patient by pressing b. this normative behavior of the operator ismodeledasstate machine ein figure .
supposethedesignerofthemachinewishestocheckwhether the therapy system satisfies its safety requirements assuming that an operatorcarriesoutthe tasksas expected.moregenerally this canbeformulatedasthefollowingcommon typeof analysis task doesthesystem undertheenvironmentthatbehaves asexpected satisfy a desiredproperty?
to performthis task one mayapplyaverificationtechniquesuch as model checking to check whether the composition of the machineandtheenvironmentsatisfiesadesiredproperty however otheranalysistechniquesmaybejustapplicableaslongastheycan be used to check m e p .
performing this analysis confirms that the system indeed satisfies the safety property that the spreader is alwaysin place duringthe x raymode.
analysisofundesirableenvironmentaldeviations.
incomplexsystems theenvironmentmaynotalwaysbehaveasexpected andpossiblyundermineassumptionsthatthesystemreliesonto fulfill its requirements.
for instance in interactive systems human operators are far from perfect and inadvertently make mistakes fromtimetotimewhileperformingatask e.g.
performasequence of actions in a wrong order .
in the context of a safety critical systemsuchasmedicaldevices someoftheseoperatorerrors if permittedby theinterface mayresult in a safety violation.
to discover these potential environmental deviations the designer decidesto perform the followinganalysis task what are possible ways in which the environment maydeviatefromitsexpectedbehaviorandcausea violation of theproperty?
given the therapy system models mande and property p the designercanuseanexistinganalysistool e.g.
ltsa tocheck whetherm p.theanalyzermayreturnacounterexampletrace that demonstrates how the operator could deviate from its normativebehavior ascapturedby e andcausea violation of p. suppose that one such trace contains the following sequence of operatoractions x up e enter b .thistracedepictsascenario in which the operator accidentally selects the x ray mode corrects themistakebypressingupandselectingtheelectronbeammode and then carrying on the rest of the treatment as intended by confirmingthemode and firing thebeam .this sequence of operator actions however may lead to a violation of the safety property pin the following way when the operator presses b the beam setter may still be in the process of mode switch i.e.
state switchtobeam causingthebeamtobedeliveredinthex raymodewhile the spreader is out of place.
this scenario corresponds to one type of failure that caused fatal overdoses in the therac system .
robustness analysis.
havingdiscoveredhowtheoperator s mistakecouldleadtoasafetyviolation thedesignermodifiesthe treatmentinterfacetoimproveitsrobustnessagainstthepossible error.
in this redesign shown in figure e the operator can press bto fire the beam only after the mode switch has been carried out by the beam setter.
as the next step the designer wishes to ensure that the system as re designed is robust against the operator s mistake i.e itcontinuestosatisfythesafetypropertyevenunder themisbehavingoperator .
2abehavioralnotion ofrobustnessfor software systems esec fse november virtual event usa inplaceoutof placee xediting confirm xrayconfirm ebeam fire xrayfire ebeam beam deliveredbbenter entere x upup up up enternotset xray modeebeam mode switchto ebeamswitchto xrayx e setset b beam setter mb a treatment interface mi c spreader ms select mode confirm mode firebeam task completex e enter b d operator task e x exe x eediting confirm xrayconfirm ebeam fire xrayfire ebeam beam readyset setenter entere x upup up up b e redesigned interface m i beam deliveredenterb b figure1 labelled transitionsystemsfor aradiationtherapy system.
the designer couldcheck m pwherem isthe redesign if noerrorsreturned itmeansthat m isrobustagainstthemistake and alsom can work under any environment.
however it s not alwaysthecase.morelikely theanalyzermayreturnanothertrace representing a new mistake and it does not necessarily mean that thesystemisrobustagainsttheoldone.
instead thedesignercanuseourtooltoperformthefollowing robustness analysis task what are possible environmental deviations under which the new design satisfies the property but the olddesigndoes not?
given the original system model m modified system model m normativeenvironment e andproperty p ouranalysisreturnsa set of traces expressed over environmental actions each trace describes a scenario where system m satisfies the property but m does not.
for example one of the traces is the sequence of operator actions discussed above x up e enter b confirming that the redesign has correctly addressed the risk of a possible safety violation dueto this particular typeof mistake by theoperator.
the analysis steps and may be repeated to identify potentialsafetyviolationsduetoothertypesofoperatormistakesand furtherimprovetherobustness of thesystem.
robustness notion this section describes the underlying formalism used to model systems and environments namely labelled transition systems .
wethenformallydefinethenotionofrobustnessandintroducea new set of analysis problems that leverage this notion to reason about therobustness of systems.
.
preliminaries in this work we use labelled transition systems to model the behaviors of machines andenvironment.
.
.
labelled transition system.
alabelled transition system tis a tuple s t r s wheresis a set of states tis a set of actions called the alphabet oft r s t sdefines the state transitions where isadesignatedactionthatisunobservableto the system s environment and s0 sis the initial state.
an lts isnon deterministic if s a s s a s r s s otherwise it isdeterministic .
a trace t of an lts tis a sequence of observable actions from the initial state.
then the behavior of tis the set of all the traces generatedby t denoted beh t .
.
.
operators.
foranlts t s t r s theprojection operator isusedtoexposeonlysomesubsetofthealphabetof t.given t a s t a r s0 whereforany s a s r ifa a then s s r i.e.
awill behiddenby otherwise s a s r .
the operator can also be applied to traces.
we use ato denotethetracethat resultsfromremovingalltheoccurrencesof actionsa afrom .
theparallel composition is a commutative and associative operator which combines two ltss by synchronizing their common actions and interleaving the remaining actions.
let t1 s1 t1 r1 s1 andt2 s2 t2 r2 s2 t1 t2is an lts t s t r s wheres s1 s2 t t1 t2 s0 s1 s2 andrisdefinedas forany s1 a s1 r1anda t2 wehave s1 s2 a s1 s2 r for any s2 a s2 r2anda t1 we have s1 s2 a s1 s2 r and for s1 a s1 r1and s2 a s2 r2 wehave s1 s2 a s1 s2 r. .
.
properties.
in this work we consider a class of properties calledsafetyproperties .inparticular asafetyproperty pcan berepresentedasadeterministicltsthatcontainsno transitions.
it defines the acceptable behaviors of a system tover p and we say that an lts tsatisfiesp denoted t p if and only if beh t p beh p .
we check whether an lts tsatisfies a safety property p s p r s by automatically deriving an errorltsperr s p rerr s0 where denotes the error state and rerr r s a a p nex stss s s a s r .
with this perrlts we test whether the error state is reachable in t perr.
if is not reachable then wecanconclude that t p. .
robustness definition letmbe the lts of a machine ethe lts of the environment and em m ethe common actions between the machine and the environment.
then we say m emrepresents the set of all environmental behaviors that are permitted by machine m. 3esec fse november virtual event usa changjian zhang davidgarlan andeunsukkang machinemissaidtobe robustagainstasetoftraces beh m em ifandonlyifthesystemsatisfiesadesiredpropertyundera newenvironment e thatiscapableofadditionalbehaviorsin comparedto theoriginal environment e definition3.
.
machinemisrobustagainst aset of traces with respecttoenvironment eandproperty pifandonlyif beh m em beh e em and for every e such that beh e em beh e em m e p. the set of traces in are also called deviations ofe fromeover em.then the robustness ofamachineisdefinedasthelargestset ofenvironmentaldeviations underwhichthe systemcontinues to satisfy a desiredproperty definition3.
.
therobustness ofmachine mwithrespecttoenvironment eandproperty p denoted m e p isthesetoftraces suchthat misrobustagainst withrespectto eandp andthere exists no suchthat andmisalsorobustagainst .
beh e harpoonupright em latexit sha1 base64 y4eherqfbavc wwp7uaw0xqbmwo aaaccnicbzdlssnafiynxmu9rv26gs1c3zrebf0wpebgqgav0iqwmu6aozozmdmrsujaja ixouibn0cd76n0zylbf1h4om 53dm ghkqnko820tla srq2xnsqbw9s7u beflujtglswoij2q2rioxy0tjum9jnjufjyegnhf5p6p0hihuv f6puuinambprdhsxgrso5de1qb0sjrgmhwcszqinfqqmwzsblengv1xas5ucbhcaiqgudowv7y wflcumymkdvznvt7ozkaykbgzs9tjev4iaakz5cjhcg n54yhifg6cnispo4hlp390soeqvgswg6e6rjnv bmp vepmolv2c8jtthopzoihjuas4yqx2qsrys5ebhcu1f4xyrikwnumvtqju mml0d6ruybvziv1qykoejgex6akxhab6uagneelypainsereloerbfr3fqyts5zxcwb cpr8wfx1znd latexit latexit sha1 base64 y4eherqfbavc wwp7uaw0xqbmwo aaaccnicbzdlssnafiynxmu9rv26gs1c3zrebf0wpebgqgav0iqwmu6aozozmdmrsujaja ixouibn0cd76n0zylbf1h4om 53dm ghkqnko820tla srq2xnsqbw9s7u beflujtglswoij2q2rioxy0tjum9jnjufjyegnhf5p6p0hihuv f6puuinambprdhsxgrso5de1qb0sjrgmhwcszqinfqqmwzsblengv1xas5ucbhcaiqgudowv7y wflcumymkdvznvt7ozkaykbgzs9tjev4iaakz5cjhcg n54yhifg6cnispo4hlp390soeqvgswg6e6rjnv bmp vepmolv2c8jtthopzoihjuas4yqx2qsrys5ebhcu1f4xyrikwnumvtqju mml0d6ruybvziv1qykoejgex6akxhab6uagneelypainsereloerbfr3fqyts5zxcwb cpr8wfx1znd latexit latexit sha1 base64 y4eherqfbavc wwp7uaw0xqbmwo aaaccnicbzdlssnafiynxmu9rv26gs1c3zrebf0wpebgqgav0iqwmu6aozozmdmrsujaja ixouibn0cd76n0zylbf1h4om 53dm ghkqnko820tla srq2xnsqbw9s7u beflujtglswoij2q2rioxy0tjum9jnjufjyegnhf5p6p0hihuv f6puuinambprdhsxgrso5de1qb0sjrgmhwcszqinfqqmwzsblengv1xas5ucbhcaiqgudowv7y wflcumymkdvznvt7ozkaykbgzs9tjev4iaakz5cjhcg n54yhifg6cnispo4hlp390soeqvgswg6e6rjnv bmp vepmolv2c8jtthopzoihjuas4yqx2qsrys5ebhcu1f4xyrikwnumvtqju mml0d6ruybvziv1qykoejgex6akxhab6uagneelypainsereloerbfr3fqyts5zxcwb cpr8wfx1znd latexit latexit sha1 base64 y4eherqfbavc wwp7uaw0xqbmwo aaaccnicbzdlssnafiynxmu9rv26gs1c3zrebf0wpebgqgav0iqwmu6aozozmdmrsujaja ixouibn0cd76n0zylbf1h4om 53dm ghkqnko820tla srq2xnsqbw9s7u beflujtglswoij2q2rioxy0tjum9jnjufjyegnhf5p6p0hihuv f6puuinambprdhsxgrso5de1qb0sjrgmhwcszqinfqqmwzsblengv1xas5ucbhcaiqgudowv7y wflcumymkdvznvt7ozkaykbgzs9tjev4iaakz5cjhcg n54yhifg6cnispo4hlp390soeqvgswg6e6rjnv bmp vepmolv2c8jtthopzoihjuas4yqx2qsrys5ebhcu1f4xyrikwnumvtqju mml0d6ruybvziv1qykoejgex6akxhab6uagneelypainsereloerbfr3fqyts5zxcwb cpr8wfx1znd latexit beh wm e p latexit sha1 base64 j zr5gxedhsy5nyda5eauz8vhvi aaab9xicbzbns8naeiynftb6vfxojviecqukiuixkiixoyl9gdawzxbslt1swu5gkah w4shrbz6x7z5b9y2owjrcwsp78wws68fc6a043xbs8srq2vruy385tb2zm5hb7 hokrsrnoir7lle4wccaxrpjm2yokk9dk2 ehvpn58rklyjo71keyvjh3bakajntadj4nss5velq ltffjt1b0ks5u9ik4grqhu61b or0ipqekdtlrkm268tas4nujhic5zujwpjqielj26agisovnv49to n07odsjontd11f0 kjfrqfpqmmyr6oozre o wjvrwywxmhenggwdlqosbuvinkrg95heqvniakgsmvttoicsug2cypsq3pkvl0ljtoiavjsrvi zohjwcedqahfooqo3uim6ujdwdk wzj1zl9a79tfrxbkymqp4i vzb90kkw4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 j zr5gxedhsy5nyda5eauz8vhvi aaab9xicbzbns8naeiynftb6vfxojviecqukiuixkiixoyl9gdawzxbslt1swu5gkah w4shrbz6x7z5b9y2owjrcwsp78wws68fc6a043xbs8srq2vruy385tb2zm5hb7 hokrsrnoir7lle4wccaxrpjm2yokk9dk2 ehvpn58rklyjo71keyvjh3bakajntadj4nss5velq ltffjt1b0ks5u9ik4grqhu61b or0ipqekdtlrkm268tas4nujhic5zujwpjqielj26agisovnv49to n07odsjontd11f0 kjfrqfpqmmyr6oozre o wjvrwywxmhenggwdlqosbuvinkrg95heqvniakgsmvttoicsug2cypsq3pkvl0ljtoiavjsrvi zohjwcedqahfooqo3uim6ujdwdk wzj1zl9a79tfrxbkymqp4i vzb90kkw4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 j zr5gxedhsy5nyda5eauz8vhvi aaab9xicbzbns8naeiynftb6vfxojviecqukiuixkiixoyl9gdawzxbslt1swu5gkah w4shrbz6x7z5b9y2owjrcwsp78wws68fc6a043xbs8srq2vruy385tb2zm5hb7 hokrsrnoir7lle4wccaxrpjm2yokk9dk2 ehvpn58rklyjo71keyvjh3bakajntadj4nss5velq ltffjt1b0ks5u9ik4grqhu61b or0ipqekdtlrkm268tas4nujhic5zujwpjqielj26agisovnv49to n07odsjontd11f0 kjfrqfpqmmyr6oozre o wjvrwywxmhenggwdlqosbuvinkrg95heqvniakgsmvttoicsug2cypsq3pkvl0ljtoiavjsrvi zohjwcedqahfooqo3uim6ujdwdk wzj1zl9a79tfrxbkymqp4i vzb90kkw4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 j zr5gxedhsy5nyda5eauz8vhvi aaab9xicbzbns8naeiynftb6vfxojviecqukiuixkiixoyl9gdawzxbslt1swu5gkah w4shrbz6x7z5b9y2owjrcwsp78wws68fc6a043xbs8srq2vruy385tb2zm5hb7 hokrsrnoir7lle4wccaxrpjm2yokk9dk2 ehvpn58rklyjo71keyvjh3bakajntadj4nss5velq ltffjt1b0ks5u9ik4grqhu61b or0ipqekdtlrkm268tas4nujhic5zujwpjqielj26agisovnv49to n07odsjontd11f0 kjfrqfpqmmyr6oozre o wjvrwywxmhenggwdlqosbuvinkrg95heqvniakgsmvttoicsug2cypsq3pkvl0ljtoiavjsrvi zohjwcedqahfooqo3uim6ujdwdk wzj1zl9a79tfrxbkymqp4i vzb90kkw4 latexit e m latexit sha1 base64 g asx6bpl16wbknwtt88p sngi aaaca3icbzdlsgmxfiyz9vbrbdsdbojfqc7kjai6lirgrqhgl9azy5k0bumzmyhjcguoupfv3lhqxk0v4c63mw1noa0 bl785xys8wecm6ud59vklswula kvwtr6xubw b2tl3fiss0rmiey2yainiw0zpmmtomkbtcgnngmlgc1xspvcowr3d6kkgfqi9ixuzag6tt75u84kip ap7batobjdh98dtu iunynwplgzffgmatv 8joxsuiaacjbqzbrco2nidujni4kxqkoadkahm0zjcckyk8no4zwoxe6ubtlcyknj 7virrcpyzhydpd0h01wxub 9vaie6e ymlrkjprkypdroodyzhgeaok5ropjqardlzv0z6iifoe1vbhodorjwp9zoya j2tfi5yolio310gerirweogq5rfduqqy ogb2in vjerhery9pa87kznbrh1mfpzctle4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 g asx6bpl16wbknwtt88p sngi aaaca3icbzdlsgmxfiyz9vbrbdsdbojfqc7kjai6lirgrqhgl9azy5k0bumzmyhjcguoupfv3lhqxk0v4c63mw1noa0 bl785xys8wecm6ud59vklswula kvwtr6xubw b2tl3fiss0rmiey2yainiw0zpmmtomkbtcgnngmlgc1xspvcowr3d6kkgfqi9ixuzag6tt75u84kip ap7batobjdh98dtu iunynwplgzffgmatv 8joxsuiaacjbqzbrco2nidujni4kxqkoadkahm0zjcckyk8no4zwoxe6ubtlcyknj 7virrcpyzhydpd0h01wxub 9vaie6e ymlrkjprkypdroodyzhgeaok5ropjqardlzv0z6iifoe1vbhodorjwp9zoya j2tfi5yolio310gerirweogq5rfduqqy ogb2in vjerhery9pa87kznbrh1mfpzctle4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 g asx6bpl16wbknwtt88p sngi aaaca3icbzdlsgmxfiyz9vbrbdsdbojfqc7kjai6lirgrqhgl9azy5k0bumzmyhjcguoupfv3lhqxk0v4c63mw1noa0 bl785xys8wecm6ud59vklswula kvwtr6xubw b2tl3fiss0rmiey2yainiw0zpmmtomkbtcgnngmlgc1xspvcowr3d6kkgfqi9ixuzag6tt75u84kip ap7batobjdh98dtu iunynwplgzffgmatv 8joxsuiaacjbqzbrco2nidujni4kxqkoadkahm0zjcckyk8no4zwoxe6ubtlcyknj 7virrcpyzhydpd0h01wxub 9vaie6e ymlrkjprkypdroodyzhgeaok5ropjqardlzv0z6iifoe1vbhodorjwp9zoya j2tfi5yolio310gerirweogq5rfduqqy ogb2in vjerhery9pa87kznbrh1mfpzctle4 latexit latexit sha1 base64 g asx6bpl16wbknwtt88p sngi aaaca3icbzdlsgmxfiyz9vbrbdsdbojfqc7kjai6lirgrqhgl9azy5k0bumzmyhjcguoupfv3lhqxk0v4c63mw1noa0 bl785xys8wecm6ud59vklswula kvwtr6xubw b2tl3fiss0rmiey2yainiw0zpmmtomkbtcgnngmlgc1xspvcowr3d6kkgfqi9ixuzag6tt75u84kip ap7batobjdh98dtu iunynwplgzffgmatv 8joxsuiaacjbqzbrco2nidujni4kxqkoadkahm0zjcckyk8no4zwoxe6ubtlcyknj 7virrcpyzhydpd0h01wxub 9vaie6e ymlrkjprkypdroodyzhgeaok5ropjqardlzv0z6iifoe1vbhodorjwp9zoya j2tfi5yolio310gerirweogq5rfduqqy ogb2in vjerhery9pa87kznbrh1mfpzctle4 latexit normative behaviors of environment e environmental deviations under which m satisfies p i.e.
its robustness grey environmental deviations violating p red set of all possible traces between m e beh m harpoonupright em figure2 behavioralrelationshipsbetweenpossibleenvironments.
figure2illustratestherelationshipsbetweenthebehaviorsof possibleenvironmentsthatinteractwithamachinethroughshared actions e m. the outermost circle represents the set of all environmental behaviors that are permitted by the machine the innermost circle represents the normative behaviors of the environment.
the deviations of the environment could be classified intotwosets thoseunderwhichthemachinestillmaintainsadesired property p i.e.
its robustness and the others that lead to its violation the area shadedredin figure .
analysis problems thissectiondefinesasetofanalysisproblemsforevaluatingsystem designs withrespectto their robustness.
problem .
robustness analysis .given machine m environmente andproperty p compute m e p .
given a method for computing the robustness of a machine describedinsection wecanalsoperformthefollowinganalyses problem .
design comparison .given machines m1andm2 environment e and property psuch that m1 e m2 e compute set x m2 e p m1 e p .
this analysis allows us to compare a pair of machines representingalternativedesignsofasystem ontheirrobustnessagainst thegivenenvironmentandproperty.
m2 forexample maybeanevolution of m1 the result of the analysis would describe precisely the environmental deviations under which m2is more robust than m1.notethat m1andm2may overlap notnecessarily subsume in termsof their robustness.
anothertypeofanalysiscanbeusedtoreasonabouthowthe robustness of a machine changes depending on the property that it attemptsto establish problem4.
property comparison .given machines m environmente and properties p1andp2 compute set x m e p2 m e p1 .
for instance suppose that p1says that the radiation therapy systemshouldalwaysdeliverthecorrectamountofdosetoeach patient while p2states that the system never overdoses patients bydeliveringx raywhilethespreaderisoutofplace similarto propertypfrom section .
the result of this analysis could tell us for example that the system is capable of guaranteeing p2 weaker and arguably more critical of the two even under certain operator errors while p1maybeviolatedundersimilar deviations.
in general since improving robustness might introduce additionalcomplexityintothesystem itmaybeacost effectivestrategy to design the system to be robust for most critical of the system requirements our analysis could be used to support this approach to design.
robustness computation thissectiondescribesamethodforautomaticallycomputingthe robustnessofthemachinewithrespecttoagivenenvironmentand a desiredproperty problem .1in section .
.
overview figure3shows the overall process of our approach to compute the robustness of a machine mwith respect to environment eand property p. the input of our tool is the lts of m e andp.
we firstgeneratethe weakestassumption ofm section5.
tocompute m e p .
since may be infinite we then generate a succinct representationofit.wecomputethe representative modelof section5.
.
group the traces into equivalence classes and generate afinitesetof representative traces section .
.
.finally wetake anexternal deviation modelasinputtogenerateexplanationsfor those representativetraces section .
.the final outputisaset of pairs of a representativetraceanditsexplanation.
.
weakest assumption inassume guaranteestyleofreasoning amachineisconsidered capable of establishing a property under some assumption about the behavior of the environment.
in our modeling approach an assumption is represented as some subset of all permitted environmentalbehaviors thelargestsuchsubsetiscalledthe weakest assumption thesecondlargestcircle in figure .
moreformally definition .
.
theweakestassumption wm e pofamachine m with respect to environment eand property pis an lts which defines the largest subset of the permitted environment behaviors 4abehavioralnotion ofrobustnessfor software systems esec fse november virtual event usa figure overview of the process for robustness computation.
the input is the lts of machine m environment e and propertyp.
section .2describes weakest assumption generation for computing .
section .3describes generating robustness representation i.e.
asetofrepresentativetraces .finally section .4describesexplanationgenerationfortherepresentative traces.
ofmwhich satisfy property p i.e.
beh wm e p beh m em m wm e p p e m e p e wm e p if stated otherwise we willsimply write wto meanwm e pfor therest of thepaper.
then therobustnessofamachineisequivalenttoitsweakest assumption minusthebehaviorsoftheoriginalenvironment.more formally wecancomputetherobustnessofmachine mwithrespect toenvironment eandproperty pbyconstructingthefollowingset m e p beh w beh e em weusetheapproach bygiannakopoulou et al.
to generate the weakest assumption of a system to satisfy a certain safety property.
we briefly describe the approach given the system lts m theenvironmentlts e andthesafety property p compose system mwith the errorlts of property p as defined in section .
.
and project its alphabet to the common actions between mande i.e.
let em m e we compute m perr em.
performbackwardpropagationoftheerrorstateover transitions in the lts obtained from step .
we prune all states that are backward reachable from the error state via one or more steps.
the rationale is that if the system is in a state whichcanentertheerrorstatewithsomeinternalactions then no environmentcanprevent theproperty violation.
determinize the lts obtained from step by applying eliminationandsubsetconstruction .
remove the error state and all of its incoming transitions to obtain the lts that corresponds to the weakest assumption.
.
representation ofrobustness in general the set of environmental traces that represent robustness in equation may be infinite.
since simply enumerating this set may not be an effective way to present this information to the system designer we propose a succinct finiterepresentation of the robustness.
the key idea behind our approach is that manyofthetracesin m e p captureasimilartypeofdeviation e.g.
a human operator erroneously skipping an action and can be groupedintothesameequivalenceclasswithasingle representativetracethat describes the deviation.
based on this idea we describe a methodforautomaticallyconverting intoafinitenumberofsuch equivalence classes andthus a finite set of representativetraces .
.
.
representativemodelofrobustness.
recallfromequation that containstracesthatareintheweakestassumption wbutnot in the original normative environment e. to construct an lts that represents wetakeadvantageofthemethodtochecksafetyproperties described at the end of section .
.
.
in particular we treat theoriginalenvironment eprojectedover emasasafetyproperty andcomputetracesin wthatleadtoaviolationofthisproperty any suchtracerepresentsa prefix of the traces in m e p .
a e0 2a b b a c c0 2a b b c0 2a b b c?
a c b w c w e err figure lts s for a simple example illustrating the construction of robustness.
toillustrateourapproach considerasimpleexampleinfigure wherewis the weakest assumption generated from some machine mandeistheoriginalenvironment.tocomputetherepresentation of m e p we first test whether w e em which is equivalenttotestingwhethertheerrorstateisreachablein w e em err as shown in figure c .
we say w e em erris the representative model of m e p and let w e be the set of all theerrortraces in it.then m e p beh w w e prefix whereprefix 1 2 means 1is the prefix of 2. thus a trace in w e canrepresentasetoftracesin m e p thatsharethis prefix.forourexample trace a c in w e canrepresent e.g.
a c a b ... and a c a c ... in m e p .
.
.
representativetracesofrobustness.
nevertheless w e mayalsobeinfinitedue to possible cycles.forexample in figure c a b b ... a wouldresultininfinitenumberoferrortraces.
therefore wefurtherdivide the traces intoequivalence classes 5esec fse november virtual event usa changjian zhang davidgarlan andeunsukkang lettw e sw e em rw e s0 be the composition w e em err.
then w e uniondisplay.
s sw e a em s a w e where s a rw e i.e.
s a w e denotes a subset of traces in w e that all end withtransition s a .
then wehave m e p beh w s a w e s a w e prefix we say that s a w e is anequivalence class of w e .
in our example we have two equivalence classes 1 c w e and 2 a w e .
traces like a c and a b c a c all belong to class 1 c w e and traces like a b a and a b b b a all belong to class 2 a w e .
therationaleisthat sisthelaststatebyfollowingthenormative behaviorsoftheoriginalenvironment and aisthefirstdeviated action.
thus s a w e describes a class of traces that deviate fromtheoriginalenvironmentfromthesamenormativestate sand by thesameaction a. sincesw eand emare finite so we have a finite number of equivalence classes.
we can simply generate them by enumerating all the transitions leading to the error state.
then we can pick one of the traces in each equivalence class to represent m e p .
because we may not beinterested in howthe environment reaches the last normative state here we simply choose the shortest one.
finally wedefine definition5.
.
therepresentation of m e p denotedby rep m e p is a finite set of traces such that each trace in it is the shortesttraceof one of theequivalence classesof wm e p e .
therefore for our conceptual example m e p can be representedby 1 c w e a c and 2 a w e a b a .
.
explanation ofrepresentativetraces by definition a representative trace in rep m e p contains only actionsfrom em.whilethistracedescribeshowtheenvironment deviates from its expected behavior as observed by the machine itdoesnotcapturehowtheinternalbehavioroftheenvironment couldhavecausedthisdeviation.toprovidesuchan explanation for an environmental deviation we propose a method for augmenting therepresentative traces withadditional domain specificinformation called faultyevents abouttheunderlyingrootcausebehind the deviation.
in this approach the normative model is augmented with additional transitions on these faulty events which are internal to the environment and an automated method is used to extract a minimal explanation for aparticularrepresentativetrace.
.
.
explanationsfromadeviationmodel.
inordertobuildexplanations for representative traces our tool takes a deviation model as input which contains normative and deviated behaviors and maps eachrepresentativetraceto a tracein thedeviation model.
definition .
.
adeviation modeldofenvironment eisanlts t s d r s where d e f1 f2 ... fn fiis a fault in the environment beh e beh d e andbeh d em m e p .ourtoolmakesnoassumptionsonhowtogeneratesuchadeviationmodel.itcanbebuiltmanually e.g.
section .2usesamanually defineddeviationmodel oritcanbederivedfromexistingfault models in other fields e.g.
section .3derives the deviation model fromanexistinghumanerrorbehaviormodel .themodelmaynot necessarily cover all the traces in m e p however we say a deviationmodel is complete withrespectto m e p ifand only if m e p beh d em .
then anexplanationofarepresentativetraceisatraceinthe deviation model definition5.
.
foranytrace rep m e p and beh d if em then wesay isanexplanation of .
a original environment e0 2a b b c b deviation model d0 2ab b c3f1 c4f2a5 f3 f4 figure5 deviation model for thesimple example.
consideradeviationmodelforoursimpleexampleinfigure then forthe representativetrace a c wecan build explanations a f1 c and a f3 f4 c and for the representative trace a b a wecanbuildanexplanation a b f2 a .
.
.
the minimal explanation.
in general there could be infinite numberofexplanationsforarepresentativetrace.however similar to software testing where we are often interested in the smallest test cases against certain errors here we are also only interested in the explanation of which contains the minimal number of faults.
definition5.
.
theminimalexplanation for a0 ... an an in rep m e p underdeviationmodel distheshortesttrace beh d where em and faulty actions only exist between an 1andan.
aminimalexplanation describes howtheenvironmentcan reach the last normative state without any faults and what minimalsequenceoffaultshavecausedtheenvironmenttodeviate fromthenormativebehavior.
tocomputetheminimalexplanationfor rep m e p let t s em r s0 be the lts where and its prefixes are the only traces in it.
besides wemakethe last action in leadto to denote the end state i.e.
s an r. then we use bfs to search theminimal explanationin d t asshown in algorithm .
line define an empty queue to store the remaining search states and an empty set to store the visited states and add the initial state to the queue.
the algorithm loops until the queue is empty line .
if the current visiting state is then it returns the current trace as the explanation line7 otherwise it adds the nextstatestothequeue.specifically ifthecurrenttracedoesnot match the prefix of i.e.
a0 ... an then it only adds states with a non faulty transition line .
since bfs returns on the first result it is guaranteed to find the minimal explanation.
for 6abehavioralnotion ofrobustnessfor software systems esec fse november virtual event usa algorithm minimal explanationsearch data a trace rep m e p andthelts of d t result the minimal explanation beh d 1q empty queue remaining search states 2v empty set of states visited states 3enqueue q s0 4while isempty q do 5s t dequeue q sthe current state tthe current trace 6ifs vthen ifs then returnt else v v s for s a s rdo ift em subtrace n then enqueue q s t a tdoes not match a0 ... an .
else ifais notafault then enqueue q s t a end end 16end 17end example ouralgorithmreturns a f1 c astheminimalexplanation for a c instead of a f3 f4 c in the deviation model figure b .
robustness comparison this section describes a method to comparerobustness between a pairofmachines problem .
oramachineagainstapairofproperties problem .
.
according to equation to solve problem .
wehave x m2 e p m1 e p beh wm2 beh e em beh wm1 by assuming beh e em beh wm1 we can simplify the equationto x m2 e p m1 e p beh wm2 beh wm1 then we can use the same method described in section .3to generateitsrepresentation.bycomputing wm2 wm1 err wehave wm2 wm1 representingalltheprefixesof x.similarly wedivide itintoequivalenceclasses i.e.
s a wm2 wm1 where s a leads to theerrorstate.
then wehave x m2 e p m1 e p beh wm2 s a wm2 wm1 s a wm2 wm1 prefix finally the representation ofx m2 e p m1 e p isafinite set of shortesttraces of s a wm2 wm1 .
weapplythesameprocessto x m e p2 m e p1 .by assuming that beh e em beh wp1 and computing wp2 wp1 anditsequivalence classes wehave x m e p2 m e p1 beh wp2 s a wp2 wp1 s a wp2 wp1 prefix then the representation ofx m e p2 m e p1 isafinite set of shortesttraces of s a wp2 wp1 .
casestudies this section reports on our experience applying our proposed method to evaluate the robustness of software designs.
in particular our goal was to answer the following research questions does our proposed notion of robustness capture the types of environmentaldeviationsthatoccurinpractice?
isournotion ofrobustnessapplicableacrossmultipledomains?toanswer we demonstrate the application of our method to two different types of systems namely network protocols and safety critical interfaces.for weshowthattherobustnesscomputedbyour method indeed corresponds to environmental deviations that have been studiedin therespectivedomains.
.
implementation we created our robustness analyzer on top of ltsa a modeling tool that supports automated reachability based analysis of labelled transition systems.
in our tool the lts s corresponding to the input system environment and property are specified using fsp the input modeling language of ltsa.
we implementthefunctionsincludingweakestassumptiongeneration representation generation and explanation generation in a kotlin program a jvm based language .
in particular we take advantageofthebuilt intoolsupportofltsaforcomposition projection and property checking over lts.
our evaluation was done on a windows machine with .6ghz cpu and 32gb memory.
the source code of the implementation can be found on github .
networkprotocoldesign this section describes a case study on rigorously evaluating the robustness of network protocoldesigns.
in particular we focuson two protocols anaiveprotocolthatassumesaperfectly reliable communication channel and the alternate bit protocol abp whichisspecificallydesignedtoguaranteeintegrityofmessages overapotentiallyunreliablecommunicationchannel.bycomputing andcomparingtherobustnessofthetwo weformallyshowthat the abp is indeed more robust than the naive protocol against possiblefailuresinthechannel.asfarasweknow ourmethodis thefirstautomatedtechniqueforformallyevaluatingtherobustness of network protocols.
.
.
models.
figure6showsthelts sfortheenvironmentand machines i.e.
network protocols .
here the environment ecorrespondstoacommunicationchanneloverwhichmessagesaretransmitted with e send rec ack getack .
undernormalcircumstances weexpectthatthechannelreliably delivers messages to the intended receiver i.e.
it does not lose 1send referstoasetofactions send send .
7esec fse november virtual event usa changjian zhang davidgarlan andeunsukkang a perfect channel e sender send waitackwaitrec outputreceiver waitinput ackinput send getack rec outputack transmit channel send receiveack getackacknowledge channelsender send.
waitinputwaitrec.
outputreceiver waitinput ack waitrec.1getack rec output send.1send getack input send getack getack input ack rec outputrec ack waitrec.
outputack rec rec send rec ack getack b naive protocol mn c abp protocol mabp figure a the perfect channel the transmission channel transmits messages with parameter or from the sender to the receiver and the acknowledge channel transmits