context aware and data driven feedback generation for programming assignments dowon song korea university republic of korea dowon song korea.ac.krwoosuk lee hanyang university republic of korea woosuk hanyang.ac.krhakjoo oh korea university republic of korea hakjoo oh korea.ac.kr abstract recently various techniques have been proposed to automatically provide personalized feedback on programming exercises.
the cutting edge of which is the data driven approaches that leverage a corpus of existing correct programs and repair incorrect submissions by using similar reference programs in the corpus.
however current data driven techniques work under the strong assumption that the corpus contains a solution program that is close enough to the incorrect submission.
in this paper we present cafe a new data driven approach for feedback generation that overcomes this limitation.
unlike existing approaches cafe uses a novel contextaware repair algorithm that can generate feedback even if the incorrect program differs significantly from the reference solutions.
we implemented cafe for ocaml and evaluated it with real student programs.
the results show that cafe is able to repair of incorrect submissions far outperforming existing approaches.
ccs concepts software and its engineering automatic programming .
keywords program repair program synthesis acm reference format dowon song woosuk lee and hakjoo oh.
.
context aware and datadriven feedback generation for programming assignments.
in proceedings of the 29th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse august athens greece.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction in recent years there has been a surge of interest in automatic feedback generation for programming assignments .
as the demand for programming education grows it is becoming increasingly difficult for an instructor to provide personalized feedback to a large number of students.
simply corresponding author permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse august athens greece association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
an instructor s solution as feedback is unsatisfactory as students s attempts typically diverge from the reference solution.
the goal of automatic feedback generation technology is to help students to understand what they did wrong and how to fix it without manual effort of instructors.
data driven feedback generation .among prior techniques data driven approaches are arguably the current state of the art.
the main idea of these techniques is to leverage a corpus of existing correct programs and repair an incorrect program by using similar reference solutions in the corpus.
in contrast to approaches that require intervention of instructors data driven techniques are fully automatic and yet show impressive performance in repairing introductory programming exercises.
however existing data driven techniques have a significant shortcoming.
that is they rely on a strong assumption that the corpus contains a solution program that is close to the incorrect program.
for example two notable techniques clara and sarfgen assume a solution exists that is equivalent to the incorrect program modulo control flows.
this assumption however does not hold always especially when providing feedback beyond introductory level exercises.
in this case constructing a corpus with the close program assumption becomes a challenge.
our approach .in this paper we present cafe a new datadriven feedback generation technique that overcomes the above limitation.
unlike existing approaches cafe can generate feedback even when the incorrect submission is substantially different from reference solutions.
the keystone of cafe is its context aware function level repair algorithm.
cafe primarily targets sizable programming exercises where students are freely allowed to define and use their own helper functions.
to repair such a program cafe does not seek to find a solution program that matches the submission in its entirety instead it leverages multiple partially matching