identifying key features from app user reviews huayao wu wenjun deng xintao niu and changhai nie state key laboratory for novel software technology and department of computer science and technology nanjing university china fhywu niuxintao changhainie g nju.edu.cn wenjundeng smail.nju.edu.cn abstract due to the rapid growth and strong competition of mobile application app market app developers should not only offer users with attractive new features but also carefully maintain and improve existing features based on users feedbacks.
user reviews indicate a rich source of information to plan such feature maintenance activities and it could be of great benefit for developers to evaluate and magnify the contribution of specific features to the overall success of their apps.
in this study we refer to the features that are highly correlated to app ratings as key features and we present kefe a novel approach that leverages app description and user reviews to identify key features of a given app.
the application of kefe especially relies on natural language processing deep machine learning classifier and regression analysis technique which involves three main steps extracting feature describing phrases from app description matching each app feature with its relevant user reviews and building a regression model to identify features that have significant relationships with app ratings.
to train and evaluate kefe we collect app descriptions and user reviews from chinese apple app store.
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of kefe in feature extraction where an average f measure of .
is achieved.
the key features identified are also likely to provide hints for successful app releases as for the releases that receive higher app ratings of features improvements are related to key features.
index terms key features feature extraction user reviews app store analysis i. i ntroduction with the increasing popularity and revenue of mobile application app market app stores such as apple app store and google play have become the primary source for the distribution and acquisition of mobile applications .
a prominent nature of app stores is the exploitation of knowledge and creativity of distributed crowds to establish an open ecosystem.
this also indicates a paradigm shift in software engineering practices and has greatly influenced app development maintenance and evolution .
one powerful mechanism of app stores is that they allow users to rate and also post reviews to express their opinions and experiences on particular apps .
such a communication channel not only facilitates users for selecting their favourable apps but also provides app developers a rich source of information for assisting release plannings .
however the volume of available user reviews is simply too large to be manually analyzed .
researchers have therefore developed a variety of approaches to automatically digest the content in user reviews to extract the most interesting information they carry .
for example some approaches aim tocategorize user reviews into different groups e.g.
bug report feature request aspect evaluation etc.
while some others attempt to cluster and prioritize user reviews to identify the most crucial topics .
apart from the summarization of user reviews into informative topics it is also important for app developers to understand the impact of particular features on the success of their apps .
a feature of an app typically indicates an essential functionality or a service that the app can provide for users .
to make the app survive in the highly competing app market developers might want to find the features that users complain a lot so that they can try to modify these features in the next releases to retain users developers might also be interested in the features that are popular in competing apps because such features can be directly borrowed for requirement elicitation .
in order to achieve an effective analysis of the many features of a given app a primary challenge and also an elementary step is the automatic and accurate extraction of app features.
app descriptions and user reviews are good candidate sources for this purpose but it is not easy to accomplish because texts in such sources are usually written in unstructured noisy and ambiguous natural languages .
currently despite that there are approaches such as safe for handling english text the support for chinese is yet to be investigated.
addressing chinese app descriptions and reviews could be potentially beneficial for the ever growing and profitable chinese app market.
but this asks for novel approaches because different linguistic rules and workflows are generally required to process chinese text and simply reusing existing english oriented approaches with automatic translation tools is unlikely to be an effective choice .
once features of a given app are extracted the second challenge is the identification of features that are important for developers consideration.
empirical studies have demonstrated the influence of app ratings on the rank of app downloads so it is rational to evaluate and magnify the contribution of specific features on the app s overall rating score.
currently keertipati et al.
and licorish et al.
have applied regression based approaches for prioritizing features but their approaches rely on a human rater for assigning severity scores for each review sentence.
noei et al.
identified key topics that share significant relationships with app ratings but their approach works at the level of topics of a complete app category instead of concrete features of each specific app.
ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee fig.
.
the overall workflow of the kefe approach.
in this paper we propose the kefe approach to address the above two challenges i.e.
feature extraction and evaluation.
in particular we introduce the concept of key feature to refer to the features that are highly correlated to app ratings.
such key features indicate features that should be carefully addressed by app developers in next releases as proper maintenance of these features is likely to result in more positive reviews and or fewer negative reviews and correspondingly a higher rating score.
in order to identify key features of a given app the kefe approach leverages the information in both app description and user reviews.
specifically kefe first applies a textual pattern based approach and a deep machine learning classifier to extract feature describing phrases from app description kefe then matches each app feature with its relevant user reviews by using another classifier and finally kefe applies a multi linear regression model to yield a set of key features each of which has a significant relationship with positive and or negative user reviews received for the given app.
we note that the first two steps of kefe are especially developed to processing chinese text.
nevertheless as long as the features can be extracted and associated with user reviews e.g.
by using an approach like safe kefe remains capable for key features identification.
the kefe approach presented in this paper differs from previous studies that rely on part of speech and traditional classifier to analyze app descriptions as it further exploits grammatical relations of sentences and utilizes a more powerful deep machine learning classifier to address the feature extraction challenge.
moreover kefe relies on the contribution of features to app ratings to identify key features of a specific app instead of user sentiment or review frequency to a feature or key topics that are common to an entire app category .
this indicates a different strategy to address the feature evaluation challenge.
to train and evaluate the kefe approach we created a dataset of chinese apple app store which includes app descriptions and user reviews.
the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of kefe in extracting features from app descriptions where a precision of .
and a recall of .
are observed.
kefe also performs well in matching app features with their relevant user reviews achieving an average f measure of .
.
moreover theidentified key feature indeed indicate the features that are important for app developers consideration.
especially for the app releases that receive higher app ratings about of features improvements are related to key features.
summing up we make the following contributions in this paper we propose a novel approach kefe to identify key features that have significant relationships with app ratings i.e.
the features that should be carefully addressed by app developers.
we create a dataset from chinese apple app store which includes app descriptions and user reviews.
we evaluate the performance of kefe on our dataset in which experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness and usefulness.
this rest of this paper is organised as follows section ii introduces the detailed process of the kefe approach.
section iii explains the dataset and experiment design for evaluating the performance of kefe.
section iv presents the experimental results.
section v discusses potential threats to validity.
section vi introduces related works and section vii concludes this paper.
ii.
a pproach given an app the primary goal of the kefe approach is to automatically identify key features that have significant relationships with its rating scores based on the information in app description and user reviews.
figure gives the overall workflow of kefe which includes the following four main components preprocess removing irrelevant and noisy information from app description and user reviews feature extraction applying a textual pattern based filter and a deep machine learning classifier to extract feature describing phrases from app description user review matching applying a deep machine learning classifier to determine user reviews that are relevant to each feature regression analysis applying a multi linear regression model to identify key features.
in the next sections we will explain the detailed process for each of the above components.
923table i thetextual patterns for phrase extraction pattern sentence phrase extracted vob verb object user can send messages send messages att attribute provide a music player music player vob verb object user can listen to classical music listen to classical music fob fronting object any type of music can be searched search music coo coordinate vob verb object user can send pictures andvideos send pictures send videos coo coordinate vob verb object att attribute users can listen to classical andpop musiclisten to classic music listen to pop music dbl double vob verb object there are plenty of novels toread read novels coo coordinate rad right adjunct vob verb object user can download information about tickets hotels etcdownload tickets information download hotels information coo coordinate rad right adjunct vob verb object user can download information about train tickets air tickets etc.download train tickets information download air tickets information individual word all resources are available upon registrationregistration a. preprocess the preprocess step removes noisy sentences and characters from app description and user reviews.
this is a common step in studies of user review analysis .
preprocessing app description app description represents a relatively formal text that describes what the app is about and what it can do for users.
given an app description kefe removes sentences that describe contact and subscription information e.g.
email address telephone number and membership fees and the sentences after them.
such sentences typically appear at the end of the description and do not describe app features.
kefe also removes redundant punctuation marks special symbols e.g.
etc.
emojis and characters except for chinese and english from the description we note that some features might be described in english phrases in chinese app stores .
preprocessing user reviews in contrast to app descriptions user reviews are usually in short length and contain informal and mixed vocabularies.
for each user review kefe first removes all characters that are not written in chinese and english in order to reduce potential disturbance to future analysis.
next since there is no explicit boundary between words in chinese kefe applies the pyltp toolkit to split the review text into sentences and segment each sentence into words.
at last kefe removes stop words that are common in chinese app reviews based on a stop words list.
this stopwords list is created by extending a standard list of chinese language1 aiming to include words that are common in user reviews but are not relevant to app features.
at the end of this step if a sentence in user review contains no word after stop words removal this sentence will be removed.
b. feature extraction different studies usually have different ways to define a feature .
in this study we refer to a feature to an essential functionality or a service that the app can provide for users.
this can indicate a description of functional capabilities fig.
.
an example of the phrase extraction process.
of the app e.g.
upload images and online streaming or a resource that users can access e.g.
music library .
in order to extract feature describing phrases from app description kefe applies a process that is similar to that of jiang et al.
but with different techniques .
this process first uses textual pattern based approach to extract candidate phrases and then uses a classifier to determine whether each of these candidate phrases is feature describing or not.
phrase extraction given an app description with clean sentences kefe first extracts candidate phrases i.e.
a small group of words that could represent app features.
figure uses an example to illustrate this process.
the first step of phrase extraction is words segmentation.
kefe applies the pyltp toolkit to segment the app description into words.
here to improve the performance of the default words segmentation model of pyltp an additional 924words segmentation directory is created and used.
this directory contains common collocations of chinese characters that frequently appear in app descriptions.
after words segmentation kefe applies part of speech pos tagging to label each segmented word in the sentence with its appropriate part of speech.
with the above results kefe further conducts dependency parsing to reveal the syntactic structure of the sentence.
this step will produce a syntax parsing tree that indicates the grammatical relations between words in the given sentence2.
take the sentence in figure as an example.
according to the syntax parsing tree we can see that the head predict of the sentence is send andsend andmessages follow a verb object relation vob .
kefe applies the pyltp toolkit to implement pos tagging and dependency parsing.
once the syntax parsing tree is constructed kefe applies a textual pattern based approach to extract candidate phrases.
the use of textual patterns is a common choice for feature extraction and there are several patterns developed for english app descriptions e.g.
verbs adjectives and nouns are usually considered as important parts of speech in defining features .
to derive the textual patterns for kefe in this study we first examined the grammatical relations behind existing pos patterns to investigate whether they can be reused for processing chinese text.
next we collected a large number of chinese app descriptions and performed the above phrase extraction process to build their respective syntax parsing trees.
we then manually analyzed these trees to identify grammatical relations that are related to app features.
after these steps we have developed ten patterns for kefe as shown in table i. specifically each pattern in table i gives a combination of grammatical relations indicating a common linguistic rule for describing features the square bracket indicates that the relation can appear more than once in the sentence .
for example according to pattern vob verb object relation the phrase send messages will be extracted as a candidate phrase from the sentence in figure .
feature classification once a set of candidate phrases is extracted kefe applies a deep machine learning classifier to determine whether each of these phrases is a featuredescribing phrase or a non feature describing phrase.
this represents a common binary classification problem where each data instance consists of a candidate phrase f and a boolean label lindicating whether this candidate phrase describes a feature or not.
in this study we choose to use bert bidirectional encoder representations from transformers to implement the classifier.
bert is a recent method of pre training language representations which allows users to fine tune a specific classifier based on a general purpose pre trained model specifically the bert base model for chinese language3is used 2more details about the grammatical relations can be found at https en models chinese l h a .zipin this study .
the use of bert has achieved very promising results in a wide range of natural language processing tasks .
we also compared bert with several traditional classifiers in our preliminary experiments including na ve bayes c4.
and random forest and bert tends to exhibit the best performance.
c. user review matching after extracting feature describing phrases from app description the next step of kefe is to find user reviews that are relevant to each feature.
specifically for a given set of feature describing phrases f ff1 f2 f ng and a set of user reviews r fr1 r2 r mg the user review matching process will produce the set rf fr1 r2 r ng where ri ris the set of reviews that comment on feature fi i n that is feature fiis mentioned in every review r2ri.
here sets riandrjmay have overlaps because a user review may talk about multiple features.
for example the review i cannot send pictures and videos is relevant to two features send pictures andsend videos .
to implement user review matching we also choose to use bert to train a deep machine learning classifier with the same pre trained model3 .
similarly this also represents a binary classification problem where each data instance consists of a feature describing phrase f a user review r and a boolean label lindicating whether fis mentioned in r. the trained bert model will then assess the semantic similarity between the given feature f0and user review r0 and produce two class probabilities matching and non matching .
we take the class with higher probability i.e.
p as the result of classification.
note that the previous safe approach also addresses the user review matching problem.
but it uses the same feature extractor to extract feature describing phrases from both app description and user reviews and applies a binary semantic similarity function to determine matching.
however app descriptions and user reviews usually have different characteristics e.g.
user reviews are shorter and more informal .
in our preliminary experiments we found that it is ineffective to use the same textual pattern based approach to extract features from chinese user reviews.
we thus choose to use a classifier to implement the user review matching process.
d. regression analysis the last step of kefe is to apply regression analysis technique to identify key features that have significant relationships with app ratings.
the input of this step includes the set of feature describing phrases f ff1 f2 f ng and their corresponding user reviews rf fr1 r2 r ng the output is a set of key features.
in this study since apple app store uses a five stars scale to represent user rating scores we consider ratings of one or two stars as negative reviews and ratings of four or five stars as positive reviews .
in order for an app to receive a higher rating score in future releases it is rational to increase the number of positive reviews and at the same time decrease the number of negative 925reviews.
kefe thus uses a regression model to investigate the relationships between the number of all positive or negative reviews received i.e.
the dependent variable and the number of positive or negative reviews that are relevant to each feature i.e the independent variables .
specifically kefe first calculates the number of all negative or positive reviews received in each of the past mdays w as well as the number of negative or positive reviews that are relevant to each feature fiover the same time period wi for1 i n. here because user reviews that are posted a long time ago might contain no useful information for the current release we choose to use the reviews that are posted in the last m days only about half a year .
in addition we remove features that are not mentioned in any review of the past m days because such features tend to have no impact on the app ratings.
then kefe builds a multi linear regression model that uses variables wito predict the outcome of variable w. the regression equation used is in the form of w w1 w2 n wn where 0is a constant and iis the correlation coefficient associated with variable wi i n .
kefe uses the statsmodels package of python to build the regression model.
this process will produce a p value for each independent variable to indicate whether the relationship between this variable and the outcome is statistically significant.
finally we consider the variables with p value 05as significant variables and the features associated with these variables are identified as key features.
kefe will apply the above process based on positive and negative reviews respectively.
the key features identified are then merged together to produce the final set of key features of the given app.
we note that the concrete improvement strategies to address key features are left to app developers decision.
for example developers can choose to improve key features of positive reviews e.g.
by adding functionalities to amplify their attractions and or to improve key features of negative reviews e.g.
by fixing bugs to reduce users complaints.
iii.
e xperiment design in this section we first describe the research questions we seek to investigate and then the detailed approaches we used for evaluation.
in order to assist others to replicate our findings and reuse the kefe approach in further work we provide our dataset natural language processing resources classification models and executable scripts of kefe at this paper s companion website the experiments of this study were conducted on several machines each of which is equipped with intel xeon .5ghz cpu 32gb memory and windows operating system.
a. research questions in this study we set out the following three research questions to investigate the performance of the three majorsteps of the kefe approach.
the first two research questions concern the effectiveness of feature extraction and user review matching.
while the last research question concerns the usefulness of the identified key features for app development.
rq1how effective is kefe in extracting featuredescribing phrases from app descriptions?
rq2how effective is kefe in matching app features with their relevant user reviews?
rq3how useful are the key features identified by kefe for release plannings?
b. dataset the dataset used in this study was retrieved from qimai4 which is a commercial platform for collecting and analyzing app related data of popular chinese app stores including apple app store and nine app stores of android platform .
here we chose apple app store as the source of this study because qimai provides the most complete information for this app store.
to create the dataset we randomly selected ten categories from chinese apple app store.
this helps to avoid introducing bias towards specific categories .
then for each category we randomly selected ten free apps and ten paid apps from their respective top ranked lists.
we chose to focus on those popular apps because they tend to receive more attentions from users and thereby have enough information for carrying out this study.
in addition to ensure that the features of the app are well documented the description of the app selected should contain more than chinese characters.
at the end of this step we had a collection of apps categories apps per category .
we extracted app descriptions of these apps for answeringrq .
we then selected five apps we will explain the selection of these subject apps in the next section and extracted their user reviews of a period of roughly five years for answering rq 2andrq including user name title content date and rating score of each review .
this results in a total number of raw user reviews in our dataset.
c. evaluation approaches in this section we present the approaches for answering each of the three research questions posed in section iii a. approach for answering rq the first research question concerns whether the feature describing phrases can be precisely extracted from app description.
to this end we randomly selected apps from our dataset for training the feature classifier of kefe apps per category and used the remaining apps for evaluation.
specifically for each of the apps used for training we applied the preprocess and phrase extraction processes see sections ii a and ii b to extract candidate phrases from app description.
we then manually annotated each of these phrases 5the stop words list and words segmentation directory see sections ii a and ii b used in kefe were also created based on a deep observation and analysis of these apps.
926table ii theconfusion matrix actual value positive negative predicted valuepositive tp fp negative fn tn as either feature describing phrase or non feature describing phrase.
this process was performed independently by two authors of this paper and we have set a guideline to ensure that they follow the same criteria to do the annotation.
during this process if the two authors assign different labels to a data instance i.e.
one author think that it is feature describing but the other author disagrees a third author will be involved and the final label will be decided based on the vote of all three authors.
this annotation process ends with featuredescribing phrases and non feature describing phrases and these data were used as the training set to fine tune the bert classifier for feature extraction.
next for each of the remaining apps we manually extracted a set of golden features from its app description as the ground truth for evaluation.
this process was also performed independently by two authors with a pre defined guideline.
we note that the extraction of golden features is different from the annotation of phrases as the former requires to pick out feature describing phrases directly from app description while the latter only requires to assign a boolean label to each candidate phrase.
we also note that both of the two authors are major in computer science and have enough experience with software development so it is not difficult for them to perform the extraction task.
similarly if the two authors cannot reach consensus i.e.
there exists any difference in the phrases extracted a third author will be involved in the discussion to resolve disagreements.
finally we applied kefe to automatically extract featuredescribing phrase from app descriptions of the above apps and compared these phrases against their corresponding golden features.
we then calculated the precision recall f measure andaccuracy that can be achieved precision tp tp fp recall tp tp fn f measure precision recall precision recall accuracy tp tn tp tn fp fn where tp fp fn and tn indicate the true positives false positives false negatives and true negatives of the confusion matrix as shown in table ii respectively.table iii thesubject apps and releases selected for answering rq2 andrq3 name reviews releases positive negative alipay dingtalk netease music tencent video wechat sum we note that kefe is the first approach for extracting features from chinese app descriptions.
the previous stateof the art feature extractors safe and safer cannot be directly applied in our dataset because they rely on several english oriented textual patterns and we find that most of them are not suitable for processing chinese text.
meanwhile some additional treatments e.g.
word segmentation are also required in chinese oriented natural language processing tasks.
hence we just chose to report the results of these two previous extractors for handling english app descriptions as