targeting requirements violations of autonomous driving systems by dynamic evolutionary search yixing luo xiao yi zhang paolo arcaini zhi jin haiyan zhao fuyuki ishikawa rongxin wu tao xie key lab.
of high confidence software technologies peking university ministry of education beijing china department of computer science and technology school of eecs peking university beijing china national institute of informatics tokyo japan school of informatics xiamen university xiamen china email yixingluo zhijin zhhy.sei taoxie pku.edu.cn xiaoyi arcaini f ishikawa nii.ac.jp wurongxin xmu.edu.cn abstract autonomous driving systems adss are complex systems that must satisfy multiple requirements such as safety compliance to traffic rules and comfortableness.
however sat isfying all these requirements may not always be possible dueto emerging environmental conditions.
therefore the adss mayhave to make trade offs among multiple requirements duringthe ongoing operation resulting in one or more requirementsviolations.
for ads engineers it is highly important to knowwhich combinations of requirements violations may occur asdifferent combinations can expose different types of failures.however there is currently no testing approach that can gen erate scenarios to expose different combinations of requirementsviolations.
to address this issue in this paper we introduce thenotion of requirements violation pattern to characterize a specific combination of requirements violations.
based on this notion wepropose a testing approach named emood that can effectively generate test scenarios to expose as many requirements violationpatterns as possible.
emood uses a prioritization technique to sort all possible patterns to search for from the most to the leastcritical ones.
then emood iteratively includes an evolutionary many objective optimization algorithm to find different combi nations of requirements violations.
in each iteration the targetedpattern is determined by a dynamic prioritization technique togive preferences to those patterns with higher criticality andhigher likelihood to occur.
we apply emood to an industrial ads under two common traffic situations.
evaluation results show thatemood outperforms three baseline approaches in generating test scenarios by discovering more requirements violation patterns.
index t erms many objective optimization autonomous driving systems requirements based testing i. i ntroduction autonomous driving systems adss are making revolutionary changes in the domain of transportation.
as adss are complex and safety critical systems their testing is vitalfor their wide acceptance .
although on road testing of this work is supported in part by the national natural science foundation of china under grant no.
and .
zhi jin is the corresponding author.
x. zhang p .
arcaini and f. ishikawa are supportedby era to hasuo metamathematics for systems design project no.jpmjer1603 jst and mirai engineerable ai project no.
jpmjmi20b8 jst.
we thank our industry partner mazda for providing the software usedin our work and discussing principles in testing and improving complex real world automotive systems.
the provided software is a prototype constructedfor the purpose of evaluating new testing techniques and its quality has norelation with the quality of mazda products.autonomous vehicles is necessary and widely used in industrial adss such as waymo and v oyage.auto existingstudies have shown that billions of miles provideonly limited assurance since such time consuming and costlytesting approach would still miss dangerous and rare situationsin the real world.
one road testing for the ads under test can be augmented by existing approaches of virtual testing in computersimulations in short as simulation based testing e.g.
generating critical test scenarios in which the autonomousvehicle under test fails e.g.
the vehicle collides with ob stacles .
considering that the test scenario space is complexand multidimensional evolutionary search techniques are applied to explore this test scenario space.
in particular these evolutionary search techniques aim to identify criticaltest scenarios that indicate complex driving conditions underwhich the ads behaviors violate specific requirements e.g.
safety and compliance to traffic regulations suchas lane keeping and adhering to traffic light .
however these existing simulation based testing approaches do not consider combinations of requirements violations which are highly important for two main reasons.
first satisfying all the requirements may not be possible for anads in practice as unexpected events may happen in highlyopen and dynamic environments e.g.
intrusion of a hiddentraffic participant or weather disturbances .
in responseto these unexpected events the control software of the adshas to make trade offs among requirements likely resultingin one or more requirements being violated.
second differentcombinations of requirements violations can expose differenttypes of failures.
for example the type of failure in whichthe autonomous vehicle collides while running a red lightis different from the one in which the autonomous vehiclecollides while violating the lane keeping as the differentcombinations of requirements violations may provide differentinsights about the cause of the collisions.
generating scenarios that expose different combinations of requirements violations is a challenging problem.
one ideais to enumerate all possible combinations of requirementsviolations as the objective functions in the evolutionary search 36th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase 36th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee .
ase51524.
.
.
ieee in order to identify critical test scenarios that expose different combinations of requirements violations.
however asthe number of the requirements increases the number ofcombinations of requirements violations grows exponentially thus testing all of them could be impossible under limitedtime and resources.
to address the preceding challenge our work is based on an insight consisting of two aspects.
first the search shouldfirst focus on combinations of requirements violations withhigher criticality i.e.
including more violated requirements with higher importance as these combinations may lead tomore serious accidents for the ads under test.
second somecombinations of requirements violations are impossible tooccur for the ads in reality and the search should not focuson them in order to avoid wasting the search time.
based on our insight in this paper we propose emood a search based testing approach to generating diverse testscenarios that effectively expose different combinations ofrequirements violations in the ads testing.
similar to existingwork we cast the problem of exposing differentcombinations of requirements violations into a search basedtest scenario generation problem.
for emood we introduce the notion of requirements violation pattern also referred to as pattern in the rest of the paper i.e.
a specific combinationof requirements violations that the ads under test can exhibitas the objective functions to search for.
the notion of re quirements violation pattern facilitates the determination of theads behaviors violations of requirements.
emood conducts a type of dynamic evolutionary search i.e.
evolutionary many objective optimization emoo whose objectives aredetermined by dynamic prioritization dp that prioritizes thepatterns in terms of criticality and likelihood to occur.
in particular emood starts with the initial ranking of all the patterns built statically based on the criticality of each requirement and iteratively runs the heuristic dynamicprioritization algorithm dp to adjust the ranking additionallybased on the dynamically estimated likelihood of occurrence of patterns the more similar an unexposed violation patternwith exposed patterns is the more likely the pattern can occur.
this paper makes the following main contributions the notion of requirements violation pattern for characterizing different combinations of requirements violations.
an effective approach for generating test scenarios toexpose diverse requirements violation patterns namely emood which iteratively applies evolutionary many objective optimization emoo whose objective functionsare selected by dynamic prioritization dp .
an initial prioritization technique ip for ranking patternsbased on their criticality i.e.
the importance and numberof violated requirements included in a pattern.
a heuristic technique in dp for prioritizing patterns todynamically rank them based on their criticality and like lihood of occurrence.
evaluation results for showing that emood can discover diverse patterns with higher criticality and given the sametesting budget it is more effective than baseline approachesthat do not prioritize the patterns during the search.
ii.
m otiv a tion fig.
a shows the decision process of an autonomous driving system ads as reported in previous work theads is operating in a complex environment including trafficparticipants .
the autonomous vehicle running the ads iscalled ego vehicle.
the environment is perceived by sensors e.g.
camera lidar and radar for object detection and local ization .
the ads requirements are determined by differentstakeholders such as the passengers e.g.
comfortableness and the authorities e.g.
safety standards .
then the adsmakes optimal decisions based on the observed situation andcontrols the vehicle through actuators e.g.
accelerating anddirection changing.
both sensor inputs and actuator outputs aresequences of timestamped values.
the ads runs iteratively atregular time steps.
at every time step the ads decides theoptimal trajectory to be followed by minimizing cost functionsrelated to different requirements to achieve requirementsviolations are penalized in the cost function .
in such a process the ads needs to make trade offs among the requirements.the final output is the trajectory with the least overall cost the red line in fig.
b .
as a case study we use an ads with an optimizationbased path planner provided by our industry partner calledads pp which repeatedly uses a weighted cost function that considers various requirements to select the least costlypath.ads pp can run in a simulator as shown in fig.
b .
besides the navigation mission i.e.
moving from an initialposition to the destination ads pp considers four categories of requirements during the planning process as follows stability r the ads should assure the stable control and avoid dangerous actions for the vehicle .
r1.
the ads should avoid impossible steering angles.
safety r the ads should avoid collision with moving or static objects along the path .
r2.
the ads should keep a safe distance from other objects.
compliance r the ads should respect the traffic regulations enforced by law in a geographical area .r .
the velocity of the vehicle should be less than the speed limit r3.
the vehicle should not run the red light r3.
the vehicle should stay in the correct lane.
comfortableness r the planned trajectory should be comfortable for the passenger .
r4.
the vehicle s velocity should not change too much r4.
the vehicle s acceleration should not change too much.
during the operation ads pp is required to respond to the uncertain and dynamic environment and adjust the trajectoryfor the ego vehicle to follow.
for example fig.
b shows a type of scenario in which the ego vehicle plans to turn right into lane at the intersection while vehicle a is crossing the intersection from left to right.
however there are differentversions of this scenario that can lead to different behaviorsofads pp and different satisfaction violation of the requirements we here consider two examples i.e.
scenario a and 280sensors actuatorscontrol software environment ego vehicleautonomous driving system ads requirements a ads decision process adapted from l l ane l l lane v vvehicle a v vvehicle b v vvehicle c e ego vehicle b ads at the intersection fig.
overview of an autonomous driving system ads scenario b.i nscenario a vehicle a proceeds at high speed and the ego vehicle orders an emergency braking to bring the vehicle to a halt however the ego vehicle cannot stop in time and collides with vehicle a i.e.
violation of requirement r2 .
in scenario b instead the vehicle a proceeds slightly slower than in scenario a and in this case the ego vehicle accelerates and tries to cut into the lane before vehicle a. this action plan requires a higher speed from the ego vehicle to the point to exceed the speed limit still the ego vehicle cannot cut into the lane quickly enough and collides with vehiclea i.e.
it violates both r2andr3 .
although the ego vehicle collides in both scenarios scenario b may be more interesting for debugging because the occurrence of collision could be related to the violation of the speed limit requirement whichcan provide a different insight about the cause of the collision.for example if the ego vehicle decelerates to wait for vehicleato pass the collision may not happen in scenario b. testing how ads pp handles the requirements requires finding critical scenarios in which one or more requirementsare violated such type of testing is particularly challenging.furthermore with the increase of the number of requirements there could be different requirements violation combinations.we need approaches that can find critical test scenariosforads pp in which one or more requirements are violated expose all possible combinations of requirements viola tions for ads pp if these combinations can occur in reality.
iii.
f ormaliza tion and problem sta tement we here formalize an ads and its environment by considering the input and configuration variables of ads pp.
a. autonomous driving system at any time instant k the state of an object is a tuple of three elements i.e.
sk pk vk ak .
the vector pk x y is the geometric center of the position of the object while vkandak are its velocity and acceleration.
the state of the ego vehicleiss e k. we define oas the set of objects interacting with the ego vehicle e.g.
pedestrians other vehicles their state can be described as so k witho o .
the trajectory of the ego vehicle is a sequence of the vehicle s states t se ... se t where the time interval between two consecutive states is fixed as andtis the simulation time duration.
the ego vehicle continuously interacts with the dynamic and uncertain environments and the ads generates the trajectory 0 0 fig.
requirements violation evaluation functions for the ego vehicle to follow.
a scenario sce describes the environment in which the ego vehicle is operating including i a map of the road structure ii information of trafficregulations e.g.
location of traffic lights iii dynamic be haviors of objects s o ... so t o o iv initial state of the ego vehicle se v target destination for the ego vehicle pd vi duration of the simulation t. we assume that the driving model of other vehicles is fixed and described by standard kinematic equations.
the system under test is the ads of the ego vehicle.
for simplicity we view it as a function that given a scenario sce produces the trajectory of the ego vehicle i.e.
t ads sce .
b. requirements violation evaluation it is challenging to verify the absolute violation satisfaction false true of requirements directly from the behaviors of theads operating in complex and changing environments .in previous work various quantifiable metrics areprovided to indicate the dangerous behaviors of the ads.however the previous work does not show how these metricsreflect requirements violation satisfaction results.
to fill this gap we provide a systematic way to design the quantifiable metrics qms for requirements and theirmapping functions to the requirements evaluation results.given a requirements set r r ... r n for the ads to consider during the decision process we introduce xias the qm for each requirement ri.xiis defined as a function of the trajectory of the ego vehicle and the running scenario i.e.
x i hi t sce .
to evaluate the violation of requirement ri we compare xiwith the threshold gispecified in the definition ofri in this way we get the evaluation result yi f xi ri ranging over the boolean domain di.
we set up three types of evaluation functions according to the relationship between theqm and the threshold in the requirement to indicate whethera requirement is violated y i or satisfied y i .
fig.
shows the three boolean evaluation functions in which lbi ubi andgiare the lower bound upper bound and threshold ofxi as specified in the requirements.
the function flt xi describes the less than relationship.
a requirement riis satisfied if xi gi otherwise the requirement is violated andyi .
similarly fmt xi describes the more than relationship g i x i andfcl xi describes the as close as possible relationship g i i x i gi i .
note that there can be other evaluation techniques to describe require ments satisfaction such as fuzzy membership functions .all the qms of the requirements described in section ii canbe assessed from our project website .
281example .
requirement r2.
states that the ego vehicle should keep safe distance from other objects.
qm x2.
min k t o o bardblpe k pok bardbl is the minimum euclidean distance between the ego vehicle and other objects including vehicles pedestrians etc.
x2.1should be more than the minimum separation epsilon1min otherwise there could be collisions.
the evaluation function is formulated with function fmtas follows y2.
braceleftbigg0 epsilon1 min x .
otherwise definition requirements violation pattern .
letd d1 ... dnbe the space of evaluation results for all requirements wheredjis the domain of yj.arequirements violation patternvi dis a vector representing a distinct combination of requirements violation for the behavior of theads under test.
given the violation pattern v i the initial requirements set rcan be split into two subsets of requirements i.e.
the set of satisfied requirements ri s rk vi and the set of violated requirements riv rk vi .
for example vi represents a requirements violation pattern with the evaluation of seven requirements where the first two are violated and the other fiveare satisfied.
the set of all possible requirements violationpatterns is defined as v v ... v m where mis the total number of patterns in v.f o rads pp we evaluate the requirements reported in section ii and there are requirements violation patterns in v. c. problem statement for the ads the testing approach ttargeting requirements violations can be defined as a function angbracketlefts vf angbracketright t ads r wheresis a set of critical test scenarios exposed by tandvf is the set of requirements violation patterns that are coveredbys v f v .
it is challenging for testers to explore the space of all possible scenarios to expose all the patterns withlimited time or computing resources.
another challenge is thatsome patterns may not be achievable and the testers shouldavoid wasting time searching for these patterns.
in summary the general problem that we aim to solve is as follows given the ads as the system under test along with a set of requirements rthat should be achieved by the system design a testing approach ttargeting requirements violations which can effectively find test scenarios to expose differentrequirements violation patterns of high importance.
iv .
a pproach a. overview fig.
shows the workflow of emood which first applies initial prioritization ip and then iteratively applies evolu tionary many objective optimization emoo and dynamicprioritization dp to achieve efficient ads testing.
ip isused for identifying the most critical requirements violationpatterns.
emoo is used for finding scenarios violating andsatisfying requirements as specified by the given targetedpattern.
this targeted pattern in a search round is identified ads simulator requirementstest scenario requirements violation evaluationtrajectory population unfound patterns searched patterns targeted pattern random initialization initial prioritization ip evolutionary many objective optimization emoo fitness scores dynamic prioritization dp targeted pattern criticality ranking fig.
overview of the proposed approach emood by dp .
in particular dp aims to give preferences to thosepatterns with higher criticality and likelihood to occur.
thecombination of emoo ip and dp makes it possible for ourapproach to explore different test scenarios thereby exposingmore types of requirements violation patterns.
more specifically the approach works as follows.
in the beginning in ip given the ads requirements and their im portance we rank the requirements violation patterns basedon their criticality see section iv b .
the criticality ranking list of all patterns after ip is v c. then test generation starts by employing an iterative evolutionary process.
at each iteration the fitness functions of the searching process i.e.
emoo aredefined based on the targeted pattern see section iv c inthe first iteration the targeted pattern is v c .
the population specifies values for the variables of an abstract test scenario i.e.
a scenario in which some fields are parameterized .
itis instantiated by these values to produce a concrete test scenario sce that is executed with the ads simulator.
the fitness scores xof the behaviors of ads tin each test scenario are computed by running the ads simulator and requirements violation evaluation.
after the execution of emoo we perform the dynamic prioritization see section iv d .
in particular the patternlikelihood prioritization see alg.
is used to sort all possiblerequirements violation patterns based on their likelihood tooccur.
such likelihood is estimated by considering the relationbetween exposed and unexposed patterns.
the occurrencelikelihood ranking of patterns v lis merged with the criticality rankingvcto update the list of patterns to search for vt s oa s to identify the most critical patterns that are likely to occur.the first element v t of the merged list is used in the next iteration as the pattern targeted by emoo.
using dp the approach continually changes its fitness functions round by round until the given testing time orresource budget exhausts.
the whole process is described insection iv e in detail.
the output is a set of test scenarios thatfacilitate reproducing the wrong behaviors of the ads and theset of requirements violation patterns that have been identifiedduring the testing.
b. initial prioritization ip as it is time consuming and economically expensive to test whether each pattern in the set vis possible to occur we need to determine their order of being searched for.
in the 282beginning we prioritize the patterns based on their criticality which is defined based on the following two ranking rules p a pattern viis ranked higher than another pattern vjif the highest importance level of the violated requirements inviis higher than that in vj.
p a pattern viis ranked higher than another pattern vj ifvihas more violated requirements in importance level pthanvj whilevihas the same number of violated requirements in importance level lasvjfor p l q whereqis the maximum importance level.
rulep1is designed based on the predefined importance levels among different categories of requirements in ads behaviors as defined in previous work e.g.
the safetyrequirement s importance level is higher than that of thecompliance requirement .
for the functionality of the sys tem certain requirement r imay be split into a set of sub requirements ri.
... r i.m i to be achieved where mi is the number of sub requirements e.g.
r3is instantiated into r3.
r3.
r3.
.
for simplicity we assign the same importance level to the sub requirements belonging to thesame category as done in ads pp provided by our industry partner.
for ads pp the requirements listed in section ii rank from the highest to the lowest one i.e.
r1 followsr2 follows r3 r3.
r3.
r3.
followsr r4.
r4.
.
thus according to p1 viis ranked higher than follows p1 vjif rk ri v rk prime rj v rk followsrk prime.
assume that importance level pis the highest level where patternsviandvjdiffer in terms of the number of violated requirements in the same level.
rule p2is designed based on the assumption that in the critical scenarios in which the trajectory generated by the ads violates a larger number ofrequirements in importance level p the wrong decision logic of the control software is more likely to be exposed.
we apply these two ranking rules assuming that p 1takes precedence over p2 as suggested by our industry partner.
based on p1andp2 to compare the criticality of patterns viandvjis to compare the number of violated requirements level by level from the highest to the lowest importance levels.therefore the set of all requirements violation patterns vcan be transformed into a sorted list of patterns v c p v ranging from the most to the least critical patterns we namethe list criticality ranking.
note that v cis a partial order and some patterns could have the same ranking.
the first elementv c invis a unit vector where all the requirements are violated while the last element vc is the zero vector indicating that all requirements are satisfied.
c. evolutionary many objective optimization emoo as it is difficult to generate critical test scenarios in which one or more requirements are violated we use a searchbased testing sbt approach which has been shown to bevery effective for ads testing .
we cast theproblem of generating ads critical test scenarios for a specificrequirements violation pattern as a many objective optimiza tion problem where the fitness functions are defined asthe indicators for requirements satisfaction violation.
fig.
the relationship of requirements violation patterns for the many objective optimization algorithm we use the non dominated sorting genetic algorithm version nsga iii as it is good in solving problems with many ob jectives four or more and so is suitable for our case.in our work nsga iii generates a number of ads criticaltest scenarios by maximizing or minimizing the indicators thatcharacterize the violation or satisfaction of the requirements i.e.
qms x iintroduced in section iii b .
here we discuss how we apply nsga iii to our case.
individuals.
as explained in section iii a test scenarios describe the characteristics of the operating environment and the initial state of the ego vehicle.
in emoo we aim at generatingtest scenarios.
however searching over all the possible sce narios is not feasible.
hence we follow a pragmatic approachalso adopted by other work .
specifically we defineanabstract scenario that specifies some fixed characteristics such as the road structure and the other traffic participants inthe abstract scenario some characteristics e.g.
initial positionand acceleration of a vehicle are parameterized with variablesdefined over some domains.
in the search an individual is anassignment to these variables.
given an individual a concrete test scenario can be derived by instantiating the abstract scenario with the values assigned to the variables in theindividual.
fitness functions.
for a targeted requirements violation patternv i v there is a corresponding set of quantitative fitness functions f f1 ... f n whose values indicate the qms of the requirements.
since the requirements evaluation is boolean as shown in fig.
viis an n dimensional vector of .f o rvi the satisfaction of the rkshould be guaranteed r k ri s while for vi rkis expected to be violated r k riv .
based on the set of satisfied and violated requirements risandriv the set of fitness functions fis also split into fi sandfi v.f o rr k ris the corresponding fitness function fk fi sis to improve xk i.e.
trying to satisfy rk.f o rr k riv its corresponding fitness functionfk fi vis to worsen xk i.e.
trying to violate rk.
d. dynamic prioritization dp in this phase we select a pattern to be used as the target for the next search round of emoo.
the rationale is that we want to select a critical pattern that can occur in reality.
thus dpfirst computes a ranking of patterns based on their likelihoodof occurrence.
then dp merges this ranking with the rankingbased on the criticality v c. 283algorithm pattern likelihood prioritization input vt patterns that have not been found ved patterns that have been searched for.
output vl likelihood rankings for patterns 1initialize the reward of each pattern with eq.
2vl v t ved 3forvj v ldo 4k prime getclass vj forvi v v t ved v t do ifviis predecessor to vjthen k getclass vi r vj k prime k r vi 9vl sort vl r vl 10returnvl likelihood prioritization the intuition of occurrence likelihood ranking for requirements violation patterns is that if a specific requirements violation pattern has been found there is a high likelihood to expose similar related violation patternsthat are less critical than the found pattern.
to prioritize thepatterns we first define the relationship between differentpatterns to estimate the likelihood of their occurrence.
definition .
requirement violation pattern relationship given two requirements violation patterns v k andvk prime y prime ... y prime n i f i ... n yi y prime i j ... n i yj y prime j then pattern vkis the predecessor of pattern vk prime andvk primeis the successor ofvk.
as shown in fig.
we construct a graph to describe the relationship between different requirements violation patterns based on def.
.
the relationship between two patterns isdescribed with an arrow where the left hand side of thearrow indicates the direct predecessor and the right hand sideof the arrow indicates the successor.
note that a requirementsviolation pattern v icould have multiple direct predecessors as well as multiple successors.
therefore the set of patternsvis a partially ordered set according to the relationship.
the pattern with all requirements violated has no predecessors while the pattern with no requirements violated has no successors.
all the patterns can be classified into n classes c ... cn based on the number of violated requirements.
alg.
shows the prioritization based on likelihood that exploits the pattern relationship introduced in def.
.
first we initialize a reward function for each pattern v iasr vi line indicating the likelihood that the pattern occurs inreality.
the higher the reward is the higher the likelihood ofthe pattern is to be found.
given the list v tof patterns that have not been found so far and the list vedof patterns that have been treated as fitness functions to search for the rewardfor each requirement violation pattern is initialized as follows r vi r v i v v t r v i v ed v t vt v ed for requirements violation patterns that have been found v v t we assign a positive reward r and for patterns thathave been searched but not found i.e.
ved v t we define a constant penalty as r .
the remaining patterns are those that need to be searched for i.e.
vt v ed and their reward is initialized as we identify them as vl line .
the rewards of patterns in vlare updated as described as follows.
to calculate the rewards of patterns vlthat we need to search for we consider the rewards of their predecessors.
theidea is that if a predecessor v iof a requirements violation patternvjhas been previously found v i v v t it is likely that vjmay occur.
on the other hand if vihas been searched for but not found v i v ed v t the likelihood that pattern vjcan be found is low.
based on these heuristic rules the algorithm works as follows.
given a pattern vjthat has not been searched for and not been found line thealgorithm iterates over the other patterns v iinitialized with non zero rewards line for those that are predecessors ofv j line it updates the reward of vjwith reward r vi discounted based on the distance between viandvj line .
note that and so the factor k prime kdecreases as the distance increases.
finally it prioritizes the sequence vl of requirements violation patterns to search for based on thecomputed rewards ranging from the highest to the lowest line as the higher the reward the higher the likelihoodthat this pattern is exposed in the next round.
we call v las estimated likelihood ranking.
merging criticality and likelihood rankings then we merge the rankings of requirements violation patterns in vland vcwith a weighted sum following a classical approach used in multi criteria decision making .
the criticality ranking vc indicates the importance of the patterns while the likelihood rankingvlindicates the likelihood of the occurrence of each pattern.
by combining these two ranking algorithms we canselect for the next round of emoo the patterns that areboth critical and likely to be found.
the weights for these twolists are defined as a vector w c wl and the final rank of a patternviis determined by summationtext j c l wj rank vj vi where rank vj vi is the function to retrieve the rank of viinvj.
the merged ranking substitutes vt. e. details of emood we here describe the details of our emood approach as shown in fig.
i.e.
how to combine the initial prioritization ip section iv b the evolutionary many objective optimiza tion emoo section iv c and the dynamic prioritization dp section iv d during the testing process.
alg.
showsthe algorithm of emood aiming at generating test scenarios that expose different requirements violation patterns.
emood receives a set vof requirements violation patterns to search for the total number mof generations and the budget gof generations in each search round.
the output of emood is a setsof test scenarios and requirements violation patterns v fthat have been found.
initially the approach applies initial prioritization see section iv b to rank the patterns by criticality line obtaining ranking v c. the list of patterns to search for vt is initialized with vc line .
then at each iteration emoo 284algorithm emood input v a set of requirements violation patterns m total number of generations g budget of generations for each execution of emoo.
output s a set of test scenarios vf requirements violation patterns that have been found 1vc p v ip 2vt v c ved 3pop 4whilem v t negationslash do select an initial population set prandomly 6f objgenerate vt 7q g nsga iii g p f stopcondition emoo g used generations q all solutions 8m m g 9q q pop 10ved v ed v t 11vt getunfoundpatterns q vt 12vl relationranking vt ved dp 13vt mergedranking vl vc dp 14s sceneencoding pop vf v c vt 15return angbracketlefts vf angbracketright starts with a randomly selected population set p line and a requirement violation pattern to search for that defines the fitness functions line the pattern is the first element ofthe list of unfound patterns v t. emoo performs a number gof generations using nsga iii line until the stopcondition is reached either the total number gof generations is reached or the targeted pattern has been found.the number gof used generations is subtracted from the total budgetmof generations line .
the pattern that has been searched for is stored in set v ed line .
then vtis updated by removing the patterns that have been found the targetedone and or also other patterns according to the requirementsviolation evaluations of all solutions generated during search line .
note that some of the patterns despite having beensearched for may not be discovered within their dedicatedsearch round either because they are too difficult to discoveror they are not achievable at all.
finally emood applies dynamic prioritization it first uses alg.
to get the likelihood ranking v lof the patterns line then it merges the rankings vtandvlwith a weighted sum line .
emood can be stopped when the total numbermof generations is reached or all patterns have been found i.e.
vt negationslash line .
note that in the ads testing the most time consuming part of the search is running simulationsto compute fitness functions.
emood does not increase the number of simulations compared to emoo with the originalnsga iii.
v. e v alua tion to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach we investigate the following research questions.rq1 pattern detection how is the exploration capabilityofemood in generating test scenarios to expose different requirements violation patterns?rq2 pattern criticality how effective is emood in discovering critical requirements violation patterns?table i two traffic scenarios used in the experiments name description v ars.
overtake so the ego vehicle tries to overtake another vehicle a proceeding slowly while vehicle b is coming from behind.
turn right s t the ego vehicle must turn right at the intersection.another vehicle a is crossing from left and vehiclebfrom right.
v ehicle c is waiting at the intersection.
l l ane l ne l n an l lane v vvehicle a v vehicle b v vvehicle c e ego vehicle a overtake s o l l ane l l lane v vvehicle a v vvehicle b v vvehicle c e ego vehicle b turn right s t fig.
two abstract traffic scenarios for the experiments a. experimental design and settings traffic scenarios we consider two abstract traffic scenarios where left hand traffic is assumed as shown in table i. each abstract traffic scenario defines shared characteristics ofthe generated test scenarios e.g.
road map speed limit andspecific characteristics e.g.
position speed acceleration ofthe ego vehicle and other vehicles duration of the traffic light that are left as search variables for emoo.
the ego vehiclewithads pp follows the requirements reported in section ii.
the two abstract traffic scenarios identify two different driving situations that will possibly lead to different behav iors ofads pp and thus patterns of potential requirements violations.
to ensure that the simulations start from a validand meaningful state we have the following two constraintson the initial state of the simulation also used for other adssin previous work there is a safe distance between theego vehicle and other vehicles when all the vehicles start and the ego vehicle is far from the traffic light such that it hassufficient time to react.
overtake s o as shown in fig.
a the ego vehicle is proceeding on lane encounters vehicle a proceeding slowly and tries to overtake it.
meanwhile vehicle b is coming from behind the ego vehicle on the passing lane lane .
moreover vehicle c is proceeding in the opposite direction on a different lane.
inso there are search variables including the initial states i.e.
position velocity and acceleration of the ego vehicle vehicle a vehicle b and vehicle c respectively and the location and duration of the traffic light.
table ii reportsthe search space for the traffic scenario s o. turn right s t as shown in fig.
b the ego vehicle turns right at the intersection.
meanwhile vehicle a is crossing from left vehicle b is crossing from right and vehicle c is waiting at the intersection.
as shown in table ii there are searchvariables the initial states of the ego vehicle and the otherthree vehicles respectively and the duration of the traffic light.
285table ii search spaces for traffic scenarios soandst objects variables intervals soego vehicle pe ve0 vehicle a pa0 va0 aa0 vehicle b pb0 vb0 ab0 vehicle c pc0 vc0 ac0 traffic light p tg ty tr stego vehicle pe0 ve0 vehicle a pa0 va0 aa0 vehicle b pb0 vb0 ab0 vehicle c pc0 traffic light tg ty tr baseline approaches to the best of our knowledge at the moment of writing there do not exist any automated testing approaches targeting requirements violation patterns.we compare emood with three approaches including the random test generation algorithm the baseline of comparisontypically adopted in sbse research and two variants ofemood to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach interms of pattern detection and coverage.
random it randomly generates values for variables in thesearch space of s oandstto create test scenarios and checks which patterns are discovered.
emoo application of emoo using fitness functions target ing pattern v c i.e.
all requirements violated .
fitness functions are never changed over the search process.
notethat since v c is the most critical pattern and the ancestor of all the patterns other patterns can be discovered whiletrying to cover it.
emoo ip the combination of initial prioritization withupdated objective functions but without the dynamic prior itization.
in this case each emoo execution uses the mostcritical pattern in v c that has not been searched so far.
configurations and implementations we implement the baselines and our approach in python and use jmetalpy as the search framework.
for random we use the implementation of random search in jmetalpy .
for the settings ofthe emoo algorithm we adopt nsga iii .
the settingsfor nsga iii are the default ones in jmetalpy parent selec tion with tournament selection sbx crossover operator polynomial mutation operator crossover rate of andmutation rate equal to the reciprocal of the number of searchvariables.
for each emoo based algorithm the size of thepopulation is .
the weights used when merging v candvl are .
each approach emood and the baselines is used to test the ads for some generations.
as the termination conditiongforemoo emoo ip and emood we set generations for the first round and generations for the subsequentrounds.
as global budget m we set a total number of generations across all the rounds.
hence totally we canevaluate50 scenarios.
for random in order to assure a fair comparison we set fitness evaluations as the termination condition.
to take into account the randomeffect during the search we repeat each algorithm ten times.
generations010203040 requirments violation patternsrandom emoo emoo ip emood a overtake s o .
generations010203040 requirments violation patternsrandom emoo emoo ip emood b turn right st .
fig.
rq1 average number of discovered patterns table iii rq1 statistical test results comparing the number of patterns discovered by the approaches approachesovertake so turn right st p value a12 p value a12 emood vs.random .64e .
.22e .
emood vs.emoo .73e .
.57e .
emood vs.emoo ip .58e .
.38e .
emoo ip vs.random .54e .
.19e .
emoo ip vs.emoo .62e .
.06e .
emoo vs.random .06e .
.
.
the experiments are executed on servers with cpu intel xeon e5 2697a v4 .6ghz cores and gb of memory.the time budget for scenario simulation is set as seconds.more details of experimental results can be found online .
b. results and analysis we next answer the two research questions and then provide qualitative analysis.
evaluation on pattern detection rq1 we investigate the discovered requirements violation patterns by the different approaches and how the patterns are related.
fig.
showsthe average number of the patterns discovered during theallocated generations.
the detailed comparisons of the patternsdiscovered during the search process are shown in fig.
.
as shown in fig.
we can find emood s average number of discovered patterns to be .
and .
in s oandst respectively outperforming the three baseline approaches i.e.
random emoo and emoo ip.
for the first two baseline approaches random andemoo there is a large increase in the number of patterns discovered within the 50th generation while the speed to find new patterns decreases after the 100thgeneration.
the reason is that both emoo ip andemood could change the objective functions to search for leadingto the discovery of new patterns during the search process.compared with the third baseline approach emoo ip emood adjusts the sequence of the targeting pattern to search forby also considering the likelihood to occur thus excludingpatterns that cannot occur and saving the search time.
hence ins oand inst emood could find respectively .
and .
patterns more than emoo ip.
we also observe that random performs better in stthan inso a ssthas a smaller search space.
thus the gaps in the a overtake s o .
b turn right s t .
fig.
rq1 comparison of discovered patterns table iv rq1 time cost of the testing process time cost hours overtake so turn right st rand.
emoo emoo ip emood rand.
emoo emoo ip emood simulation .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
computation .
.
.
.
.
.
total .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
in the simulator ads pp is terminated once collisions are detected.
average number of the discovered patterns between the four approaches are smaller in stthanso.
we next perform a statistical test on the final results of the approaches across the ten runs.
following a guideline we use the wilcoxon signed rank test and the v argha delaney s a 12effect size .
table iii reports the results of the statistical test obtained when comparing the number ofthe patterns discovered by random emoo emoo ip and emood fors oandst.
as shown in the table the p values of the results between emood and the baseline approaches are all lower than .
and the a12statistics show a large effect size close or equal to .
hence the number of thepatterns discovered by emood is significantly higher than those discovered by the baseline approaches moreover wealso notice that each technique of the approach i.e.
ip dp and emoo significantly improves over the approach withoutthat technique.
moreover we want to know whether emood s higher effectiveness is due to its capability to discover more patterns which do not necessarily subsume patterns discovered bythe baseline approaches or its capability to subsume all thepatterns discovered by the baseline approaches plus some otherpatterns.
we compare all the discovered patterns in the tenruns for the four approaches as shown in fig.
.
we find that across ten runs emood could aggregately discover and patterns in s oandst respectively.
in addition emood could discover and extra patterns not discovered by anybaseline approach accounting for and .
of the totalnumber of discovered patterns in s oandst respectively.
thus emood s higher effectiveness lies in its capability to discover extra patterns compared with the baseline approaches.
finally to check whether the effectiveness of emood comes at the cost of computation time we compare the whole execu tion time of emood and the baseline approaches.
considering that the simulation time of each test scenario could be large we parallelize the simulation of the generated test scenarios fig.
rq2 the sum of criticality of discovered patterns using threads.
table iv reports for each approach the timecost of the test simulations the computation time excludingthe simulation time during fitness evaluation and the totaltime cost.
ads pp will be terminated in the simulation after violating some requirements especially for safety r2.
i f the ego vehicle s behaviors are abnormal.
we observe thatthe time costs of emoo emoo ip and emood are less thanrandom because these three approaches could generate more scenarios with violations of r .
and these scenarios are terminated earlier.
moreover we observe that the mostexpensive part of the approaches is due to the simulations.
answer to rq1 each phase emoo ip and dp ofemood provides a significant contribution in discovering requirements violation patterns.
indeed the approaches ofrandom emoo emoo ip and emood are in the order of increasing effectiveness indicating that the emoo ip and dp techniques all provide a relevant contributiontoemood s overall effectiveness.
additionally emood s effectiveness does not come at the cost of time.
evaluation on criticality rq2 we analyze the criticality of requirements violation patterns discovered by eachapproach to this aim we propose a metric for assessing thecriticality.
as explained in section iv b the initial rankingv cranks the patterns based on their criticality.
therefore we quantify the criticality of each pattern by its rank in vc i.e.
k vi rank vc vi vc .
the sum of the criticality of discovered patterns can be calculated as summationtext vi vfk vi .
fig.
shows the results for the sum of the criticality of discoveredpatterns.
we find that emood achieves the highest sum for the criticality of discovered patterns being .
and .
onaverage for s oandst respectively.
we also compare the results in fig.
for each pair of approaches for soandst using the same statistical tests used in rq1.
we report the results online due to spacelimit.
using significance level .
we observe that emood is always significantly better than the baseline approaches emoo ip is always better than random and better than emoo ins o emoo is better than random inso i nt h e other cases there is no significant difference.
table v provides a detailed analysis by showing the aver287table v rq2 number of discovered patterns by rankings invc pattern rankingsovertake so turn right st rand.
emoo emoo ip emood rand.
emoo emoo ip emood .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
total .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
a over speed limit b encounter with vehicle a c exceed curvature limit d collision with vehicle b fig.
a scenario with requirements violations in st age number of the patterns discovered by each approach in each scenario by ranks in vc.
compared with the baseline approaches emood identifies more patterns with higher ranks i.e.
ranks from to while the gap decreases for thepatterns with lower ranks i.e.
ranks from to .
inmore complex scenarios such as s o the gaps between the number of discovered patterns are more obvious betweendifferent approaches because complex scenarios might havemore challenging states that are difficult to reach.
we also findthat the results of violation criticality are consistent with theresults of pattern detection in rq1.
in simpler scenarios such ass t the difference between the baseline approaches and emood is lower showing that emood is particularly useful in finding critical patterns in large search spaces.
answer to rq2 random testing is limited in findingcritical requirements violation patterns in complex sce narios while as the combination of emoo ip and dp emood is more effective than the baseline approaches.
requirements violation pattern analysis we next analyze a concrete test scenario to better understand what thegenerated critical test scenarios look like and what are thebehaviors and requirements evaluation results of the egovehicle with ads pp in this scenario.
we next consider some results found by emood inst.a s shown in fig.
b emood discovers patterns not discovered by the baseline approaches fig.
reports the scenario expos ing the most critical one among these patterns.
in this concretescenario the behavior of the ego vehicle violates the majorityof the requirements i.e.
v indicating the violation of r .
r2.
r3.
r4.
.
this pattern also ranksfirst in all of the discovered patterns in st. fig.
a shows the start of the scenario in which the ego vehicle is acceleratingand moving into lane to turn right at the intersection quickly.
in this process the speed of the ego vehicle reaches .82m s exceeding the speed limit .
67m s a little as shown in fig.
a .
reacting to the violation of the speed limit the ego vehicle reduces the speed when it reaches the intersection and encounters vehicle a crossing from left to right in the lane1at the moment shown in fig.
b .
to avoid the potential collision with vehicle a the ego vehicle decelerates a lot and turns its direction to right.
however this dangerous actioncauses its curvature rate to reach .
which exceeds the limitofk limit .
.
fig.
c shows the moment in which the ego vehicle reaches the maximal curvature rate at the speed of .56m s while there is another vehicle b crossing from right to left.
finally the ego vehicle fails to figure out a feasible trajectory and ends with a collision with vehicle b as shown in fig.
d .
the change rate of acceleration of this trajectoryis .
exceeding the threshold r a .
.
we next show how the patterns discovered by emood are useful in an industrial setting i.e.
whether they provide theengineers of our industrial partner useful insights regardingthe faults of ads pp.
considering the previous example we find that at the start of the scenario the ego vehicle first accelerates to cross the intersection and then decelerates whenencountering with vehicle a. however it is too late for the ego vehicle to change its direction and brake.
we estimate that this series of requirements violations in this scenario canbe due to that the ego vehicle is not sensitive to exceeding the speed limit.
based on this result we modify ads pp by penalizing the selection of paths that require the violation ofthe speed limit we run the same scenario with the modifiedads pp and find that the ego vehicle does not violate the speed limit and at the intersection changes its direction intolane until vehicle b has passed and then changes into lane1.
the ego vehicle ends with no requirement violated the maximal speed is .9m s the maximal curvature rate is .
the acceleration change rate is .
and no collision occurs.
such type of information is useful for engineers of our industrypartner to re engineer ads pp.
c. threats to v alidity the threats to external validity primarily include the degree to which the subject adss their faults and abstract testscenarios are representative of true practice.
our evaluationis conducted with only one system ads pp provided by our industry partner.
moreover the evaluation results are based ononly two common scenarios i.e.
s oandst these threats could be reduced by more experiments on wider types ofadss and more abstract scenarios in future work.
the threatsto internal validity are instrumentation effects that can biasour results.
faults in our prototype and the search frameworkjmetalpy might cause such effects.
to reduce these threats we manually inspected the intermediate results of applyingour approach.
288vi.
r ela ted work search based testing.
search based testing sbt for test generation is an active area in ads testing.
the idea is to use optimization to efficiently generate critical test scenar ios in which the autonomous vehicle under test fails e.g.
collision .
abdessalem et al.
use multi objective searchwith a surrogate model and learnable evolution algorithmto test an advanced driver assistance system such systemsupports levels of automation .
for the testing ofadss with higher level automation and a more dedicateddecision making process cal o et al.
propose an approach to generate avoidable collision scenarios in which a differentlyconfigured ads would not lead to collisions.
gambi et al.
generate through procedural content generation and search based testing challenging scenarios in which the vehicleunder test departs the lane while li et al.
introducea v fuzzer a framework based on fuzzing to find safetyviolations of the ads under test.
in contrast to our work none of these preceding approaches considers the problem ofmultiple requirements violations but consider the generationof critical scenarios for only one specific ads requirement such as safety.
furthermore emood identifies critical test scenarios covering different requirements violation patterns.
many objective optimization in sbt.
many objective search is increasingly used to address the need for many objectives to represent different decision criteria in volved in software engineering tasks.
the usage of many objective search presents an important challenge since thehigh dimensional pareto fronts demand more time and mem ory resources to be generated.
for object oriented systems panichella et al.
design a highly scalable many objectivegenetic algorithm mosa for the many objective branchcoverage problem.
their later work proposes dynamosato dynamically focus on not covered objectives according tobranch statement and mutant coverage to generate tests dynamosa is now the default algorithm in evosuite anautomatic test generation framework.
however the precedingexisting work on many objective optimization in search basedtesting is slightly different from our approach as we executemany rounds of emoo using different patterns as objectivesto search for and our prioritization aims at selecting the targetpatterns.
namely based on a new insight of the relationshipbetween requirements violation patterns we design dp to au tomatically select the most likely to occur and critical patternsto search for at the beginning of each emoo execution.
coverage criteria.
since it is infeasible to test adss under all possible conditions due to the large test scenario space other vehicles road structure etc.
some work proposescoverage criteria for ads testing.
hauer et al.
definecategories of different scenarios that should be covered.
totest any possible behaviors of the ads under test laurent etal.
use weight coverage to cover different configurationsof a path planner while tian et al.
use neuron cover age to guide the generation of tests for neural networks inautonomous vehicles.
however neither scenario coverage nordriving behavior coverage criteria can guarantee that unsafebehaviors of the ads are tested in terms of requirements vio lations and so they cannot guarantee to expose all the possiblerequirements violation patterns.
in contrast emood targets requirements violation patterns to identify diverse critical testscenarios for the ads.
therefore through the coverage ofdifferent requirements violation patterns unsafe behaviors ofthe ads are more likely to be exposed so that ads engineerscan build a resilient ads in extreme or stressful scenarios.
requirements based testing.
requirements based testing for autonomous systems aims at system conformance with all identified requirements .
as adss are complex cyber physical systems that are challenging to test and debug requirements based testing approaches have been proposed tocheck the requirements satisfaction during the developmentprocess to decrease the resources needed to design the sys tems .
to generate tests to expose requirements violations two mainstream approaches i.e.
model checking and modeltesting have been proposed for cyber physical systems .model checking approaches attempt to find failures whenthey exist or prove the absence of failures through formalverification.
however because formal verification considersall possible executions it often has difficulty in scaling tocomplex systems with a large space of system states .
model testing approaches identify and specifyrequirements for the system behaviors and generate test sce narios that violate the requirements specifications.
however these approaches do not target different combinations ofrequirements violations whereas emood can help effectively discover the most critical and likely to occur requirementsviolation patterns.
vii.
c onclusion and future work in this paper we have proposed emood an automated testing approach for adss that targets requirements violationpatterns.
emood builds on evolutionary many objective optimization emoo which is guided by initial prioritization ip and dynamical prioritization dp of requirements viola tion patterns to identify the violation pattern to search for dur ing each iteration.
our evaluation results on an industrial adshave shown that emood outperforms the baseline random testing and evolutionary search and generates test scenariosthat expose more violation patterns with higher criticality.
our current approach requires to specify as input an abstract scenario over which the search is performed.
different abstract scenarios may or may not allow to cover specificrequirements violation patterns.
such manual selection ofabstract scenarios requires rich domain knowledge and maylimit the approach s effectiveness.
in future work we plan toinvestigate tool automation to identify abstract scenarios somework has been proposed to identify the scenario types that should be considered for ads testing and we plan to leveragesuch work to specify our initial abstract scenarios.
289references u. topcu n. bliss n. cooke m. l. cummings a. llorens h. e. shrobe and l. zuck assured autonomy path toward living with autonomous systems we can trust corr vol.
abs .
.
waymo on the road to fully self driving waymo safety report .
.
available v oyage open autonomous safety .
.
available i. majzik o. semer ath c. hajdu k. marussy z. szatm ari z. micskei a. v or os a. a. babikian and d. v arr o towards system level testing with coverage guarantees for autonomous vehicles in proc.
22nd ieee international conference on model driven engineering languages andsystems models pp.
.
models.
.
.
n. kalra and s. m. paddock driving to safety how many miles of driving would it take to demonstrate autonomous v ehicle reliability?rand corporation .
r. ben abdessalem s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter testing advanced driver assistance systems using multi objective search andneural networks in proc.
31st ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase pp.
.
.
.
testing vision based control systems using learnable evolutionary algorithms in proc.
40th ieee acm international conference on software engineering icse pp.
.
.
.
r. ben abdessalem a. panichella s. nejati l. c. briand and t. stifter testing autonomous cars for feature interaction failures using many objective search in proc.
33rd ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase pp.
.
.
.
a. gambi m. mueller and g. fraser automatically testing selfdriving cars with search based procedural content generation in proc.
28th acm international symposium on software testing and analysis issta pp.
.
.
.
a. cal o p .
arcaini s. ali f. hauer and f. ishikawa generating avoidable collision scenarios for testing autonomous drivingsystems in proc.
13th ieee international conference on software testing v alidation and v erification icst pp.
simultaneously searching and solving multiple avoidable collisions for testing autonomous driving systems in proc.
22nd acm genetic and evolutionary computation conference gecco pp.
.
.
.
g. li y .
li s. jha t. tsai m. b. sullivan s. k. s. hari z. kalbarczyk and r. k. iyer a v fuzzer finding safety violations in autonomousdriving systems in proc.
31st ieee international symposium on software reliability engineering issre pp.
.
is sre5003.
.
.
t. laurent p .
arcaini f. ishikawa and a. v entresque achieving weight coverage for an autonomous driving system with search basedtest generation in proc.
25th ieee international conference on engineering of complex computer systems iceccs pp.
.
iceccs51672.
.
.
p .
arcaini x. y .
zhang and f. ishikawa targeting patterns of driving characteristics in testing autonomous driving systems in proc.
14th ieee international conference on software testing v erification and v alidation icst pp.
y .
li j. tao and f. wotawa ontology based test generation for automated and autonomous driving functions information and software technology vol.
.
j.infsof.
.
.
f. hauer t. schmidt b. holzm uller and a. pretschner did we test all scenarios for automated and autonomous driving systems?
in proc.
22nd ieee intelligent transportation systems conference itsc pp.
.
itsc.
.
.
c. zhang y .
liu d. zhao and y .
su roadview a traffic scene simulator for autonomous vehicle simulation testing in proc.
17th international ieee conference on intelligent transportation systems itsc pp.
.
itsc.
.
.
d. zhao and h. peng from the lab to the street solving the challenge of accelerating automated vehicle testing corr vol.
abs .
.
a. belbachir j. c. smal j. m. blosseville and d. gruyer simulationdriven validation of advanced driving assistance systems procediasocial and behavioral sciences vol.
pp.
.
s. shalev shwartz s. shammah and a. shashua on a formal model of safe and scalable self driving cars corr vol.
abs .
.
iso road vehicles functional safety .
.
available k. czarnecki automated driving system ads high level quality requirements analysis driving behavior safety waterloo intelligent systems engineering lab wise report university of waterloo .
c. e. tuncali g. fainekos d. prokhorov h. ito and j. kapinski requirements driven test generation for autonomous vehicles with ma chine learning components ieee transactions on intelligent v ehicles vol.
no.
pp.
.
tiv .
.
.
j. morse d. araiza illan k. eder j. lawry and a. richards a fuzzy approach to qualification in design exploration for autonomousrobots and systems in proc.
26th ieee international conference on fuzzy systems fuzz ieee pp.
.
fuzz ieee.
.
.
l. baresi l. pasquale and p .
spoletini fuzzy goals for requirementsdriven adaptation in proc.
18th ieee international requirements engineering conference re pp.
.
re.
.
.
emoo dp project website for targeting requirements violations of autonomous driving systems by dynamic evolutionary search .
.
available a. corso r. j. moss m. koren r. lee and m. j. kochenderfer a survey of algorithms for black box safety validation corr vol.
abs .
.
s. chand and m. wagner evolutionary many objective optimization a quick start guide surveys in operations research and management science vol.
no.
pp.
.
k. deb and h. jain an evolutionary many objective optimization algorithm using reference point based nondominated sorting approach part i solving problems with box constraints ieee transactions on evolutionary computation vol.
no.
pp.
a. ramirez j. r. romero and s. v entura a survey of manyobjective optimisation in search based software engineering journal of systems and software vol.
pp.
t. dreossi d. j. fremont s. ghosh e. kim h. ravanbakhsh m. v azquez chanlatte and s. a. seshia v erifai a toolkit for theformal design and analysis of artificial intelligence based systems inproc.
31st international conference on computer aided v erification ca v pp.
.
.
f. kl uck m. zimmermann f. wotawa and m. nica performance comparison of two search based testing strategies for adas systemvalidation in proc.
31st ifip international conference on testing software and systems ictss pp.
.
.
t. g. dietterich ensemble methods in machine learning in proc.
1st international workshop on multiple classifier systems multiple mcs pp.
.
.
m. harman s. a. mansouri and y .
zhang search based software engineering trends techniques and applications acm computing surveys vol.
no.
pp.
.
.
.
a. benitez hidalgo a. j. nebro j. garcia nieto i. oregi and j. del ser jmetalpy a python framework for multi objective opti mization with metaheuristics swarm and evolutionary computation vol.
.
j.swevo.
.
.
b. l. miller d. e. goldberg et al.
genetic algorithms tournament selection and the effects of noise complex systems vol.
no.
pp.
.
a. arcuri and l. briand a practical guide for using statistical tests to assess randomized algorithms in software engineering in proc.
33rd ieee acm international conference on software engineering icse pp.
.
.
.
j. a. capon elementary statistics for the social sciences study guide.
wadsworth publishing company belmont .
a. v argha and h. d. delaney a critique and improvement of the cl common language effect size statistics of mcgraw and wong journal of educational and behavioral statistics vol.
no.
pp.
.
.
sae taxonomy and definitions for terms related to driving automation systems for on road motor vehicles .
.
available a. panichella f. m. kifetew and p .
tonella reformulating branch coverage as a many objective optimization problem in proc.
8th ieee international conference on software testing v erification andv alidation icst pp.
.
icst.
.
.
automated test case generation as a many objective optimisation problem with dynamic selection of the targets ieee transactions on software engineering vol.
no.
pp.
g. fraser and a. arcuri evosuite automatic test suite generation for object oriented software in proc.
19th acm joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium on thef oundations of software engineering esec fse pp.
.
.
.
z. tahir and r. alexander coverage based testing for v v and safety assurance of self driving autonomous vehicle a system atic literature review in proc.
2nd ieee international conference on artificial intelligence testing aitest pp.
y .
tian k. pei s. jana and b. ray deeptest automated testing of deep neural network driven autonomous cars in proc.
40th ieee acm international conference on software engineering icse pp.
.
.
.
r. alexander h. hawkins and a. rae situation coverage a coverage criterion for testing autonomous robots.
department of computerscience university of y ork vol.
report number ycs .
s. nejati k. gaaloul c. menghi l. c. briand s. foster and d. wolfe evaluating model testing and model checking for finding requirementsviolations in simulink models in proc.
27th acm joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium on thef oundations of software engineering esec fse pp.
.
.
.
c. gladisch t. heinz c. heinzemann j. oehlerking a. von vietinghoff and t. pfitzer experience paper search based testing inautomated driving control applications in proc.
34th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase pp.
.
ase.
.
.