synthesis based resolution of feature interactions in cyber physical systems benjamin gafford institute for software research carnegie mellon university gafford cmu.edutobias d rschmid institute for software research carnegie mellon university duerschmid cmu.edu gabriel a. moreno software engineering institute carnegie mellon university gmoreno sei.cmu.edueunsuk kang institute for software research carnegie mellon university eskang cmu.edu abstract thefeatureinteractionproblem ariseswhentwoormoreindependent features interact with each other in an undesirable manner.
feature interactions remain a challenging and important problem inemergingdomainsofcyber physicalsystems cps suchasintelligentvehicles unmannedaerialvehicles uavs andtheinternetof things iot where the outcome of an unexpected interaction may resultinasafetyfailure.existingapproachestoresolvingfeature interactionsrelyonprioritylistsorfixedstrategies butmaynotbe effective in scenarios where none of the competing feature actions are satisfactory with respect to system requirements.
this paper proposesanovel synthesis based approachtoresolution wherea conflictamongfeaturesisresolvedby synthesizing anactionthat best satisfies the specification of desirable system behaviors in the givenenvironmentalcontext.unlikeexistingresolutionmethods ourapproachiscapableofproducingadesirablesystemoutcome even when none of the conflicting actions are satisfactory.
theeffectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated using a case study involving interactions among safety critical features in an autonomous drone.
acm reference format benjamingafford tobiasd rschmid gabriela.moreno andeunsukkang.
.
synthesis based resolution of feature interactions in cyber physical systems.
in 35th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase september virtual event australia.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction thefeature interaction problem occurs when two or more independentfeaturesinteractwitheachotherinunanticipatedways possibly leading to an undesirable systemoutcome.
although feature interactions have been long studied by the software engineering community theyremainachallengingandimportant permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september virtual event australia association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
in emerging domains of cyber physical systems cps suchasintelligentvehicles unmannedaerialvehicles uavs and the internet of things iot where the outcome of an unexpected interactionmayresultinasafetyfailure .forexample unexpected interactions between a pair of braking features has been found to be one of the contributing factors to the incidents involving unintended acceleration on toyota vehicles .
managing feature interactions typically involve two tasks detectionandresolution.
in this paper we specifically focus on the problemofresolutionatthe runtime.onceaconflictamongfeatures is detected during the execution of a system the goal of arun time resolution method is to select the most desirable out of the actions proposed by the competing features.
a major challenge in designing effective resolution mechanisms is defining what it means for an action to be more desirable than others.existingapproachestoresolutionrelyonsomenotionof priorities e.g.
emergencybrakingshouldalwaysbeselectedoverotherfeatures or variable specificstrategies e.g.
the feature that results in the lowest acceleration output is considered safest and thus should be selected .
both types of approaches however facelimitationswhenmanagingfeatureinteractionsin modern cps with a highly dynamic unpredictable environment.
first thedesirabilityofafeatureactionmaybe context dependent i.e.
whether or not one action is more desirable than the others dependsonthecurrentconditionsoftheenvironment.forexample although decreasing the speed of a vehicle is often associated with reducingtheriskofacollision incertaintrafficscenarios itmay actuallybesafertoaccelerate e.g.
whenanothervehicleistrailing withinanunsafedistance .sinceitisdifficulttopredictthesetypes ofscenariosatdesign time aresolutionmethodthatusesapriority list or fixed strategy may sometimes fail to produce a desirable system behavior.
second in certain situations none of the competing feature actions may be desirable with respectto the system requirements.
this is a fundamental challenge with resolution when a pair of features have conflicting objectives being forced to select one over theothermeanstemporarilysacrificingtheobjectiveofthelatter feature.however whenbothofthesefeaturesperformcriticaltasks e.g.
safety functions this winner takes all approach may cause a negative impact on the system e.g.
a safety violation regardless of which feature is selected.
35th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase to address these challenges this paper proposes a synthesisbasedapproach for resolving unexpected feature interactions that arise in cps.
in this approach the desirability of a feature action is definedintermsofhowwellthesystemwouldsatisfyitsdesiredrequirementsifthatparticularactionweretobeexecutedinthegivenenvironment.inparticular weleverageaformalspecificationnotation called signal temporal logic stl an extension of linear temporal logic that is well suited for describing behaviors of cps along with the notion of robustness of property satisfaction t o preciselydefinethedesirabilityofanactionasaquantitativemetric.
thisenablesaformulationofresolutionasan optimization problem given a specification of desired system behaviors specified as stl properties and competing actions in a given context the goal isto select the action that achieves the highest level of satisfaction.
furthermore our approach explores actions beyond the given ones and resolves a conflict by synthesizing a new action that is more desirable than any of the given actions.
we have implemented a prototype of our resolution method as part of the flight control software for autonomous drones in particular usingpx4 apopularopensourceflightcontrolsoftwarefordrones .todemonstratetheeffectivenessofourmethod weperformedsimulationsofanautonomousdronewithfouractive features that perform distinct but sometimes conflicting safety tasks.
our evaluation shows that compared to existing methods ourresolutionapproachissignificantlybetteratsatisfyingmultidimensional objectives avoiding the violation of safety requirements and producing smoother and more stable action sequences.
the contributions of this paper are as follows asynthesis based approach to feature interaction resolution wheretheproblemofselectingthemostdesirableactionisformulated assynthesizing the action that best satisfies the objectives of the competing features asystemarchitectureandanalgorithmforsynthesizingactions and a prototype implementation on a control system for realworld autonomous drones acasestudythatdemonstratestheeffectivenessoftheproposed approach on an autonomous drone with four safety features.
the restof thepaper isstructured asfollows.
we firstintroduce a runningexampleinvolvinganautonomousdronethatillustrates thechallengeswithexistingmethodsforresolutionandhowourapproach addresses them section .
then we describe the concepts ofstlandrobustnessofpropertysatisfaction section3 which servesasthetheoreticalbasisforourresolutionmethod section4 .
we then describe an evaluation of our approach using a case study involving simulations of an autonomous drone section .
finally wediscussrelatedworks section6 andconcludewithadiscussion of the scope and limitations of our approach and future directions section .
example consider an autonomous drone shown in figure that is controlledbyon boardautopilotsoftware whichperiodicallygenerates acommandtoupdatethevelocityanddirectionofitsmovement.
the ego drone i.e.
the drone being controlled has two safety features installed the boundary enforcer which monitors and overrides the autopilot command when necessary to prevent the unsafe region arun aboundaresolve chaserego figure a scenario where two safety features on the egodrone are activated at the same time and generate conflict ing commands a boundandarun .
drone from flying into an unsafe region and the runaway enforcer whichmonitorsthemovementofatrailingdrone e.g.
chaser in figure and attempts to maneuver the ego drone away from theformer.astheegodronemovesclosertotheboundarywhile beingchasedbyanotherdrone bothfeaturesbecometriggeredand generate conflicting commands the boundary enforcer generates anaction a boundinfigure1 tomovetheegoawayfromtheunsafe region whiletheactionfromtherunawayenforcer a run pushes the ego towards the boundary in attempt to distance it from the chaser.
the goal of resolution is to determine the final action to be performed by the system given such a conflict among the features.
existingmethods.
onepossibleapproachtoresolvingthisconflictistousesomenotionof priorities amongfeatures.thedrone operator for example may designate the runaway enforcer as havingahigherpriority andthesoftwarecontrollermaybeconfiguredtodisregardtheactionsfromotherfeatures includingtheboundary enforcer .
this decision results in system behaviors that attempt to satisfytherequirementofthehighest rankedfeaturewhile disregarding those of the lower ranked ones.
this type of winner takes all approach however may not be suitable in situations where such a strict ordering among features doesnotexist oralloftheconflictingfeaturesplayacriticalroleinmaintainingthesystemsafetyandperformance.forinstance whenthe runaway enforcer is always favored the ego drone may end upflyingoutsidethesafeboundaryinordertoevadethechaser.amore desirable outcome would be one where the ego drone behaves in a mannerthatattemptstosatisfytherequirementsofbothfeatures by evading the chaser while staying within the boundary.proposedmethod.
ourresolutionapproach incomparison takes intoaccounttherequirements ofallconflictingfeaturesandpro duces an action that is satisfactory with respect to all of them.
the key idea is to make explicit the desirable system behaviors that the features are designed to produce and allow the system designer to specify the overall specification of the system as a combination of the requirements of individual features.
for instance suppose that the two safety enforcers on the drone are designed to achieve the following requirements boundary enforcer maintain minimum time to intercept tmin seconds away from the boundary.
runaway enforcer maintain minimum safe distance dminmeters between the ego drone and another trailing drone.
givenfeaturerequirementsinaformalspecificationnotation in our case stl our resolution method attempts to synthesize an action that best achieves all of these requirements.
in the scenario depictedinfigure1 neitherofthetwogivenactions arunandabound 1091issatisfactory movingawayfromtheboundarywillincreasethe chanceofbeinginterceptedbythechaser andvice versa.however instead of taking either one of these actions our controller synthesizesanewaction aresolve thatmovesthedroneinawaythatis consistent with both requirements.
sinceourapproachdoesnotuseaprioritylistorfixedstrategies itcanhandleconflictscenarioswherethedesirabilityofonefeature changes dynamically depending on its satisfaction of the system specification in the current environmental context.
in addition by considering actions beyond those generated by the features our approach is capable of resolving conflicts and maintaining a desirablesystemoutcomeevenwhennoneofthecompetingactions are satisfactory with respect to the specification.
preliminaries signals.
in our approach the behavior of a system is modeled using the concept of a signal.
a signal over domain dis a function s t d wheretime domain tis a possibly infinite set of real numbers that represent points in time t r .
the value of a signalisatupleof krealnumbersthatcorrespondtodifferentstate variables i.e.
d rkands t v1 ... vk .
as a shorthand the subscriptnotation si t denotesthe i thcomponentofthesignalat timet for i k .
signal temporal logic.
stl is an extension of linear temporal logic ltl with an ability to specify system states as real valued signalsevolvingover time.sincecpsrequirementstypically involve timing properties e.g.
the drone must re enter the safe region within the next seconds as well as continuous state variables e.g.
dronespeed stl iswell suitedfor specifyingcps behaviors.
an stl formula takes the following form u 1 2 1u 2 wherea bfora b q anduis a predicate of the form fu s1 t ... sk t 0forak tuplesignal s s1 ... sk attimet.
informally 1u 2meansthat 1mustholduntil 2becomes truewithintheinterval .theuntiloperator ucanbeused toexpresstwoothercommontemporaloperators eventually f and always g f trueu andg f .
robustness.
inatypical verificationprocess aspecificationlanguage such as ltl is used to define a desired property of a system andatoolisusedtocheckwhetherthesystemsatisfiestheproperty.inadditiontothis binarynotionofsatisfaction itisusefultobeable to reason about how close the system is from satisfying or violatingaproperty.tosupportsucha quantitative notionofsatisfaction stl has been extended with the concept of robustness .
informally therobustnessofsignal swithrespecttostlformula attimet denoted s t isavaluethatrepresentsthedifference between the actual signal value and the threshold at which thesystem violates .
for example given property that says the distance between the drone and the boundary to an unsafe region must be at least .
meters s t represents how far beyond .
meters the drone is able to maintain its distance.
robustness can be used to compare different executions of a system in terms of their desirability.
suppose that we are given twosignals s1ands2 representingtwodistinctsystemexecutions such that s1 t .0mand s2 t .0m.
arguably theexecutionrepresentedby s2isasafer moredesirablescenario since the system maintains a greater distance to the boundary.
formally robustness is defined over stl formulas as follows u s t fu s1 t ... sk t s t s t 1 2 s t min 1 s t 2 s t g s t inft prime s t prime f s t supt prime s t prime where infx xf x is the greatest lower bound of some function f overdomain x and suptheleastupperbound .sinceeachpredicate in stl is of the form u fu s1 t ... sk t robustness intuitively captures how far the signal deviates above or below .
robustnessfor g representsthevaluewithininterval at which the system is the furthest away from satisfying or closest to violating it .
similarly robustness for f represents the valueatthetimebetween atwhichthesystemachievesthe highest satisfaction of .
example.
suppose that the objective of the boundary enforcer is tofulfillthefollowingsafetyrequirement thetimebeforetheego dronecrossestheboundaryofasaferegionmustbeatleastsome minimumthreshold tminsecondsforthenext3timeunits .this specificationcanbewrittenasstlproperty g tti tmin wherettiis a state variable that stores the current time tointercept tti i.e.
the time before crossing the boundary.
one possible execution of the drone is represented by the following signal sa .
.
.
.
note thatsahere is a single tuple signal with only one state variable tti sa t in practice a signal would have a number of other variables suchasthedronecoordinates velocity andacceleration .
in particular this signal depicts the behavior of the drone where its tti approaches .5s at time step before pulling away to .5s at time step .
suppose that tmin .5s.
then the robustness of signalsawith respect to the above property at the beginning of the execution denoted by sa can be computed as .
.
tmin .intuitively thisrobustnessvaluequantifieshowclosethe system comes to violating the property.
consider an alternative execution represented by signal sb .
.
.
.
where sb .
.although the property holds over both executions robustness values arepositiveforboth sarepresentsarguablythesaferandmore desirable behavior since the drone does not come as close to crossing the boundary as it does in sb.
this example demonstrates how the concept of robustness in stl can be used to distinguish system behaviors that would be considered equivalent under the binary notion of satisfaction as in ltl for example .
as described in the following section this quantitative notion of satisfaction plays a key role in our resolution mechanism.
resolution approach a high level overview of the proposed framework for feature interactionresolutionisshowninfigure2.inourmodelingapproach a system consists of a controller that interacts with the environment.
thecontroller containsone or more features eachof which receives information about the environment from various sensors 1092resolver detectorfeature1 feature2 featurenconflict actions...synthesized actionsystem speci fication actuators sensors environmenta1 a2 ancontroller environment model figure overview of the proposed resolution framework.
and generates an actionto influence the latter through an actuator.
for instance a feature in an autonomous drone may be a safety enforcer e.g.
the boundary enforcer from section that is ac tivated under certain environment conditions and generates an actionneededtofulfillarequirement e.g.
keepthedronewithin thesaferegion .the detectorcomponentinthecontrollermonitors the actions generated by the features and determines the subset of theactionsthatarepotentiallyinconflictwitheachother.these conflict actions are then passed onto the resolver.
the resolver is configured with two types of information the system specification that describes the requirements of the features expressedinstl andthe environmentmodel whichisusedbythe resolver to predict how the environment evolves over time given a particularsystemaction.duringresolution theresolvergeneratesaspaceofcandidateactionsandevaluateseachofthemintermsofitsrobustness i.e.
howwellitwouldsatisfythespecificationifitwere tobeexecutedontheenvironment .theactionwiththehighestrobustness value is selected and fed to the actuator which then performs the corresponding control action on the environment.detection.
detecting feature conflicts is an important part of feature interactions management but is not the focus of this paper and thus omitted from discussion.
briefly we use the variablespecificmethod proposed in the prior works where a pair of features that involve inconsistent modifications to the same actuatorvariable e.g.
acceleration isconsideredtobeinaconflict.
.
environment model a key element of our approach is an executable model of the environmentthatisusedtoevaluateeachcandidateactioninterms of how well it would satisfy the given specification if it were tobe selected as the final action.
in particular the environment is modeled as a transition system m q a qo where q rkis the set of states each representing one possible configuration of a k tuple signal i.e.
q v1 ... vk for some q qandv1 ... vk r ais the set of controller actions q a qis the transition function that describes how thesystemmovesfromonestatetoanotherbyperformingan action and q0 qis the set of initial states.
in our running example the environment model describes how the state of the ego drone i.e.
its location direction and velocity changes in response to a flight control action.
more precisely each stateqcanberepresentedastuple locx locy locz velx vely velz wherelocx y z rencodesthex y zcoordinatesoftheegodrone andvelx y z rencodes the current velocity of the drone.
onetypeofactionperformedbythecontrolleris setvelocity vx vy vz whichsetsthenewtargetvelocityofthedroneto vx vy andvz forx y zcomponents respectively .then thetransition function is defined such that for any state q prime q a anda setvelocity vx vy vz q prime q.locx q.velx q.locy q.vely q.locz q.velz q.velx ax q.vely ay q.velz az whereaxis the amount of acceleration that is applied to bring q.velxtovx and similarly for ayandaz .
conceptually anenvironmentmodelcanberegardedasamachine that generates different signals based on the actions performedbythecontroller.inparticular anexecutiontrace q0 q1 ... ql can be converted into signal s where for each t l s t qt.
.
system specification to recall one of the major challenges in resolution is that some ofthefeaturesaredesignedtofulfillrequirementsthatinevitably conflictwitheachotherincertainsituations e.g.
thescenarioin figure .
one approach is to select one of these conflicting features as the winner and disable the rest however this effectively amounts todisregarding therequirements ofthe losing features.
instead ourgoalistoconsiderallofthe possiblyconflicting requirements and synthesize an action that satisfies them as much aspossible.tosupportthistypeofresolution weallowtheoverall system specification to be expressed as a combination of the requirements of individual features.
moreprecisely afeature f fismodeledasafunctionthattakes a set of observable variables and produce an action.
each feature is associated with a requirement rfthat describes the objective that the feature is designed to achieve.
for instance the requirement of the boundary enforcer may be stated as maintain a safe minimum distancedminto the designated boundary .
in our approach each featurerequirementisspecifiedasanstlformula e.g.
rboundary g tti tmin .
then given nfeaturesf1 f2 ... fn the overall system specificationis defined as a set of weighted feature requirements as follows rsys w1 r1 w2 r2 ... wn rn wherew1 w2 ... wn r 0areweighting factors that together add up to .
.
the weights allow the system engineer to specify therelativeimportanceofthefeaturerequirements.forexample assigning equal weights will intuitively configure the system toresolve a conflict by selecting an action that attempts to satisfyallofthefeaturerequirements.similarly ifdesired theengineer could assign a weight of .
to one of the requirements effectively turningourresolverintoapriority basedone.theweightscould also be modified at runtime allowing the engineer to dynamically adjust the importance of requirements as needed over time.
.
synthesis based resolution .
.
resolution as optimization.
thegoalofresolutionistoresolve feature conflicts in a way to ensure that the resulting system behaviorisdesirable withrespectto thefeaturerequirements.to 1093definedesirabilityasametric weleveragethenotionofrobustness introduced in section .
formally given a set of feature requirements r1 r2 ... rnasstlformulas theoveralldesirabilityofa system behavior represented as signal s i st h eweighted sum of the robustness of the individual requirements sys w1 r1 s t w2 r2 s t ... wn rn s t we call systheglobal robustness of the system.
foraction a aandsignal scurrthatdescribestheexecution ofthesystemuptothepresentpointintime let sabethesignal that results from performing afor the next ksteps of the system execution i.e.
saisanextensionof scurr .then theproblemof synthesizing an action for resolution can be formulated as follows argmax a a parenleftbigw1 r1 sa t w2 r2 sa t ... wn rn sa t parenrightbig inotherwords theresolutiontaskinvolvesfindingaction athat would result in a signal that maximizes the global robustness.
.
.
normalization.
computing sysby simply adding robustness values for different requirements as stated above is not se mantically valid due to the following reasons.
first recall fromsection that the robustness for stl expression is computed based on the atomic functions over signal values i.e.
u s t fu s1 t .. sk t .
since different feature requirements are generally expressed over different signal functions their robustness values cannot be directly compared or combined.
second although robustness values are real numbers operations over them e.g.
addition and subtraction may not be semantically meaningful.
for example the robustness value of signifying that the associated stl formula is violated by the margin of may not be as bad as 1i s g ood .
before computing the global robustness as a sum of robustness for individual feature requirements we first perform normalization ofthesevaluesintoacommon semanticallymeaningfuldomain.
in particular our normalization method is designed to achieve the following list of desiderata thesamerobustnessvalueproducedbytwodifferentsignalfunc tionsshouldhaveroughlythesamemagnitude i.e.
u1 s1 t u2 s2 t ... uk sk t .
addition and subtraction of robustness values should also be meaningful e.g.
which represents the threshold at which the system satisfies a stl formula.
toenablenormalization ourresolutionframeworkisconfigured at design time with a pair of robustness bounds maxand min for each signal function i.e.
for some u s t fu s1 t .. sk t and any pair of signal sand time t min u s t max intuitively minrepresents the amount of violation that the system may be willing to tolerate and recover from i.e.
below this robustnessthreshold thesystembehaviormaybeconsideredunacceptable or invalid similarly maxrepresents the maximum degreeofpropertysatisfactionthatismeaningful.theselowerand upper robustness values are highly application specific and thus areprovidedbythesystemengineer anexampleofthesevalues will be discussed in section .
.
.giventhese maxand minvalues originalrobustness xistransformed into a normalized value within using the following min max scaling function scale x x min min 1x x maxx based on our experience however we found this scaling alone insufficient for encoding the desirability of system behaviors.
in mostcpssystems bringingthesystemfromthestateofviolatingarequirement i.e.
negative tosatisfyingit i.e.
positive ismore important than improving the degree of satisfaction i.e.
further increase thatisalreadypositive .todrivetheresolvertowards making decisions that mitigate violations we further improve our normalizationsothat negativerobustnessvaluesareweighted morethan positiveones and majorrequirement violationsare treated exponentially worse than minor violations.
in particular wemapthescaledrobustnessvaluesfrom to using the following function which penalizes violations of a property while maintaining linearity for positive robustness values penalize x x x 1x xx where is some constant greater than .
higher values result in steeper exponential curves for our case study discussed in section we used to create a sufficiently exponential curve that severely penalizes increasing requirements violations without overpenalizing minor requirements violations.
such a curve improvestheresolutionsystem sabilitytominimallyviolatecertainrequirementsinordertopreventextremeviolationsofother requirements.
then fully normalized robustness values for atomic stl expressions are computed as follows u s t penalize scale fu s1 t .. sk t robustness for other types of stl expressions e.g.
g f a r e computedtheusualwayasdescribedinsection3.then normalized robustness values for different feature requirements can be added to compute the global robustness sys.
.
.
algorithm.
the resolution algorithm algorithm takes four inputs the set of conflicting actions ac the system specification rsys w1 r1 w2 r2 ... wn rn a model of the environment m and a signal sthat describes the history of the system execution up to the current time.search space and sampling.
the first step of the algorithm is toidentifyafiniteset ofcandidateactionstobeevaluated line3 .
this involves two tasks defining the search space given the set ofconflictingactionsand samplingtheelementsofthisspace to be included in the candidate set acand.
sinceamaycontainalarge possiblyinfinite numberofactions it is infeasible to search this entire space.
instead to bound thesearch space we apply a heuristic based on the following idea givenaction aigeneratedbysomefeature fi for1 i n actions thatare closer to aiaremorelikelytofulfilltherequirementof fi than those that are further away from it.
for example given action 1094input ac conflicting actions rsys system specification m environment model s current signal 1funresolve ac rsys m s 2 opt aopt none 3acand encandidateactions ac g 4fora acanddo sa execute m a s window rsys a computeglobalrubustness rsys sa ifaopt none a optthen aopt a opt a end 11end 12returnaopt 13end algorithm synthesis based resolution algorithm.
afrom the boundary enforcer that moves the drone in a particular direction otheractionsthathavethesimilarvelocityvectoras aare morelikelytokeepthedronewithinthesaferegion.buildingon thisidea ourheuristicistonarrowthesearchspacetothoseactions thatarelocated betweentheactionsin ac thus minimizingthe sum of distances to the actions generated by the features.
moreformally weassumethatthesetofactions acanberepresented by a metric space m d wheremis an ordered set of elements in aandd m m ris a metric function that computes a non negative distance between any pair of elements inm.thisassumptionisreasonableinthecontextofcps where actions are typically used to manipulate continuous variables e.g.
velocity vector steering angle acceleration .
let aminandamax be thesmallest and largestelements respectively in the givenset ofconflictingactions ac.then thespaceofcandidateactionsis defined as the set of all actions between the aminandamax aspace a a amin a amax this set in general may be infinite and thus we further performasamplingofthisspacetoselectafinitenumberofcandidate solutionstoevaluate.thereareanumberofdifferentmethodsof sampling andourapproachdoesnotprescribeaparticularmethod.
however since resolution is performed during runtime one important consideration is the number of the sampled actions the overhead caused by robustness evaluation may interfere with systemoperations dependingonthetimingpropertiesofthecontroller e.g.
how frequent the controller issues an actuator command .
in our approach we allow the system engineer to control the numberofthesampledactionsbyprovidinganintegervaluefor the sampling granularity inputgon line which represents the numberofsamplesperunitdistance.giventhisvalue oursampling method partitions aspaceinto equally sized sets and samples one solution from each resulting in acand g amax amin .
the more fine grained the sampling is the more likely that the search will find the best solution in aspace the engineer may adjustgdependingontheamountofoverheadthatisacceptable to a particular application.signalestimation.
eachofthecandidateactions a acand is thenevaluatedforitsglobalrobustnessasdefinedby rsys.t odo this theenvironmentmodelisexecutedtoextend stoanewsignal sa which describes the estimated evolution of the system state assuming thataction ais executedfor somenumber of steps line .
the length of execution also called the windowof execution is theminimumlengthofasignalneededtoevaluatetherobustnessof a stl formula.
to compute this we adopt the method from a prior work thatanalyzesthestructureofformula todetermine its window as follows u 1 2 max 1 2 1u 2 max 1 b 2 b inparticular window rsys online5isdeterminedasthemaximum of the windows of the stl formulas that describe the individual feature requirements.
giventheestimatedsignal sa theglobalrobustness aiscomputedandthencomparedagainstthoseoftheotheractions lines6 to .
after evaluating acand the resolution algorithm terminates by returning an action that yields the highest global robustness value line among the candidate actions.
.
.
example.
inourrunningexample theoverallactionspace a isdefinedasthesetofallpossibleinstancesofaction setvelocity vx vy vz withconcretevaluesfor vx vy andvz whichcorresponds to thex y z components of the velocity vector respectively .
the distancebetweenapairofactionsisdefinedastheeuclideandistancebetweenthetwove ctors.weassumethatthemaximum speed of a drone is m s i.e.
radicalbig v2x v2y v2z .
.
supposethattheegodroneperiodicallykeepstrackofitsown location and velocity as well as those of another non friendly enemy drone in its vicinity as represented by the following signal s t loce o locenemy vele o velenemy whereloce oitself is a tuple that contains the x y z coordinates of the ego drone and similarly for other elements of the signal .
the drone is configured with two safety features the boundary and runaway enforcers as introduced in section .
the requirements of the two features are specified in stl as follows rb g timetointercept s t .
rr g distancetoenemy s t .
wheretimetointercept isafunctionthatreturnsthetime inseconds before the ego drone crosses a designated boundary into an unsafe region and distancetoenemy returns the distance between the ego and the enemy drone.
we assume that the features are assigned equal weights wb wr .
.
informally rbstates that for the following second after the controller issues a new actuator command1 the drone must maintainatleastaminimumtime to intercept tti of1.5secondstothe boundary.tonormalizetherobustnessvalue bforrequirement rb w eu s e bmax .
and bmin .
.
the upper bound of .
signifies that being .0s .
.
away from the boundary is sufficientlyfar enoughthatincreasing thetti evenfurtheris not critical for the boundary enforcer.
on the other hand once ttifalls below .0s .
.
then the drone has already veered 1since the controller is executed periodically at a much higher than second this window is sufficient to ensure that the safety property is maintained continuously throughout the entire drone mission.
1095deepintotheunsaferegionandshouldbeconsideredasbeingin the least desirable state possible.
similarly therequirementfortherunawayenforcerstatesthat the ego drone must maintain a distance of at least .
meters away fromtheenemydrone.weuse rmax .
and rmin .0asthe upper and lower bounds on the robustness of the requirement rr.
suppose that the current state of the ego drone is as follows s t parenleftbig .
.
.
.
.
.
parenrightbig this signal shows that the ego drone is being chased by the enemy drone towards thetop right corner of the boundary.
atthis point bothenforcersbecomeactivatedandgenerateactionstofulfilltheir individual requirements.
in particular the boundary enforcer generatessetvelocity .
.
which would instruct the ego dronetoflytowardstheorigin atthemaximumvelocityof2 meterspersecond.ontheotherhand therunawayenforcergeneratesaction setvelocity .
.
intendedtofurtherdistance the ego from the enemy drone.
given this pair of conflicting actions our resolver attempts to synthesize a new action that satisfies the requirements of both features as described in algorithm .
the set of candidate ac tions acandare sampled from the space between the two conflicting actions amin setvelocity .
.
andamax setvelocity .
.
.withg 10andthez componentfixed to this would result in around sampled actions.
the resolver then evaluates each of these actions by executing it under environment model m which estimates how the location and velocity oftheegodroneevolvesovertimegiventhenewvelocityvector the enemy drone is modeled as constantly updating its velocity in order to minimize its distance with the ego drone.
executing the environment model for the window of execution in this case second with setvelocity generates a new estimated signal with the following values s t parenleftbig .
.
.
.
parenrightbig evaluatingthenormalizedrobustnessvaluesoverthissignalresults in r .92and b which is combined using the given weights to yield sys .
.
after evaluating all of the sampled candidates ourresolverdeterminesthat setvelocity yields thehighest sysandthusreturnsitasthefinalactiontobeexecuted by the flight controller.
evaluation in this section we describe the evaluation of our proposed reso lution method.
in particular our goal is to answer the followingresearch question does the proposed synthesis based approach to resolution result in more desirable system behaviors compared to existing methods?
we first describe a prototype implementation of ourmethodaspartoftheflightcontrolsoftwareforanautonomous drone and then discuss a set of simulation based experiments that demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
the code for ourimplementation and evaluation is available at .
implementation weimplementedaprototypeofourresolutionframeworkontopof px4 an open source flight control software in c used for a widerangeofdrones .torunourexperiments weusedthejmavsim simulator partof px4 which simulatesthe physicaldynamics of a drone as it reacts to commands from the flight control software.simulatedscenarios.
ontopofpx4 weimplementedthemissionlevelcontrollogicthatinstructstheegodronetoperformthefollowingmission flytoanumberofwaypoints performareconnaissancetaskateachpoint andreturntothestartingcoordinate.a reconnaissance task involves dropping to some predefined altitude andflyinginafigure 8aboutthewaypoint.tocommandthedrone themissioncontrolsoftwaresendsavelocityvectortothelow level flight control at a frequency of approximately .7hz.
theenvironmentmodelusedforsignalestimationwasimplemented as a c program that takes the current signal andcontroller action as inputs and produces a new set of signal valuesthatdescribehowtheenvironmentevolvesgiventhisaction e.g.
changes to the location and velocity of the enemy drone .
features.
various safety features of the drone are implemented as componentscalled enforcers which areinterposed betweenthe missioncontrollerandthelow levelflightcontroller.eachenforcermonitorstheactiongeneratedbythemissioncontrolforapotential safetyviolation e.g.
approachingtheboundarywithinanunsafe distance and if necessarily overrides it with its own action that is intended to maneuver the drone to safety.
we implemented four safety features to test as part of our evaluation.
each feature is associated with certain operating conditions under which it becomes active and begins to generate actions that overridethosefromthemissioncontrol.forinstance theboundary enforcer from the running example is activated when the distance between the drone and the boundary drops below a certain threshold.
the following features were implemented boundary enforcer ensures that the drone stays within a predefined boundary with its robustness value calculated based on signal function timetointercept.
runaway enforcer ensures that the drone maintains a minimumdistancefromatrailingdrone withitsrobustnesscalculated based on signal function distancetoenemy.
stealthenforcer ensures that the drone stays above some minimum altitude alstealthwhen flying through predefined regions with its robustness calculated based on signal function distancetoaltitude which measures the distance between the ego vehicle and some target altitude along the z axis.
flightenforcer ensures that the drone does not crash into the groundbystayingaboveminimumaltitude al round withits robustness calculated based on function distancetoaltitude.
these features were chosen because they correspond to realistic features in autonomous drones and based on their requirements could lead to interesting interactions.
.
experimental design to evaluate our approach we compared our resolution method whichwecall synthesis based or synthrforshort tothefollowing two methods priority based resolution priorr which uses a fixed total ordering among the features to decide which one ofthe competing actions should be selected and property based resolution propr whichevaluateseachofthegivenconflicting 1096figure3 histogramofrobustnessvaluesforeachresolutionstrategy.thex axisrepresentstheaveragerobustnessvaluesfor eachrunwiththecorrespondingfeature.they axisrepresentsthefrequenciesofthoserobustnessvalues.largerrobustness values mean higher satisfaction of the feature requirement.
actions for global robustness sysand selects the one with the highest value but does not involve synthesizing a new action.
to evaluate our approach we devised the following hypotheses h1 synthrleadstoahighersatisfactionofthefeature requirements than priorr.
h2 synthrmethodleadstoahighersatisfactionof the feature requirements than propr.
to test these hypotheses we conducted 1500controlled experiments.toavoidaselectionbias werandomlysampled500starting conditions e.g.
locationsofthewaypointsandthestartingpositions of the ego and enemy drones .
for each of them we executed the drone mission under all three resolution methods.
onerisktoconsiderwasthatenvironmentvariables suchasthe enemy drone speed or the size of the boundary might implicitly change the importance of each feature which could introduce a situational bias to one method over the other.
for example a faster enemydronemightleadtopersistentviolationsoftherunawayfea ture.amethodthatoptimizesfortherunawayfeaturewillperform verywellinthisspecificcase howevermayperformpoorlyinother featureinteractions.ontheotherhand decreasingtheboundary sizemightcausetheboundaryfeaturetobecomethelimitingfactor biasingtheresultstowardsanimplementationthatisoptimizedforthissituation.sincethehypothesistotestinthisevaluationisabout the general techniques instead of specific application dependent situations wecreatedalargespaceofenvironmentvariablesand controlled for them to introduce the least possible situational bias.
in addition to avoid a predominant order between features we also randomly modified the weights of the features between theruns.fortheprioritymethod thetotalorderingbetweenthefeaturesweredeterminedfromtheirweights.toboundthenumber of candidate actions evaluated by synthr we used a granularity of10samplesperunit.forexample fortherangeof inthe x componentofthevelocityvector thiswouldresultin20candidatesolutionsbeingsampleduniformlyacrossthisspace andifthe same range was set for all x y z components samples .
data collection.
for each run we measured the robustness of the feature requirements every .
seconds.
we also collected the number of feature interactions i.e.
the occurrence of a conflictbetween at least two features allowing us to later compare the effectiveness of the methods with and without conflict.
.
experimental results weevaluatedandcomparedtheeffectivenessoftheresolutionmethodsintermsoftherobustnessthattheywereabletoachieveduring the simulated runs.
figure shows the results of our experiments.
toevaluatethesignificanceoftheresults weuseda t test which determines whether there is a statistically significant difference between the means of two distributions in this case the distribution of average robustness values collected over the simulation runs .
once an effect is determined by the t test to be statistically significant thepracticallymorerelevantmetricis effectsize sinceitstates howlargethedifferencebetweenapairofmethodsis.inparticular weusedcohen sd oneofthemostcommonwaystomeasure effect size.
cohen s d describes the difference between two means in terms of the standard deviation of the overall distribution.2for 2avalueofapprox.
.2isconsideredasmalleffectsize.
.5isconsideredamedium effect size and .8is considered a large effect size .
1097allmeasurements wealsobuiltaregressionmodelthatcontrolsfor thestartingconditions.sincebothanalysismethodsresultedinthe sameconclusions wefocusontheresultsofthemoreintuitively understandable t test as well as cohen s d as effect size measure.
.
.
synthr vs. priorr.
the data analysis results show that the synthrmethodissignificantlybetteratsatisfyingtherequirements ofmultiplefeaturesandavoidingtheirviolationsthanthe priorr method.
this subsection will discuss this in more detail.
when comparing the weighted sum of the robustness values of all four features i.e.
global robustness our results show that synthris significantly better than priorr cohen s d .
with p .
meaning that the global robustness achieved by synthr is almost .
standard deviations larger .
one noteworthy observation which can be seen in figure is thatpriorrtends to result in negative robustness values more frequently.forexample notehowtherequirementoftheboundaryfeatureisoftenviolatedunder priorr whereas synthrrarelyresults inaviolation.thisisaconsequenceofthe winner takes all nature ofpriorr which simply disregards the requirements of the lowerpriority features and thus results in their violations.
looking at the robustness of individual feature requirements we observe that synthris significantly better than priorrfor both the boundary with medium to large effect size cohen s d .
mediumtolargeeffectsize p .
andrunawayfeaturewith a medium effect size cohen s d .
p .
.
this was a surprisingoutcome sincewe had expectedthatforindividualfeatures priorrwouldperformjustaswell ifnotbetter than synthr.
thiscanbeattributedtothefactthat synthr bydesign valuesthe improvementofnegativerobustnessvaluesmorethantheimprovementofpositiverobustnessvaluesinordertoavoidrequirement violations.soittradesofftheimprovementofapotentiallyviolated requirements inthiscase boundaryandrunaway withtheasmall compromisewithanalreadyhighlysatisfiedrequirement inthis case flight .
the stealth feature shows no significant effect size for a difference between between the two resolution strategies cohen sd .
p .
.
for the flight feature synthrperforms significantly worse with a small to medium negative effect size cohen sd .
p .
.thiscanbeattributedtothefact that conflicts involving these features are relatively rare and in suchcases optimizingforoneparticularfeature asdoneby priorr may overall be just as effective as if not better than synthr.
the larger effect size for the improvement in the boundary feature and runway outweighs the smaller effect size for a decrease intheflightfeature.sowecanconcludethat inourcasestudy synthr shows abetter satisfaction of themulti dimensional requirements thanpriorr.this leads us to accepting hypothesis h1.
.
.
synthr vs. propr.
our results show that synthris significantlybetterthan proprwhilefeatureinteractionsareoccurring but only insignificantly better outside of these time periods.
tobemorespecific whencomparing proprwithsynthrwith respecttoglobalrobustness thedifferenceisnotstatisticallysignificant cohen sd .
p .
.theprimaryreasonforthisis thatduringthepartsofexecutioninwhichnofeatureconflictexists all feature requirements are satisfied regardless of the selected resolution method.
it is only during the period of interactions inwhichsynthrcan be shown toachievehigher global robustness thanpropr.
this can be seen by conducting a time series analysis of the global robustness over each run.
weconductedaregressiondiscontinuityanalysis to compareproprwithsynthrbyevaluatinghowthelevelandslope of the global robustness time series of the two methods change overtime.inthisanalysis eachindividualmissionismodelledas a time series with a data point for each time tick.
all data points ofthe1500timeseriesarethenanalyzedinoneregressionmodel thatenablesustostatisticallycomparetheslopesoftherobustness values during the presence of a feature interaction versus not.
the resulting regression equation is sys intervention synth intervention time timeafterintervention synth timeafterintervention enemy drone speed boundary size intervention is a boolean indicating whether a conflict is taking place synthis a boolean for whether the experiment was conducted with synthror not timeis the number of ticks passed sincethestartofthemission timeafterintervention isthenumberofticksafteraconflictstarted and enemy drone speed andboundary sizeare the control variables for environment configurations.
intervention tells us the average change in robustness values during the presence of a feature interaction versus not.
synth intervention tellsusthedifferenceinchangeinrobustness whenusing synthrversusnot.
timeafterintervention tellsusthe average change in the slopeof robustness when a conflict is taking place.
similarly synth timeafterintervention constitutes the average difference in robustness slope for synthr.
theentireregressionmodelexplains .
ofthevariance.the results are shown in figure .
all independent variables are statistically significant p .
for each .
overall the improvement achievedby synthris0.077robustnessunits confidenceinterval ci whencontrollingforthementionedvariables.
so there is a small improvement overall when using synthr i fw e disregard the presence or absence of feature interactions.
when a conflict occurs the global robustness is reduced on average by .469robustness units ci which is a significantdifference.theaveragerobustnessdifferencefor synthr is0.29robustnessunitssmaller ci thanfor propr whichisabout oftheoveralldifference.hence wecanconclude thatsynthrperformssignificantlybetterinachievinghigherglobal robustness than proprwhen the system is encountering a conflict.
furthermore asshowninfigure5 synthrresultsinasmoother andmorestablepathwithlessextremechanges whichisadesirable property in a cyber physical system.
in conclusion in our case study there is a large effect size for improvements achieved by synthrduring the presence of feature interactions whilethereisrelativelyasmalleffectsizeduringtheir absence.this leads us to accepting hypothesis h2.
.
performance overhead althoughourresultssuggestthat synthrcanachievehigherglobal robustness it also involves more computation in comparison to the other two methods mainly due to the evaluation of additional actions.
since px4 requires the velocity vector to be updated at 1098coeff.
std err.
r2 intercept .
.
intervention .
.
.
enemy drone speed .
.
.
boundary size .
.
.
synth .
.
.
synth intervention .
.
.
timeafterinterv.
.
.46e .
synth timeafterinterv.
.
.
.
time .
.84e .
p .001n r2 .
figure results for the regression discontinuity analysis.
the intervention is defined as the time frame in which featureinteractionsarehappening.thesynthesis basedresolutionleadstohighersatisfactionoftherequirements inpar ticular during the time while feature interactions are hap pening.
a synthesis based resolution b property based resolution figure time spatial visualization of a representative runforbothmethods.orangelinesrepresenttheflightpathandthebigbluedotsrepresentthethepointsatwhichaconflicttakes place.
synthrresults in a smoother path.
least 2hz the operation of the drone may be affected negatively if resolution takes longerthan the maximumallowed time between controller updates i.e.
.
seconds .
to test this we measured the durationofeachresolutiontaskandcheckedwhetherthisexceeded themaximumcyclelength3.insummary withthegranularityof samplingusedforourcasestudy wedidnotobserveanyoverhead thatwassignificantenoughtoviolatethetimingrequirementon controller updates and negatively impact the drone operation.
in practice to deploy our resolution method the system engineer would take into account the hardware capacity and timing properties of the controller system and would adjust the sampling granularity to ensure that resolution does not interfere with the drone operation.
.
threats to validity construct validity.
whenmeasuringpropertiesofcps simulations are often the only practical evaluation technique.
this constitutes a threat to construct validity since every simulation omits 3the performance measurements were made on an imac with an .8ghzintel core i5 cpu and 16gbramsome properties of the real world.
however the asserted safety properties measure execution logic instead of accuracy of physics.
further any imprecision applies to all experiment instances to the same extent.
so while our measurements might include a small error it should not bias the results towards a particular conclusion ofh1orh2.
internal validity.
thepracticalconstraintofpartiallysampling a space of configurations i.e.
actions poses a threat to internal validity since the possibility of sampling exceptional cases can neverbe ruledout.
thisthreatwas addressedby samplingalarge numberofdifferentcasesandbypayingcloseattentiontostatisticalsignificance.
however the concrete numbers for effect sizes should not be over interpreted but rather only used to get an overall impression of how large the difference can be.external validity.
the performance measurements of the run time overhead are application specific and hardware dependent.
on other hardware and for other applications the results may vary greatly.
so with more restricted hardware and more complex computation theimplementationwouldneedmoreperformancetuning than our prototypical implementation.
however we believe in the conclusionthatinmostcasestheimprovedabilitytoresolvefeature conflicts outweighs the insignificant increase in computation.
furthermore the results of the case study might not necessarily generalizetootherpotentialusecasesofthepresentedapproach.
although webelieve that thepresented case study embodiescommon characteristics of cps the results might differ for other kinds of cps features or use case scenarios.
the main claim of thisevaluation is that the presented approach is able to significantly outperform existing work.
the empirical evaluation explicitly does not make any claim about whether the measured effect sizes apply to other cases or whether h1andh2hold true for a majority of cps.
however since the proposed approach is also supported by a theoretical framework that outlines its advantages we expect it to perform well on many other cps that have to deal with conflicting features that need to be resolved during run time.
related work feature interactions.
feature interaction problems have been studied extensively by the software engineering community .
there are two major sub problems in feature interactions detection andresolution.
here we mainly focus on the prior approaches to resolution.
raghavan et al.
p r o po s eda property driven approach to resolution where they also use the notion of robustness in stl to resolveconflictsbetweenasetofcompetingfeatureactions.our workimprovesontheirsinthefollowingways ourapproachallowsaspecificationtobeexpressedasaweightedsumofrobustness of properties that describe the requirements of conflicting features whereastheirapproachislimitedtoasingleglobalproperty thatis not tied to a particular feature and our approach is capable of synthesizinganewaction whiletheirapproachislimitedtoselecting one of the given feature actions.
thus as demonstrated in our study ourapproachismoreeffectiveatproducingdesirablesystem behaviors when there is no clear priority among the features and all of their requirements are critical to system operation.
1099anotherrelatedapproachisthe negotiation based approachto run time resolution where a central mediator is used to resolve conflicts among multiple system agents.
their approach is similarinthatthegoalofnegotiationistodeviseactionsthatare considered acceptable to all agents involved similar to how we attempttosynthesizeanactionthatsatisfiestherequirementsof theconflictingfeatures .however ourapproachsignificantlydiffers in the type of specifications used to describe desired system behaviors constraint based policiesthatdescribeacceptablesystem operations in their approach versus cps properties in ours .
our work is also related to the variable specific approach introduced in where each actuator variable e.g.
acceleration isassociatedwitha resolution strategythatisdesignedto resolve conflicts over that variable e.g.
select the action that results in thesmallestaccelerationvalue .however itmaybedifficultfor the system engineer to anticipate all possible interaction scenarios e.g.
especiallylesscommonones likethoseinfigure1 and devise a strategy that can produce a desirable system outcome under them.
in comparison since our approach does not rely on a fixed design time strategy it is capable of handling scenarios that are unanticipated by the engineer as long as the the model of theenvironment is general enough to cover those scenarios .
prior approaches to resolution that use a priority or precedence ordering are not effective for resolving interactions in systems where the desirability of a feature action is highly context dependent e.g.
therunawayenforcer normallythetop priority feature may be of lower importance when the drone is about to cross the boundary into an unsafe region .runtime monitoring and verification.
stl and other similar specification formalisms e.g.
metric temporal logic ormtl hasbeenusedforonlinemonitoringofsystemproperties .runtimetechniqueshavealsobeendevelopedfor enforcing adesirablepropertybyobservingandpossiblymodifyingsystemactions .however thesepriorworksfocusonevaluating asingleexecution tracefor property satisfaction and donot involve a comparison of multiple actions or traces.self adaptivesystems.
self adaptive systems is an active area of researchondesigningsystemstobecapableofadjustingtochanges in their operating environment .
our proposed resolutionframeworksharessomeofthecommoncharacteristicsof a self adaptive system in that it relies on information collected by monitoringthestateofthesystemanditsenvironmenttodetermineifitisnecessarytotakeanactiontomaintainsystemrequirements andtoplanwhatactiontotake.inaddition itsharestheuseofa predictive model as in model based approaches to proactive selfadaptation toevaluatetheeffectofcandidateactionsover the near future.
our approach supports the formal specification of thedesiredpropertiestobemaintainedusingstlandprovidesa resolution approach when there are conflicts between them.
discussions and future work roleofexistingfeatures.
sinceourresolverworksbyeffectively overriding the actions of the existing features one may wonder whetherthereisanyneedfortheexistingfeaturesatall.onecould forexample conceiveofasystemarchitecturewhereacontroller basedonoursynthesismethodisusedatalltimestogenerateanactionthatisoptimalwithrespecttoasetofrequirements.however the synthesis procedure can be computationally expensive and thus our method is likely to be more cost effective in systems where conflicts are rare rather than being common events.
in these systems the existing features implementations will still be needed tocontrolthebehaviorofthesystemasdesired.additionally struc turingthesystemassetofindependentfeatures insteadofhavingasingle monolithiccontrollerthatsynthesizesactions allowsforthe benefits of modularity as system requirements change over time.optimality of the approach.
since we randomly sample from the possibly infinite search space our current method does not provide any theoretical guarantees about the optimality of the synthesizedaction butonlythatitresultsinahigherglobalrobustness than the given conflicting actions assuming the accuracy of theenvironmental model used for signal estimation .
however ourmethod may be augmented with search techniques such as stochastic gradient descent or simulated annealing to more efficiently explore the space and converge to an approximate global optimum.
generality.
ourapproachmakesseveralassumptionsregarding thesystemthatmaynotholdingeneral.weassumetheenvironmentcanbeeffectivelymodeledwithinsomepredictionwindow and that this prediction window is sufficient for approximating an optimal action.
additionally designers must be able to determine afixedmaximumviolationandsatisfactionforeachproperty.future workcouldimprovethenormalizationmethodtoautomatefinding theseparametersorbetteraccountforthedifferentratesofchange of robustness values across properties.
applying an exponential penalty to violations generalizes to any system where further violation of one property is worse than further satisfaction of another.
whenanyviolationconstitutesamaximumviolation thiscanbe captured by setting the maximum violation accordingly.
somespecificsofourcasestudydonotgeneralizetootherdomains.
our method of determining a search space is specific to ourcasestudybecauseallofouractionsaredefinedby3dvelocity vectors and weuse this knowledgeto defineour search space.
different cps with different action spaces may require differentmethods to define or search for actions but the details of these methods are orthogonal to our high level approach and remain as futurework.inaddition thenaivesample and testmethodused for action synthesis generalizes to any cps.
however such a naive searchmethodrequiresagreaternumberofcandidateactionsto be tested and therefore would be infeasible in domains where evaluating a candidate action is computationally expensive.
as future work leveragingoptimalcontroltheory couldmoreefficiently identify pareto optimal actions and could potentially do so offline without needing to discretize and search the action space.