who s pushing the code?
an exploration of github impersonation yueke zhang1 anda liang1 xiaohan wang1 pamela wisniewski1 fengwei zhang2 kevin leach1 yu huang1 1vanderbilt university nashville usa yueke.zhang anda.liang xiaohan.wang.
pamela.wisniewski kevin.leach yu.huang vanderbilt.edu 2southern university of science and technology shenzhen china zhangfw sustech.edu.cn abstract github is one of the largest open source software oss communities for software development and collaboration.
impersonation in the oss communities refers to the malicious act of assuming another user s identity often aiming to gain unauthorized access to code manipulate project outcomes or spread misinformation.
with several recent real world attacks resulting from impersonation this issue is becoming more and more concerning within the oss community.
we present the first exploration of the impact of impersonation in github.
specifically we conduct structured interviews with real world oss contributors about their perception of impersonation and corresponding mitigations.
our study reveals that in general github users lack awareness of impersonation and underestimate the severity of its implications.
after witnessing a demo of impersonation they show significant concern for the oss community.
meanwhile we also demonstrate that the current best practices i.e.
commit signing that might mitigate impersonation must be improved to encourage use and adoption.
we also present and discuss participant perceptions of potential ways to mitigate github impersonation.
we collect a dataset comprising .
million commits to investigate the current status of impersonation.
interestingly we find out that currently impersonation cannot be easily detected.
we observe that existing commit histories treat impersonation behavior identically to pull request events resulting in a lack of detection methods for impersonation.
index terms open source software impersonation i. i ntroduction over the past years github has evolved to become more than just a platform for open source software oss development but also a social ecosystem that democratizes the field enabling contributions from diverse backgrounds and skill levels .
in particular github has a dramatic impact on software development education and social networking among developers .
it is also a social platform for oss developers to communicate and share knowledge as well as develop their social profiles .
github adopts a flexible approach to commits as a natural consequence of emphasizing collaboration.
since it is based on git users can freely change their commit email allowing developers to commit not limited to a single account .
however this flexibility also presents challenges related to identity issues within the community.
with just one git command a developer can assume anyone s identity to makecommits.
this commit mechanism can lead to unexpected malicious behaviors.
as illustrated in figure an attacker eve can configure her email to pretend to be a credible developer enabling them to introduce malicious code into projects.
we refer to such behavior as impersonation .
it is difficult to determine who is pushing the code in a commit under impersonation.
real world attacks have exploited impersonation in github in very recent years.
a newly emerged supply chain attack used impersonation to compromise github repositories in .
more alarmingly a north korean group has implemented malware by creating repositories relating to blockchain cryptocurrency and online gambling in .
these repositories involve the impersonation of reputable developers committing to them .
in turn victim users are deceived into downloading the malicious software associated in the form of malicious npm packages in the case of .
with the growing security and privacy threats posed by impersonation very little work has explored warning github users about the risks associated with impersonation .
existing research on oss security focuses on issues like api leakage and metadata manipulation overlooking the impersonation issue .
though features like commit signing could potentially mitigate impersonation they may not be widely used nor practical enough for wide acceptance.
impersonation is a natural consequence of the git architecture and indeed github already has policies forbidding impersonation .
however we still lack an understanding of how impersonation influences developers in oss communities especially on github.
we present the first evaluation of developers perception and awareness of impersonation and explore potential mitigation strategies for this issue.
we investigate the awareness of impersonation among github users the level of concern among developers regarding impersonation the widespread acceptance of official practices e.g.
commit signing strategies to mitigate impersonation from the perception of github users and the feasibility of detecting impersonation.
in our study we conducted semi structured interviews with github contributors.
we reveal that the majority of participants were unaware of impersonation and underestimated its severity until encountering examples of impersonation.fig.
.
the figure illustrates an impersonation scenario on github.
the attacker eve aims to introduce malicious code into a repository she can pretend to be a credible developer bob by configuring her commit email to match bob s. the tactic causes eve s potentially malicious commits to appear as though they were created by bob in turn gaining trust from individuals in a victim repository.
we also collected data encompassing .
million commits from which we measured that of the commits did not use commit signing.
furthermore we investigate the reasons why developers do not adopt commit signing.
even though impersonation is a concern for participants we also discovered that there is currently no singularly effective method to identify impersonation behavior within github commit history primarily due to the similarity that manifests between pull requests and impersonation in git commits.
in summary our study is the first to investigate github impersonation both from the perspective of developers and data accessible from github.
specifically we make the following contributions we conduct the first study to investigate impersonation on github.
in interviews with github users participants expressed heightened concern regarding impersonation.
we also assess the usage patterns of existing best practices for mitigating impersonation i.e.
commit signing .
we illustrate the participants perceptions regarding the impact that impersonation can have on github and explore potential mitigation strategies based on their own experiences.
we made the first attempt to uncover the possibility and challenge to detect the impersonation and also provide guidance for future work.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows section presents a motivating example section analyzes related work section describes our research questions empirical methods design and impersonation detection attempt section presents the results section discusses the implications section discusses limitations and section concludes the paper.
we share the interview script and answers from participants of this study1.
ii.
m otivating example doppelganger demo we demonstrate how impersonation can be implemented in github and can cause security issues through the doppel1 github fig.
.
a motivating example showing impersonation of a legitimate user.
ganger demo2.
in figure we assume an attacker eve intends to introduce malicious code to a repository by impersonating the identity of a credible developer bob.
in figure we illustrate the process of impersonation.
initially eve finds bob s commit history in github and locates the email associated with his account.
then eve uses the git command git config global user.email to set her git identity as bob s. eve can create a fork of the target repository and use the regular push command to push commits to her fork.
similar to the right side of figure the displayed author of the malicious code is now bob even though eve is the actual contributor of the code.
in this paper we show participants this process in a structured interview.
iii.
r elated work this section first discusses software vulnerabilities in opensource software oss and how patches can introduce serious vulnerabilities in oss projects.
next we focus on existing exploitation of oss security issues including metadata vulnerabilities and supply chain attacks.
finally we introduce the issue of impersonation and user identification problems on github.
a. software vulnerability in oss several existing studies focus on vulnerabilities introduced by patches in commits.
according to research investigating vulnerability introducing commits on github less experienced developers are .
to times more likely to contribute a vulnerable patch compared to experienced developers .
additionally over of vulnerabilities are introduced by new contributors to a repository a substantially higher rate than that of original contributors .
moreover some commits intentionally introduce malicious code.
for instance hypocrite commits appear to fix minor issues while serious vulnerabilities are in fact introduced .
presently there are recurring attacks targeting open source software oss projects aimed at compromising the entire supply chain .
the objective of such attacks is to plant malicious code into open source projects which can then be executed within downstream projects contexts.
2the word doppelg anger is german for double walker it commonly refers to a person who is almost identical to another.as the influence of the oss community grows vulnerability commits have a greater impact than ever before.
impersonation as an internal issue within git mechanisms will become increasingly important in the future.
b. exploitation in oss much of society s critical infrastructure and the ability to innovate depends on the health of oss .
however security issues are prevalent in oss comprising approximately of all issues .
more specifically related to our work securityrelated discussions account for approximately of all discussions on github .
exploitations of github commonly fall into two main categories infrastructure vulnerabilities and supply chain attacks .
infrastructure vulnerabilities includes issues like buffer overflows sql injections cross site scripting xss metadata manipulation and remote code execution vulnerabilities launched against github itself.
morton et al.
explored code related risks including buffer overflows and sql injections.
in addition a defense scheme that mitigates metadata manipulation attacks is proposed by maintaining a cryptographically signed log of relevant developer actions .
supply chain attacks include malicious code inserted into open source components which then gets propagated when other software depends on these components.
for instance ohm et al.
focus on supply chain issues especially the risks tied to malicious code insertion.
in addition alexopoulos et al.
raised concerns that the openness of oss might amplify these issues.
despite these main categories discussed above a recent study has provided a review of threat modeling techniques tailored for oss which offers more insights into categorizing security issues in oss.
however there is a lack of research exploring how human developers interact with or are deceived within within oss contexts.
c. impersonation issues in oss many oss security issues are related to identity management and cryptography .
git itself also provides some identity authentication features.
one important instance is commit signing .
however with a service like github the server creates a commit object it cannot sign on behalf of the user as it lacks the cryptographic key material needed for the signature.
to improve this le git imate provides security guarantees compatible with git s standard commit signing mechanism which can defend against high impact attacks on web based git repositories.
another mechanism push certificates introduced in version .
.
of git allows a user to digitally sign the reference that points to a pushed object.
however push certificates are designed for out of band auditing.
as a result push certificates are rarely used in practice.
despite the importance and challenge of identity authentication using git github allows developers to pretend to use aliases for the commits.
in git the identity information attached to each commit including the name and email addressof the user is determined by the configurations set by the user in their local git environment.
to identify the authorship of code changes commits in open source repositories existing work has found that within around million author ids there are around .
million ids to have an alias which belong to .
million different developers with the median number of aliases being per developer.
iv.
s tudy design our study comprises two stages to investigate the impact of impersonation on github intervention interview and impersonation detection attempt.
our study seeks to answer the following research questions rq1 to what extent are github developers aware of and concerned about impersonation?
how does their perception change before and after witnessing the doppelganger demo?
rq2 how widely is the current general practice i.e.
commit signing accepted and used among developers?
rq3 to what extent can we detect the potential impersonation on github?
rq4 how can github users be safeguarded against impersonation based on user perception?
a. intervention interview following best practices in the hci literature we conduct structured interviews with participants to assess their awareness and perception of the severity and impact of impersonation on github.
we discuss the recruitment participant demographics and interview process in this subsection .
we refer to this as the intervention interview because we show participants a demonstration of github impersonation and then interview them about their perceptions.
data collection and recruitment we use github s rest api to collect user and their commit information from github .
first we queried the github api using randomly generated two letter strings e.g.
ae to retrieve lists of repositories ranked by star count in descending order and retrieve the most starred repositories for each twoletter string .
from batches of such random searches we compiled the most starred projects resulting in unique repositories after removing duplicates.
we gathered the commit history of each repository between july 1st and september 1st .
subsequently we extract the contributor list for these repositories and retrieve all the commits made by each contributor during the specified timeframe .
to gather information about each contributor we use the contributor event api which provides insights into their behavior and activities within the repository .
additionally the repository commit api allows us to collect comprehensive data on every commit made within the repository .
from the contributor api we obtain each contributor s email address .
we reviewed the collected repositories to identify users employing multiple or 3github s api is both rate limited and precludes automatically gathering larger amounts of data about each repository.fig.
.
a diagram showing our interview design unassociated emails compared to their public github user email in unverified commits resulting in users.
then we emailed contributors and finally recruited participants with a response rate of .
.
participant demographics the demographic information is detailed in table i labeled p1 through p17.
participants include males and females.
the participants coding experience ranges from beginners with less than one year to developers with over five years of experience.
the github usage frequency varies significantly among participants out of the participants use github nearly every day.
geographically the participants primarily contributed from the united states china and canada.
moreover we also grouped our participants based on their experience and their background for further analysis on individual differences in this study.
specifically we first consider participants prior experience in open source novice group the group includes participants with less than three years of oss experience.
p1 p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 p10 p11 p12 and p16 expert group the group includes participants with more than three years of oss experience and use github every week.
p9 p13 p14 and p15 then we also consider the participants occupations non industry group the group includes participants who are not working in the computer science industry.
p4 p7 p13 p14 p15 and p16 industry group the group includes participants who are working in the computer science industry.
p1 p2 p3 p5 p6 p8 p9 p10 p11 and p12 p17 has previously worked at github and is familiar with the impersonation process and provided very insightful opinions for the study from an internal view i.e.
as a github employee .
due to p17 s extensive knowledge of oss impersonation we will not include his perspectives in the general discussion but present his opinions separately in the discussion section instead.
protocol we conducted and recorded these interviews remotely via zoom ranging from to minutes per participant.
three of the authors conducted the interviews.
before the interview all participants signed an informed consent form and completed a demographic survey through email.
participantswere required to be over years of age and express comfort in communicating in english.
participants were briefed on the study s context and purpose.
we offer a amazon gift card as a participant incentive4.
the interview format follows widely used intervention based studies which we leverage to understand how participants perceive impersonation on github.
interview design as depicted in figure our interview consisted of three steps.
first we asked participants a series of questions before the demo including their reasons for using github their concerns regarding privacy and security issues their awareness of impersonation and their level of concern regarding impersonation without revealing our demo.
we also use a point likert scale to gauge their degree of concern regarding impersonation .
next we presented participants with the doppelganger demo as an intervention.
interviewers share the screen during the demo showing the git commands used during impersonation.
if a participant is willing to engage actively in this process we request their email address solely to demonstrate impersonation within the context of our study.
then similar to the process outlined in section ii participants will navigate through the entire impersonation process and the interviewers impersonate their identity.
finally participants observe their identity displayed in the interviewer s repository as the commit author even though the interviewer wrote and pushed the code.
if participants are unwilling to provide us with their github email we will only demonstrate the impersonation process and will not impersonate them.
after the demo we asked participants to reassess their level of concern to determine again if there was a shift.
we also inquired about the perceived influence of impersonation on github and elicited suggestions from participants on how developers can safeguard themselves.
qualitative and quantitative analysis in interview data we transcribed the interview conversations into text using third party software and conducted inductive thematic analysis over multiple phrases .
first we remove any irrelevant information filler words or repetitions that do not contribute to the analysis.
4this study is approved by the irb from vanderbilt universitytable i demographic information of the participants .
id sex education completed or ongoing coding exp oss exp github usage occupation location p1 male phd or higher years years almost every day cs or related field student us p2 male master s degree years years times a week cs or related field student us p3 male master s degree years or more years times a month cs or related field student china p4 male bachelor s degree years years times a week software developer engineer us p5 male phd or higher years years times a week cs or related field student us p6 female phd or higher years years times a week cs or related field student china p7 female phd or higher years years almost every day machine learning engineer china p8 female master s degree years below year times a month cs or related field student us p9 male phd or higher years or more years or more almost every day cs or related field student us p10 male phd or higher years or more years times a month cs or related field student us p11 female bachelor s degree years years times a month cs or related field student us p12 male master s degree years years times a month cs or related field student us p13 male bachelor s degree years or more years almost every day software developer engineer us p14 female master s degree years or more years or more times a week software developer engineer canada p15 male bachelor s degree years or more years or more times a week software developer engineer us p16 male master s degree years or more below year almost every day machine learning engineer us p17 male bachelor s degree years years almost every day software developer engineer germany next we generate code responses to specific questions or thematic segments that emerge during the interviews.
subsequently we assign codes or labels to different segments based on their content.
finally we organized the code into meaningful themes.
the theoretical saturation was reached at the 13th participant.
the final codebook in our analysis is available in the artifact link.
for the quantitative data obtained from the likert scale in measuring the level of concern towards impersonation we conducted a t test to determine whether there was a significant difference before and after participants viewed the doppelganger demo.
b. impersonation detection attempt in this section we outline our attempt to detect impersonation commits and users.
the process includes two key steps crosscheck for impersonation commits and identify github users engaged in impersonation.
crosscheck for impersonation commits during the process of impersonating a committer it becomes challenging to identify the actual contributor behind a commit directly.
this is because we cannot reliably determine the true author of a commit.
on the commit page github displays the impersonated user as the commit user and even provides a user link to their profile providing a very convincing view that the impersonated victim did in fact create the commit.
similarly the impersonated user is shown as the login author in the api.
the true identity of the committer remains undisclosed in impersonation.
however the commits only occur in the commit history of the real user and not the displayed user.
therefore to address this issue we collect the commit history of the repository along with the user s commit history in section iv a1.
by cross checking these two sets of data it becomes possible to identify commits that exist in the repository history but are not reflected in the displayed user history.
identify github users engaging in impersonation after identifying the commits by crosschecking the repository anduser commit histories we examine the users responsible for these commits.
by identifying these users we collect their entire commit history during the previously discussed period section iv a1 .
we presume that these users are more likely to make additional impersonation commits due to their past involvement.
consequently a user is expected to have multiple commit email addresses as they intentionally disguise their identity by altering the commit email in their configuration.
however we note this is not always the case and may result in false positives as many users legitimately use several different email addresses.
v. r esults in this section we present the findings derived from interviews and the analysis of github data to address our research questions.
a. to what extent are github developers aware of and concerned about impersonation?
how does their perception change before and after witnessing the doppelganger demo?
rq1 under rq1 the first subquestion focuses on the current level of awareness and concerns among github developers regarding impersonation i.e.
before they learn about it from our demo .
the second subquestion assesses their level of concern after they learn how easily impersonation can occur.
together these two subquestions offer a comprehensive discussion of participants views as their understanding of impersonation evolves.
the perceived security and privacy issues on github before presenting the doppelganger demo we initially inquired about the security and privacy issues participants are aware of on github.
at the start of the interview it became evident that all participants had been involved in collaborative projects.
significantly all contributors expressed happiness and excitement upon having their commits accepted by opensource projects.
they believe their contributions can help more developers and eagerly anticipate having their names listed in influential projects.table ii privacy and security concerns on github theme description representative example participant no concern the participants have no privacy or security concerns because github is the most renowned open source project community.i don t see any potential risk in using the github.
p3 p3 p5 p8 p14 p15 public key leakage the participants are worried about the leakage of sensitive information such as specific api keys when they release their code to the public.sometimes you don t even know when your code will have maybe your api key.
p2 p2 p4 p7 p11 p16 p17 personal email leakage the participants are concerned that their personal email addresses may be exposed through the github api s commit history.i have a several email address.
and so i will divide into personal or just something for work or for research.
i think it s actually okay for me if i use this email address on my github it means that is it just for my research or for my work.
p9 p9 p13 personal accounts stolen the participants are concerned about the possibility of their accounts being stolen by others.not really cause i haven t saw some account was like still stolen by other people.
p6 p1 p6 project content leakage the participants are concerned that when they work on github with unreleased projects their code might be leaked.if i m currently working on a project and that project hasn t yet been published i ll probably maintain the project into a private mode just in case others could see it.
p10 p10 p12 surprisingly none of the participants was aware of this impersonation issue before we brought it to their attention excluding p17 .
p1 believes it is secure after safeguarding their passwords.
he opts for a one time login using ssh instead of https allowing them to renew the password with each session.
he believes this practice makes it nearly impossible for attackers to steal their accounts.
when i use github i usually am logged in in the command line or i usually use ssh whenever it s possible.
so there s a command that you can run to basically check that you re logged in.
and that whenever i cloned repositories i use the ssh option instead of the https.
option.
but i don t really know anything about how someone could impersonate my github account unless they had my password or if they had my phone as well because i actually have the one time password configured.
p1 instead participants did express other security concerns.
in table ii we categorized the concerns of the participants into five distinct categories public key leakage personal email leakage personal accounts stolen project content leakage and no concern.
participants did not perceive any security issues existing in github.
given github s standing as the most influential open source community they have confidence that the platform is comprehensively secured.
among the remaining participants who express security concerns on github are apprehensive about the possible public keys leakage e.g.
api keys when releasing code to the public.
additionally participants expressed individual concerns about project content leakage p10 p12 personal account theft p1 p6 and personal email leakage p9 p13 .
p9 in particular acknowledged the potential for email leakage and took proactive measures by creating a dedicated email specifically for github use.
comparing the degree of concern about impersonation before and after the doppelganger demo as discussed above we investigate participants awareness of security issues as well as impersonation.
then treating the doppelganger demo in section ii as an intervention we sought to understand their reactions to the demo and their overall perception of impersonation.
as described in section iv a4 we employ a likert scale to gauge participants level of concern regarding impersonation before and after we showed them the doppelganger demo.
we use a scale of to where reflects the highest level of concern and indicates little concern.
in figure we illustrate their degree of concern we observe that except for p14 all participants showed an increase in concern following the demo.
the average level of concern increased from .9to7.
and the median value rose from 3to7.
.
with a t test we found t .
p .
indicating a significant difference in concern levels before and after the intervention.
interestingly this difference also varies based on the participants experiences as shown in figure .
the novice and expert groups showed a similar degree of concern before the demo .
vs. .
but the novice group was more worried after the demo .
vs. .
.
the difference in concern levels was more pronounced between industry and non industry participants.
the average concern level of the industry group before the demo is .
compared to .6for the non industry group.
after the demo the average concern levels increase to6.
for the industry group and .
for the non industry group.
though the concern level comparison did not survive the statistical test p .
industry professionals generallyfig.
.
the distribution of the degree of concern before and after the doppelganger demo.
the delta indicates the median degree of concern which saw a significant increase after participants viewed the demo t .
p .
.
exhibit lower concern towards impersonation.
this might be because of the stricter identity verification processes in the industry and the prevalence of proprietary code libraries in large companies reducing reliance on github while nonindustry individuals face higher risks of impersonation due to less stringent identity verification requirements.
concern for impersonation before the doppelganger demo.
among all participants expressed the belief that impersonation is uncommon unlikely to occur and not a significant concern for them p1 p3 p9 p11 p12 p14 .
their rationale for this perspective is rooted in the belief that faking an identity would require a considerable investment of resources or time making it an impractical pursuit for the average user.
additionally they believe that influential users in particular typically benefit from robust protection measures for their github accounts.
interestingly other participants agree that the user identity leak only affects influential developers compared to the normal one p2 p4 p7 .
they perceive identity leaks among normal users as unlikely to yield significant risks.
given that normal users typically have fewer contributions to fundamental projects even if someone were to impersonate them the potential for causing substantial harm is considered minimal.
one participant has claimed if it is easy to pretend to be other the github is an unsafe open source community p6 .
overall before our demonstration out of participants expressed a certain level of concern about impersonation a higher proportion compared to the out of participants who acknowledged security issues on github.
among these participants believed that impersonation primarily affects influential developers while another thought it had the potential to diminish the reputation of all users.
one participant even expressed the belief that every project is unsafe.
the majority of participants promptly view impersonation as a security concern upon acknowledging its potential existence fig.
.
the comparison between the degree of concern before and after the doppelganger demo for industry and non industry participants.
t .
p .
on github although they may not perceive it as highly severe.
the concern for impersonation after demo after showing our doppelganger demo to guide participants through the entire impersonation process we inquire about their attitudes towards impersonation again.
participants attitudes underwent a significant shift after witnessing our impersonation demo.
participants who initially considered impersonation as uncommon or only relevant to influential developers p2 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 p11 now perceive impersonation as more harmful than they had initially expected.
from the participant s view after the doppelganger demo participants viewed impersonation as a significant issue due to its ease of reproduction requiring only git commands familiar to every developer.
participants even expressed suspicion about whether we used additional tools in the demonstration p9 .
additionally participants emphasized that attackers do not even need to know one s password and impersonation is unexpectedly easy.
also participants expressed shock after witnessing the demo emphasizing their surprise that individuals could even access the link to the displayed author p2 p9 p13 p16 .
furthermore participants suggested that the entire git system should be enhanced to prevent the occurrence of impersonation p4 p5 .
finally participants expressed confusion regarding the existence of a serious vulnerability on github questioning why the identity of every user would be entirely public p6 p14 .
furthermore the participants also shared with us their opinions about how impersonation could influence the github community.
table iii presents the themes and representative examples from the interview results.
participants perceive impersonation as posing risks to the reliability and safety of the entire platform.
they believe impersonation introduces challenges for the system to accurately identify commit contributions which forms the foundation of the open source community.
at times developers can unfairly add other people to the contributor list by using their email which is not fair to genuine contributors table iii the influence to github with interviewee s opinion theme description representative example participant open source software education integrityfor students someone might submit low quality code using the names of those they dislike to sabotage their performance on the project.they have your email and that thing will be this whole thing will be true.
they can just easily pretend to be you and i ll post some random s .
so i random trash up to the code.
p2 p2 reduced trust in collaboration the misuse of github identities causes developers to doubt the suggestions and code contributions of their collaborators.i think it s also like you showed it can be misused where someone could push out a bunch of commits to different repositories but it s not actually the commits that they re they re associated with a different identity than the person that s making the commit.
so i think there s an opportunity to basically make a coder look bad by pushing bad code using their email.
or you can basically have someone take credit for work that you ve done.
p1 p1 p8 p10 p11 p13 p14 risky reliability and safety the entire github platform will be affected because it s now difficult to determine the true author of the commit.it might affect the integrity of commit attribution and make it challenging to accurately identify and verify computers.
potentially impacting collaboration and reliability of the platform.
p8 p6 p8 p9 p10 p16 user sabotage for developers someone could submit low quality work using another person s identity to diminish their credit in the workplace.in my work they can pretend to be me and publish a very bad code on company report and to make me like maybe have a bad code quality and they have some of fake news about me like i did badly by showing such fake information and it s fake in history.
p7 p7 project sabotage the attackers can impersonate a main contributor of an opensource project and submit malware which may be easily accepted.i think since impersonation may be misused by some like will like your will that attackers that they may pretend to be you and commit something that you don t want to happen to.
some open source project if it is critical like fundamental component or belief system or other fundamental systems and if you were believed to be the programmer and have committed something probably you will have trouble of it.
so yeah this definitely involves more potential security issues.
p4 p2 p3 p4 p12 p15 collaborator contributes to this repository and use others like account which means others names will also be a list of the contributors but they actually didn t do anything for this repository.
so i don t think it s very like it s been fair to the contributor itself.
p6 participants expressed concern about project sabotage where attackers could submit pull requests with malicious code to an open source project by posing as a senior contributor.
typically project owners tend to place more trust in developers they already know and may not thoroughly review the code contributions.
if an attacker successfully impersonates such a trusted person there is a higher likelihood that malicious code could be accepted and merged into the project.
participants also believe that it could make the entire community less active.
furthermore participants believe that impersonation is likely to reduce trust in collaboration within the opensource community.
in a github project if contributors can easily impersonate others determining the true originator of a commit becomes challenging which undermines the trust in the collaborative process.
there is a risk associated with using a credible developer s identity to submit vulnerable code to a repository.
a participant highlights that impersonation could potentially create issues in their school projects as user sabotage .
in computer science courses certain assignments require submissionvia github to the professor.
if someone can impersonate others and intentionally submit a code of poor quality the student being impersonated may receive a lower grade.
typically students use their school email as their associated email on github making impersonation even easier.
furthermore one participant is concerned about the impact of impersonation in the industry.
in some teams the quality of code is used to assess a developer s performance.
if someone maliciously impersonates others and publishes low quality code their performance evaluation could be unfairly downgraded.
according to the participants perspectives impersonation has a diverse range of impacts on github.
it diminishes the reliability of the entire platform and hampers collaboration between developers.
furthermore both students and developers can be adversely affected by the malicious act of impersonating and submitting low quality code.
surprisingly none of the participants were aware of impersonation before the interview.
the majority of them underestimated the severity before the doppelganger demo however their concern levels increased after walking through the impersonation process.
b. how widely is the current general practice i.e.
commit signing accepted and used among developers?
rq2 in this section we investigate participants perspectives on practices like commit signing to verify the user identity asso fig.
.
an example of a verified commit once a github user enables commit signing and uses git commit s m their commits will be marked as verified.
ciated with github commits.
commit signing is a feature on github designed to verify that a commit is made by a specific user5.
this process entails associating the cryptographic gpg gnu privacy guard key with the user s git client.
despite the appearance that commit signing eliminates impersonation it has several shortcomings in practice.
firstly as many as of the collected commits in our dataset have not been verified even within larger and more influential projects.
additionally commit signing is associated with a private key but it does not prevent other developers from pretending to be the verified author.
the distinction lies in the fact that impersonated commits would lack the verified label.
in our interview participants who have used commit singing previously mentioned that commit signing introduces additional steps during the committing process and generating a gpg key is not convenient for novice programmers or users who infrequently commit with different local machines.
i sometimes work on like public workspace.
so if i want to try to commit something on it it must may not be verified right?
or even i m working on a virtual machine.
and each time to open a random one?
that how can i get myself verified?
i have to maintain like much keys.
it s more like too complicated to manipulate these things to configure out of things for each day when i tried to set a quick commit or something.
p12 we examined the usage of commit signing among all participants.
out of participants only had a precise understanding of what commit signing is and how to employ it.
among these individuals had prior experience with commit signing.
interestingly following our discussion on impersonation participants who had never used commit signing expressed a willingness to adopt them in the future despite acknowledging their imperfections as commit signing is the only current mitigation to impersonation.
i will use it.
i think it s parts like part of the problem but as you see that it can t really deny really stops impersonate.
p8 however among developers who had previously used commit signing indicated that they would not use it in the future unless repositories require compulsory verification due to the extra effort on key management.
5the example comes from managing commit signature verification signing commits as shown in figure 6over half of the commits in our dataset were not signed.
the majority of our participants had not used commit signing before and among those who had some chose not to continue using them due to the effort involved in key management.
c. to what extent can we detect the potential impersonations on github?
rq3 given that many developers view impersonation on github as a significant concern and recognize that the existing authentication method of commit signing does not fully mitigate this problem an approach to distinguish between genuine and impersonated commits does not exist.
the github mechanism does not guarantee that the commit author is definitively the displayed author.
as shown in figure during commit merges the individual who merges multiple commits into the branch is designated as the displayed author for all changes even if they were not the ones directly editing the code.
consequently when primary contributors merge pull requests into the main repository they are also listed as the displayed author for all commits.
thus certain instances in pull requests resemble impersonation making it challenging to discern authentic impersonation from merge commits in a fork to a pull request.
moreover we explore the possibility of detecting impersonation by applying the crosscheck algorithm to find the commit that existed in the repository event but not in the displayed user event in section iv b. fig.
.
the illustrated example shows the challenge of distinguishing between impersonated and authentic pull requests.
as outlined in section iv a1 we collect commits from the highest starred repositories by searching random keys.
out of our repositories on github we have accumulated a total of commits and have documented the commit history of users.
among these users individuals have made commits using more than one email address comprising approximately .
of the total user count.
we have uncovered several interesting findings within the total of suspicious commits.
notably commits originate from large companies e.g.
google meta commits come from organizational emails and commits are associated with educational emails.
additionally commits are linked to government emails.
these results indicate a correlation between organizational collaboration behavior and impersonation.the git mechanism for displaying commit authors is the same for both authentic pull requests and impersonation.
thus there is no approach yet to accurately and precisely detect the impersonation behavior.
d. how can github users be safeguarded against impersonation from user perceptions?
rq4 as previously discussed impersonation may have a broader impact than initially perceived by github users and there is currently a lack of effective detection methodology for github impersonation.
therefore addressing how to safeguard github users and mitigate the effects of identity leaks becomes a crucial concern.
in this section we summarize participants opinions on this matter discussing potential measures that can be taken to mitigate impersonation.
the opinions from the industry and non industry groups do not differ.
however the expert and novice group focuses on different types of solutions.
we present the opinions from both groups to provide a comprehensive view of how github users would do to safeguard themselves on impersonation considering their different levels of experience.
participants in the expert group who are familiar with various github functions offered suggestions based on existing github commit features default vigilant mode the vigilant mode in github can alert users to all commits linked to their account p13 .
however the default setting for vigilant mode is off.
when vigilant mode is activated every developer can receive notifications if their identity has been used elsewhere.
compulsory commit signing policy github could mandate commit signing as a default setting for all commits.
this would ensure that all commits are authenticated preventing users from using other people s email addresses p13 p14 p16 .
however implementing this approach necessitates developers to generate keys on all their local machines.
participants in the novice group offered suggestions that are innovative and extend beyond existing github functions use the public key in commit signing the participants advocate for github to enhance the current commit signing feature by integrating a public key p4 p10 .
this improvement aims to deny access without introducing additional verification steps specifically when other individuals attempt to use the email of a verified user.
use specific keys in commit message another participant proposes that committers leverage a specific commit message established by the repository owner as a way of verifying identity p1 p12 .
in this approach the repository owner gains the ability to confirm the true identity of the contributor using the designated commit message posing a challenge for potential attackers attempting to impersonate an existing collaborator.
call for github to raise user s security awareness a participant expresses the desire for github to officially disclose potential risk vulnerabilities including impersonation p5 .
although some of the perceptions from participants may not be rigorously verified they can still provide insights into features that could help detect impersonation.
participants in the novice group proposed more inspiring mitigation strategies that are not currently present in github s mechanisms.
conversely the expert group provided more technical suggestions focusing on improvements to existing functions.
in the discussion section we elaborate on strategies to mitigate the influence of these factors and explore reasons why github has not addressed this issue.
vi.
d iscussion in our discussion we delved deeper into the impact of impersonation on oss github s official treatment of impersonation since its awareness of its existence several years ago and strategies for mitigating this behavior without disrupting the original function of oss.
the impact of impersonation on oss two years ago there was a noteworthy albeit humorous incident involving linus torvalds github identity where it was claimed that he would delete the entire linux system .
this real world example illustrates how impersonation can be used to deceive even renowned developers.
besides impersonating influential developers to make headlines impersonation can also happen discreetly across a broader spectrum of repositories.
from injecting malware into a project under a main developer s identity to pushing low quality code using other individuals accounts to undermine their reputation impersonation could potentially have a substantial impact and detecting the real committer within the git mechanism is challenging.
github s stance on impersonation.
github has officially acknowledged the presence of impersonation and has included impersonation as prohibited content or activity in its site policy .
the git configuration is flexible allowing any developers to use other people s identities because github considers it convenient for several contributors to share credit for their commits p17 .
however existing mechanisms are unable to definitively determine the true user behind a commit.
technically identifying violations of user identity can only depend on the assumption that malicious commits are not made by any legitimate developers on github.
ways to mitigate impersonation while commit signing may appear to offer a solution for the impersonation issue of our participants who have used commit signing before stated that they would not consider using it unless required by a project.
impersonation may be more problematic among influential and highly active developers.
however these individuals often face challenges in managing keys for signing commits particularly because they may use several local or remote machines.
additionally implementing email authentication for every commit presents challenges especiallywhen multiple contributors share credit for a commit or pull request that entails multiple email addresses.
presently the push event of a pull request mirrors impersonation through the use of other people s email addresses a pull request may contain commits made by others a natural consequence of the git architecture.
it is essential to prioritize the detectability of impersonation rather than manually policing for such events.
for instance in the github api instead of solely displaying information based on the git configuration from the committer it can include the id for each git client to identify the individuals who push the commit.
implications for future work our study represents the first investigation into the occurrence of impersonation and developers attitudes towards it.
currently impersonation behaviors are not automatically detected.
we aim for our study to provide insights for future research.
for developers we hope to raise awareness about identity verification issues in the open source community and practical strategies to mitigate risks within the current development ecosystem.
researchers need to further explore how impersonation influences open source software oss and potential mechanisms within git to mitigate these issues while maintaining flexibility.
vii.
l imitations as the first work on investigating impersonation on github our study has multiple limitations.
in our qualitative study we encountered potential biases that may affect the validity and generalizability of our findings.
we discuss each below.
recruitment biases in our recruitment process we select developers from repositories based on our selection strategy which involves choosing from the top most starred repositories across ten searches using randomly generated twoletter strings.
participants are selected only if they have committed to one of these repositories.
this approach introduces bias because the majority of participants are not relatively novice programmers as they have already committed to these repositories.
our methodology of using the github search api with random two letter strings may have yielded smaller repositories with few stars or whose contributors were more novices compared to other individuals in the participant cohort.
overall our participant pool may not represent the whole population in the github community which might lead to issues with generalizing our findings.
response biases a social desirability effect may occur during the interview especially as we introduce the doppelganger demo.
consequently participants may feel compelled to express their concerns about impersonation as a result of our mentioning it.
it could be possible that the impact on participants views of impersonation was impacted by the fact that we were confronting them about it.
furthermore our results and discussion on potential safeguarding mechanisms against impersonation are based on our participants views who might not have a comprehensive background on effective defense strategies for the open source community which might largely limit the insights for futurework on impersonation detection and defense.
we hope our current report from github users can initiate more future work to further explore solutions to prevent github impersonation and indicate candidate designs of such defense that might be easily adopted by github users.
viii.
c onclusion in our study we conducted the first study to investigate impersonation in github.
this security issue allows users to easily pretend to be other developers by committing with just a few git commands to configure a different email.
we conducted interviews with developers in github.
the interviews revealed that most of the participants were unaware of the impersonation issue before our investigation.
when mentioning the possibility of impersonation over half of the participants initially perceived it as not having significant security issues.
however after showing them a demonstration of impersonation most of the participants recognized it as a serious vulnerability.
this highlights that the severity of impersonation is often underestimated or even neglected by github users.
we also examined the adoption of the current mitigation practice known as commit signing to mark commits as verified using cryptography.
our evaluation of its usage in our dataset revealed that of commits do not have verification.
moreover during our interviews fewer than one third of the participants were familiar with commit signing before our discussions.
over half of the participants who had previously used it did not plan to use it in the future unless required and they highlighted several shortcomings associated with it.
additionally we determined that filtering out malicious impersonation from multi email commits is not currently feasible.
the impersonation behavior remains undetectable due to its similarity to pull requests.
we developed an algorithm to detect potential identity leaks analyzing .
million commits across public repositories.
our findings revealed that .
of commits and .
of users were implicated in mismatches between the displayed author and code author.
all of these instances have the potential to be cases of impersonation but we cannot automatically determine whether they are true instances of impersonation or legitimate coincidences of the git architecture.
in summary impersonation on github has a broader and more serious impact than anticipated according to our participants.
we hope that github can officially address and improve the identified issues whether through enhancements to signing commits or the addition of email configuration authentication.
ix.
acknowledgment this work was supported by the national science foundation nsf under grant ccf .
partial support was provided by the nsa science of security program the arpah program and nsf award .
the authors thank these organizations for their support.