automated implementation of windows related security configuration guides patrick st ckle patrick.stoeckle tum.de technical university of munich munich germanybernd grobauer bernd.grobauer siemens.com siemens ag munich germanyalexander pretschner alexander.pretschner tum.de technical university of munich munich germany abstract hardeningistheprocessofconfiguringitsystemstoensurethe securityofthesystems componentsanddatatheyprocessorstore.
the complexity of contemporary it infrastructures however renders manual security hardening and maintenance a daunting task.
in many organizations security configuration guides expressed inthescap securitycontent automation protocol areusedas abasisforhardening buttheseguidesbythemselvesprovideno means for automatically implementing the required configurations.
inthispaper weproposeanapproachtoautomaticallyextract the relevant information from publicly available security configurationguidesforwindowsoperatingsystemsusingnaturallanguage processing.
in a second step the extracted information is verified using the information of available settings stored in the windows administrative template files in which the majority of windows configuration settings is defined.
we showthat ourimplementationof thisapproach canextract andimplement83 oftheruleswithoutanymanualeffortand96 withminimalmanualeffort.furthermore weconductastudywith 12state of the artguidesconsistingof2014ruleswithautomatic checks and show that our tooling can implement at least of them correctly.
we have thus significantly reduced the effort of securing systems based on existing security configuration guides.
ccs concepts securityandprivacy softwaresecurityengineering usability in security and privacy software and its engineering softwareconfigurationmanagementandversioncontrol systems.
acm reference format patrick st ckle bernd grobauer and alexander pretschner.
.
automated implementation of windows related security configuration guides.
in35thieee acminternationalconferenceonautomatedsoftwareengineering ase september virtual event australia.
acm new york ny usa pages.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acmmustbehonored.abstractingwithcreditispermitted.tocopyotherwise orrepublish topostonserversortoredistributetolists requirespriorspecificpermissionand ora fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september virtual event australia association for computing machinery.
acm isbn ... .
introduction misconfigurationsreducethesecurityofasystembyintroducing vulnerabilitiesthatareoftendifficulttotrace.arecentstudy has demonstrated that from the perspective of the operators there is one major factor for security misconfigurations lack of knowledge.
oneattempttodealwiththelackofknowledgeistouseexistingsecurity configurationguides.theseguidesconsistofseveral rules for a specific software system such as windows or red hatenterpriselinux.eachruleexplainswhichsettingshouldbe set to which value to make the system more secure and why we shouldapplyit e.g.
listing1 .knownpublishersofsuchguidesare thecenterforinternetsecurity cis orthedefenseinformation systemsagency disa .organizationsandcompanieslikesiemens can use these guides to harden their systems.
one may be tempted to argue that we do not need security configurationbecausecompanieslikemicrosoftmakeastrongeffort to configure their systems securely by default.
these companies investalotinsecurity ofcourse butsecurityisjustoneconcern in addition to others including usability.
assume that there was a handy setting for most customers but it poses a small security risk.
the companies may be tempted to decide to have it activated by default whereas security aware customers would deactivate it.similarly wecouldargueforthedatacollectionsettings.they bring knowledgeto the companiesto improve their products and all customers can profit from this.
thus the companies may be tempted to activatedata collection settings bydefault.
in contrast customers with high security requirements would deactivate them to reduce the risk that sensitive information is accidentally leaked via the data collection.
thus security configuration guides from independent organizations can help security concerned customers in making their systems more secure.
rule the number of allowed bad logon attempts must be configured to three or less.
arrowhookleft description the account lockout feature when enabled prevents brute force password attacks on the system.
the higher this value is the less effective the account lockout feature will be in protectingthe local system.
the number of bad logon attempts must bereasonably small to minimize the possibility of a successfulpassword attack while allowing for honest errors made duringnormal user logon.
arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft implementations description configure the policy value for computer configuration windows settings security settings account policies accountlockout policy account lockout threshold to or fewerinvalid logon attempts excluding which is unacceptable .
arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft listing example of a rule in a windows related securityconfiguration guide.
35th ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase thepublisherspublishtheirrecommendationsonhowtoconfigure a software system in formats like pdf and in the extensible configuration checklist description format xccdf which is part of the security content automation protocol scap .
in some cases these implementations are combined with machine readable andautomatable checks.thesechecksarecreatedmanuallyaccording to the specification written down in the security configuration guides.
although xccdf is designed as a machine readable format instructionsforimplementingthesecuritysettingsareonly contained in human readable form in almost all cases.
the notable exceptionistheopenscapproject s guidesforlinuxoperating systems and applications which for many rules contain shell scriptsandpartsofansibleplaybooks.therefore existingguides solvethelack of knowledgeproblem butyieldanotherproblem automatic implementations orremediation arenotspecifiedinthe scapstandard.incontrast thespecificationofautomated checking is very detailed.
publishers sometimes deal with this problem by providing additional artifacts such as scripts or in the case of windows configurationbackupfiles.theproblemhereisthreefold.firstly suchartifactsdonotexistforallguides.secondly theguidesfrequentlygetupdated ifwetakewindows10asanexample there willbeatleastonenewguideeveryyearpublishedtodealwiththe updatedsettings e.g.
introducedbytheversion1909update minor versionupdatesdealwithproblemsorchangedrequirements.as aresult disa forexample isnowatversion18foritswindows guide.therefore creating maintaininga mechanism even ifit can be based on some artifact provided by the publisher or will be a recurring manual task.
thirdly with stand alone artifacts for implementation customizationofguides afeaturewhichiscentral toscap becomescumbersomeanderror prone becausethisrequiresamanualefforttokeepthecustomizedguideinsyncwiththe separately maintained implementation mechanism.
however easycustomization is essential experience shows that there is virtually no use case in which a publicly available security configuration guide can be implemented without at least some changes.
the authoring process is depicted in figure .
the publisher creates the guide in the xccdf format and the corresponding checksintheopenvulnerabilityandassessmentlanguage oval format.thisisamanualprocess asthepublishersincorporatetheir knowledge about the system and its architecture into the guide.
in thenextstep an administrator usestheautomatedcheckstoassess thestateoftheirsystems.theresultisalistoftherulestowhich thesystemisnotcompliant ourevaluationin 3ofover2000rules onsystemsusingthedefaultconfigurationshowsthattherateof satisfiedrulesvariesbetween0 and27 withanaverageof17.
.
thus for most of the rules the typically default configuration of the system to be hardened has to be adjusted.
if the publisher has not provided a mechanism for automated implementation foreveryruleofthislist theadministratormust read the implementation remediation section of the rule in the xccdforpdfformoftheguideandimplementthestepsdescribed there.
if a mechanism is provided in most cases only a complete implementationofallconfigurationsettingsispossible.thiscreates significant manual effort for customization especially if the implementation breaks functionality but it is unclear which setting s have caused the observed problems.in sum we address one main problem there are existing guides to configure systems securely but we cannot implement the requiredconfigurationsettings takingintoaccountnecessarycustomization and changes due to updates of the guides without sig nificant manual effort.
oursolutionto this problem realized for windows operating systems and applications consists of three major steps.
first we processthefileswhichdefinethewindowssecuritypolicysettings thatexistonawindows basedsystem.windowssecuritypolicy settingsarerulesthatadministratorsconfigureonacomputeror multipledevicesforthepurposeofprotectingresourcesonadevice or network.
we can configure a policy setting with a policy pathandavalue.theso calledadministrativetemplate admx l filesdefinethemajorityofpolicysettings.theycontaininformation about valid policy paths possible values for each policy setting andtheunderlyingimplementationofapolicysettingwithinthe windowsregistry.thus weextractthisknowledgeinthefirststep and store it in a machine readable format to access it during the remediation.second weusenaturallanguageprocessingtoextract thesettingsandtheintendedvaluesfromtheguides.weusetheinformation of the first step to verify that the extracted setting existsandthattheextractedvalueisavalidinputforthissetting andcan therefore reducetheriskofwronglyextractedvaluesto a minimum.
third we translate the settings and values to their real implementation using the information from the first step.
our tools can use this information to implement as well as check the configuration settings automatically.
our contributions are an approach to how existing windows related security configuration guides can be automatically implemented a proof of concept implementation of our approach a step by step documentation of our approach using the disawindowsserver2016guide andanupdatedversion using the disa windows server an evaluation of our approach using existing guides from disa and cis with over rules .
in we explain the general idea of our automatic implementation andinthesubchapters wepresentthetechnicaldetailsofourproof of conceptimplementation.in weusethedisawindows server guide and cis guides to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach.
in we discuss challenges and first experiences ingeneralizingourapproachtonon windowssystemsaswellas additional future work.
treats related work and concludes.
windows related security configuration generic approach.
the generic approach is depicted in figure .
it shows the different stages of the envisioned process for automaticallyimplementingwindows relatedsecurity configuration guides.
more specifically the separate steps are defined as follows.
extraction usenaturallanguageprocessing nlp foreachruleto automatically extract the information needed to implement this rule.
verification check with an automated mechanism that checks whether the derived information is valid does the extracted policy path indeed exist?
599automatic checksimplement rulessecurityconfiguraiton guide administratorpublishercreates systems under testautomatic manuallycheck rules legend figure current state of implementation of windowsrelated security configuration guides hastheextractedvaluetherequiredtypeforthatsetting?
does the extracted value meet the requirements of that setting?isitinthelistofpossiblevaluesorintherange of allowed values?
ifthepathorthevalueisincorrect themechanismprovides useful feedback about possible paths or values.
transformation to low level transform windows policy settingsintoarepresentationofoneoftheunderlying low level implementationmechanisms.thisstepisnecessarybecausealmostnoneofthemostpopularconfiguration management frameworks can directly process the windows policy settings butrequirethespecificationofanunderlyingimplementation mechanism registry settings secedit policy file entries audit file entries.
transformation to code transformtheselow levelimplementation mechanisms into code for carrying out the implementation of each setting.
implementation executecodeonthesystemwewanttoharden to implement the rules.
we emphasize that especially steps one and two are novel because to our best knowledge there is no approach published that uses nlp to extract policy settings from scap guides nor is there an approachthatverifiesextractedvaluesusingdefinitionfiles.forthe evaluationofourapproach weassumedthatanevaluationofthe completesystemsprovidesmoreevidencefortheusefulnessand feasibility of the presented approach than an evaluation of the first two steps alone.
consequently we had to design and implementthe remaining steps for our poc implementation.
in the end weachieved the first published system that reads windows related security configuration guides in the scap format and implements them automatically.
the approach in detail.
we discuss the details of our approach and demonstrateits feasibilityusing aproof of concept poc implementation.1system org.scapolite.implementation.win gpo 2ui path string containing a valid windows policy path using backslashes as separators 4value a yaml representation of a valid value for the specified path 6verification status checked.
unchecked.
.
listing syntax of the windows policy automation thestepsofouractualimplementation whichweuseasaproof of concept are depicted in figure .
we describe them shortly here and more in detail in the rest of this section.
the input of our poc consists of guides in the scap format.
in the first step we extract the necessary data for every rule to automatetheimplementationofthisruleusingnaturallanguage processing.theresultisasetofrulesenrichedwiththeconfiguration settings in a machine readable format.
these configuration settings are then passed to the verification process it has to be verifiedthattheextracteddata awindowspolicypathandrequired policyvalues isvalid.ourimplementationusestheinformationof manuallycreated verificationrulesfor whatessentially arelegacy configuration settings combined with information extracted from thewindowsadministrativetemplatefilestoverifytheextracted values.
to make the verification process as fast as possible we process the latter files a priori and store the information we need in a database format.
if theverification is successful the low level automation needed to implement the rule is generated and also stored within the rule.
depending on the chosen implementation mechanism these areused to create either a group policy backup which then canbe imported on a domain controller to secure all systems in an active directory or a json file used by a powershell script for implementing the settings.
additionally our tooling can check the rules using the json files but as scap already covers this aspect we will not look deeper into this facet of our poc.
inourpocimplementation onlythesecondandthirdstepsrequireaminimumofmanualinteraction theotherstepsareentirelyautomated.thedottedlinebetweenthe verification andtheconfigurationsettings infigure3indicatesthatthepersonautomatingthe security configurationguidemayhavetoexecutetheverification more than once and adjust the values until every rule is marked as checkedby the verification mechanism.
in the following we describe each of these steps.
tooling has been carried out in python except for a powershell framework for implementing and checking windows security configurations using the output of step .
as a real life example we use the disa windowsserver2016securitytechnicalimplementationguide .
wecreatedagithubrepository whereweconductedallthe steps andcreatedacommitandatagaftereverystepandreference them by their tags.
1forrepresentingtheguidewihingithub weusetheyaml markdown based scapolite format developedwithin siemens which isbettersuited than scapfor authoring and maintenance.
the approach though is independent of the format.
600guide .
extraction .
verification3.
transformation to low level4.
transformation to code5.
implemenation on the system phases input result figure overview of the abstract hardening approach.
.
natural language processing based extraction of windows policy automations the first step of our poc implementation is the extraction of the needed values using nlp.
before we can extract the information needed to implement a windows related rule automatically wehad to define the structure of the machine readable constructs step extract configurations values with nlpconfiguration settings createsusesstep verification low level automations automaticallyextractedknowledge creates knowledge extractionmanually extracted knowledge step json exportscap xccdf inputadmx adml legend inputmanually addedoutput fully automaticallysemi automaticallystep gpo export step implement rulejson with all information to apply or check the rules step check rule on the system under testcheck resultsgpo backups scapolite objectsauxiliaryoutput figure overview of the steps of our actual implementa tion.
in q0 .
q1 vbn vbd vb q3 in q4 .
q5 .
vbn vbd q6 in q7 nn nnp q8 .
q9to q2 .
nn nnp q10 figure example of an extraction rule as a nondeterminis tic finite automaton.1id sv 2rule see below 3implementations description see below automations system org.scapolite.implementation.win gpo ui path computer configuration policies windows settings security settings local policies user rights assignment back up files and directories arrowhookleft arrowhookleft value administrators rule 13the backup files and directories user right must only be assigned to the administrators group.
arrowhookleft implementations description 15configure the policy value for computer configuration windows settings security settings local policies user rights assignment back up files and directories to include only the following accounts or groups arrowhookleft arrowhookleft arrowhookleft administrators listing3 exampleruleofthedisawindowsserver2016in yaml markdownform incl.awindowspolicyautomation starting in line blue .
how they are integrated into the rule structure and what has to be extracted to implement a rule.
for specifying windows policy settings the structure must provide information about the policy path and the required value.
the typeofthevalue string list integer etcetera dependsonthepath hence the specification of the automation syntax must refer to the setofvalidwindowspolicysettingsasshowninlisting2.listing3 shows the usage of a policy automation in the rule sv of the windows server guide.
in an ideal scenario the rule already containsthe machine readableautomationobjects but thisisnot the case for guides published in the scap.
thus we needed to extract the information about required policy settings from the human readable description in the guide.
to this end we used the natural language toolkit nltk .
due to the highly schematic structure of the guides under consideration only eleven extraction ruleshadtobedefinedtoprocessmostoftherules.oneoftherules ispresentedhereinlisting4andfigure4.thelistingshowsthe definition of such an extraction rule as part of a grammar in nltk.
in to etc.
refer to the corr esponding part of speech pos tags.
aswehavetenrules ourgrammartoextractthevaluesconsists oftenruledefinitions.tomaketheideamoreprecise figure4is sentence with enabled with x selected for y in .
to vbn vbd vb in .
vbn vbd in nn nnp .
arrowhookleft listing example of an extraction rule with pos tags.
601id controlpaneldisplay cpl personalization nolockscreencamera registry name nolockscreencamerapath software policies microsoft windows personalizationhive hkey local machinetype reg dwordenabled value 1disabled value listing example of a relationship between the id and the definition of the registry to set.
presentingthesameruleasanondeterministicfiniteautomaton q0marks the start state and q11the end state.
weusenltktolabelthetextofthedescriptionofarulewith pos tags.
afterward the tagged sentences are passed to the grammar.
if a sentence or a part of a sentence matches an extractionrule then we know that here we can extract information for the automaticimplementation.weusethissentencefromrule sv as an example configure the policy value for computer configuration administrative templates mssecurity guide configure smbv1clientdrivertoenabledwithdisabledriver recommended se lectedforconfiguremrxsmb10driver.
now weusenltktogetthe pos tags configure vb the dt ... for in computer nnp ... driver nn to to enabled vb with in disable jj ... selected vbn for in configure nnp ... driver nn .
.
thesegmentstartingat formatches the pattern defined in the extraction rule and we would reach the endstateoffigure4.usingourdefinitionoftheextractionrule we know that we have the policy path in the part within the pos tags inandto the first value between toandin the second value betweeninandvbn in and the name of the option for which the second value has to be set between vbn in and .
.
asalreadymentioned weneedonlyelevenextractionrulesto extract information for most of the disa windows server guide foracomparablecisguide wedefinedtenrules.pleasenotethattheextractionusingnlpisassimpleasthisonlybecausedisa and cis write their guides in a highly schematic way.
if the automatic extraction process could not obtain any or only ambiguous information for a setting to set the respective rules are marked in this step of the process.
for these rules automation objects have to be created manually using the hints from the automatic extraction.
for the analysis of the degree of automation we referto .
.listing3istheresultofasuccessfulextractioncarried out by our tool.
.
verification of windows policy automations as already mentioned in .
the set of available policy settings determine the syntax and semantics of the windows policy automations.thesetofavailablepolicysettingsvariesbetweendiffer entversionsofoperatingsystemsandpolicy managedapplications.
thus we can determine the validity of a policy automation for a specificversion ofosor anapplication.
asmentionedbefore the admx l files define the majority of windows policy settings.
the windows oss use these files to display the gui for configuring policy settings via point and click and keep the policy content and 2tag step extract configurations values with nlpthe actual implementation of the settings in the registry in sync.
microsoft regularly issues updates of the admx l files.
to make this more visual we provide another example from thecontrolpaneldisplay.admx and thecontrolpaneldisplay.adml files located under policies on windows server instances our exporter can get the information that the setting with the policypathcomputer configuration ... control panel personalization prevent enabling lock screen camera has the id cpl personalization nolockscreencamera.westorethisrelationshipandthe information to which registry this id belongs in our export this is presented in listing .
here we can get the information on which hive path andregistrynameareaffected.
furthermore weknow that only enabledanddisabled are valid options for this setting and that we can translate them to and respectively.
thereare however alsowindowspolicysettingsthatarenot defined via admx l files.
these other settings are represented throughentriesineitheraspecialconfigurationfile gpttmpl.inf oracsvfile audit.csv whencreatingafile basedrepresentation of policy settings on a windows os through the lgpo.exe tool provided by microsoft.
unfortunately there exists to our bestknowledge nomachine readablerepresentationthatspecifies thesepolicysettings.
luckily wecould extractmany ofthese specifications for configuration definitions from the saltstack implementationofthe win lgpo moduleformanagingwindows configurationsettings.
fromthe 196settings configurablevia the inf file we could obtain from saltstack s implementation the remainingspecifications whichweencounteredinthecourseof our work on several windows os versions were added manually.
furthermore we could extract the specifications for all settingshandled via audit.csv via parsing a given audit.csv file.
thus themanualeffortrequiredfordealingwiththesenon admx lset tingswasnegligiblewhencomparedtotheover4000configuration specifications we could extract automatically.
withtheinformationof theknowledgeextraction theverification process can now determine for each configuration setting ifthe policy path is valid and if so whether the provided value is admissible for that particular policy path.
wehaveimplementedourtoolingsuchthatthewindowspolicy automationsinagivenguideareparsedandverified.ifthepolicy path exists and the given value is acceptable the automation is markedaschecked.ifnot theautomationisenrichedwithasmuch information as possible ifthepolicypathdoesnotexist informationaboutsimilar policy pathsis supplied using thelevenshtein distance oncharacterandwordbasisoverthesetofvalidpolicypaths.
this set is a byproduct of our import step.
to have the set of valid policy paths accessible is one reason to create those filesapriori.listing6a providesanexampleoftheresult of the verification step.
ifthevalueisnotadmissibleforthegivenpolicypath infor mationaboutadmissiblevaluesisaddedtotheautomation see listing 6b and c .
weproceedasfollowstoverifyandcorrectthepolicyautomations the verification mechanism is run a first time.
the user reviews the reported errors and corrects them.
3tag step verification 6021ui path ... control panel personalization prevent enabling lock screen 3value enabled 4error class not found policy name preventenablinglockscreen 5error hint the given path was not found but there were similar policies.
if the ui path you were looking for is in the array please replace the original ui path with the new ui path.
arrowhookleft arrowhookleft 6candidates control panel personalization prevent enabling lock screen camera ... prevent enabling lock screen slide show ... prevent changing the color scheme 11ui path ... network security lan manager authentication level 12value send ntlmv2 response 13error class configure 14error hint to apply this rule please choose a setting value for each sub setting in candidates.
next replace the content of the value attribute with the content of candidates.
arrowhookleft arrowhookleft 15candidates send lm tlm responses use ntlmv2 session security if negotiated send ntlmv2 response only.
refuse lm ntlm send ntlm response only ... 21ui path ... configure windows defender smartscreen 22value enabled 23candidates main setting disabled enabled pick one of the following settings warn disabled warn and prevent bypass listing failed verifications a policy path does not exist informationabout3possibleoptions.b specifiedvaluedoesnotexist admissiblevaluesprovided.c policysettingunder specified request for additional value.
verificationisre runeitheronarule by rulebasisorforthe complete guide.
onceall errorshave been corrected anexport pairingthe human readabledescriptionandthepolicyautomationfor each rule is created allowing the user to verify very quickly that the automation indeed faithfully reflects the humanreadable specification.
this verification seems simple but studies have shown that oftheconfigurationerrorsthatcausedhigh impactincidentsare obvious errors e.g.
typos and that a significant number of configuration errors are due to compatibility issues .
our verification is able to catch such problems at the earliest possible stage.
.
generation of low level implementation mechanisms windows policy settings are implemented through registry settings infpolicy file entries and audit file entries.
to represent these mechanisms within a guide we introduce automation extensions for these three mechanisms.
using the information gathered as described in .
we implemented a transformation from thepolicy automation into the corresponding low level automation extension.
4tag step 4c fix 5tag step create xlsx report for the current guide 6tag step enrich scapolite with low level automations atablewithallthelow level automations can be found under xlsx report with low level automations.xlsx.1ui path ... apply uac restrictions to local accounts on network logons arrowhookleft 2value enabled 3verification status checked.
system org.scapolite.implementation.windows registry 5config computer 6registry key software microsoft windows currentversion policies system arrowhookleft 7value name localaccounttokenfilterpolicy 8action dword listing7 exampleofawindowspolicyautomationandtheresulting windows registry automation.
listing provides an example according to the windows policy automation line to the value enabledhas to be set for thepolicysettingwithpath ... applyuacrestrictionstolocalaccounts on network logons.
using information extracted from the admx l files we can generate the windows registry automation the registry key under the path software microsoft windows currentversion policies system withthevaluename localaccounttokenfilterpolicy has to be set to a dwordwith the value .
.
transformation into code themainideabetweentheseparationofthisstepandtheactual implementationwasthatwecouldexecutealltheprevioussteps on one machine export the information and do only the actual implementation on the system under test.
thus a central instance can be used for storing and processing relevant guides systems undertestcanfetchtherequireddataforimplementing andtesting securityconfigurationsfromthatcentralserver.tofurtherfacilitate this approach we implemented an export from a guide containing low level automation for windows into a json document that contains all data relevant for implementing each rule with the associated automation s .
inordertosupportimplementationsviapolicies eithervialocal group policies or via the active directory capabilities we can also automatically generate policy backups based on the extracted information.wehaveimplementedthisstepaspartofacontinuousintegration where changes to automation in a guide lead to an automated re generation of both scripts and policy backups.
.
implementation of the rules on the system using powershell when choosing a target language framework to use to implement the rules using the information of the tow level automation de scribed in .
and .
we decided to use powershell for the following reasons common configuration management frameworks like ansible puppet chef andsaltstackcannothandlethewindows policy settings or use powershell to implement them.
thus wedecidedtousepowershellwithoutaconfigurationframework as a wrapper to implement the rules.
microsoft s effortsto allow code script based configuration management of windows rather than the gui based mecha nismcenteringonthepolicyeditorarebasedonpowershell.
7tag step export policy backup folder for each profile under lgpo backups.
603table extracted verified and automated rules.
categories of oval rules configurations extracted with nlp .
.
rules without extracted values .
.
first time verified .
.
not verified the first time .
.
non automatable but extracted .
.0automatable but not extracted .
.
verified after manual correction .
.0automated rules .
.
powershellisinstalledbydefaultonallwindowsossthat are still in mainstream support by microsoft.
to fully leverage the ability to generate mechanisms for rule by rule implementationrather than the bulkimplementation offered e.g.
in the form of policy backups we looked forrobustroll backfunctionalitythatallowedustoreseta configuration reliably to its previous value.
thus we have created a powershell library that based on the json file applies checks and reverts single as well as several or all rules.
as mentioned before our tooling uses the extracted information to check whether the system is compliant to a rule automatically.thisfunctionalityisalreadycoveredwithinscap and there are many scap compliant scanners.
therefore the checking functionality is not in the focus of this paper.
our powershell library uses windows tools that assure that the configurationchangesarereflectedinthelocalpolicy secedit auditpol and lgpo.exe .
in the end we can implement a securityconfiguration guide by running one powershell command.
evaluation todemonstratethepresentedapproach spotential weusethereallifeexampleofrealizingautomaticrule by ruleimplementationsforthe disa microsoft windows server guide benchmark for anevaluation.8thebenchmarkconsistsof207ruleswithautomatic checks and rules without automatic checks.
the results of all steps shown below are available for review .
every step is denoted as a commit and marked with a tag.
thus a diff view between a commit and its predecessor reveals the constructsadded removed orchangedinthisstep.inthisarticle wewillconcentrateonthisrepository.additionally wecreateda newrepositorywiththedisawindowsserver2019guide and executedthesamestepstodemonstratethatourapproachworks on recent scap documents as well.
thus the fact that we used windows server should not be a threat to our evaluation s validity.
we seek to answer the following research questions 8wechoosedisa sguidebecausetheirscapcontentispublic.onlycismembers can access cis s scap content whereas their pdfs are publicly available.rq1forhowmanyrulescanweautomaticallyderiveanimplementation from the text in natural language?
how high is their percentage?
rq2how many of the extracted rules are automatable and how many automatable rules were not extracted?
rq3after correcting wrongly extracted automations how manyrulescanweimplementautomaticallyforthecomplete guide?
rq4how much time does our approach require to extract the information verify it and implement the rule?
rq5howmanyrulesareimplementedcorrectlyinaccordance with the automated checks?
we will use the disa windows server guide to answer rq1 4and several cis guides to answer rq5.
forrq5 w eu s e cis guides because for them we have the automatic checks and can assess a given system using their cis cat tool.
.
degree of automation toanswer rq1 rq2 andrq3 weexaminethestepsregarding theextractionofwindowspolicyautomationusingnlpandthe verification of the found policy paths and values.
the results are depictedintable1.fromthe274rulesinthewindowsserver2016 guide we can extract for rules a possible policy setting withpossible values.
afterward from the possible configuration path value pairs can be directly verified as valid configuration settings by the first verification step.
these rules mean that for oftherules wecanextractboththepolicypathandtherequired valueandverifythatthisvalueisvalidfortheparticularpolicypath without any manual effort.
thus we could answer rq1.f r o mt h e remaining25rules fortworules potentialconfigurationsettings and values have been extracted erroneously with our automation mechanisms we could not automate these two rules.
we removed theerroneouslycreatedautomationsforthesestworulesmanually.
conversely forfourrulesthatwecouldautomate neitherthepolicy pathnortherequiredvaluewasextracted.inthiscase weadded the automation manually.10thus the ratio of rules not added to the set of rules to automate although they are automatable lies at1.
whereastheratioofruleswhicharenotautomatableand stillextractedis0.
regardingallrules.fortheremaining23rules that were extracted but could not be verified in the first round we created the correct automation based on the extracted information enriched with the verification process s hints.
if one sees the nlp based extraction process as a classifier with the classes automatable andnon automatable the false positive rateofthisclassifierisat2.
andthefalse negativerateat2.
.
we had to adjust rules manually.
thus for .
of all rules respectively oftheautomatablerules nomanualactionwas neededthroughouttheprocess.insummary thesenumbersanswer rq2andgivestrongevidencefortheimportanceofourverification step because otherwise these rules might be applied wrongly or not at all.
after the execution of the extraction and the verification step and the manual adjustments we now have rules which can be 9tag step 4a fix rules which have been imported but are not automatable 10tag step 4b fix rules which have not been imported but are automatable 11tag step 4c fix 604table2 timeneededtoexecutethesinglestepswithall200 automatable rules of the disa windows server guide.
step time s knowledge extraction from admx l .
import into scapolite .
nlp extraction of policy automations .93verification of policy automations .
export automations in json .
export automations in xlsx .
export policy backups from json .
check all rules for compliance .
implement automatable rules one by one .
.
automatedandhavevaluesthatareverifiedtobevalidforthegivenconfigurationdecisions.therefore thegradeofautomationwecanachieve on the set of the rules is at .
respectively at .
if we are only considering the automatable rules classifiedas automatable by disa .
this number answers rq3.
thus our approachreducesthenumberofruleswhichhavetobecheckedor set manually on the system under test significantly.
.
time table2showstimevaluesforeachoftheautomatedsteps.12the short execution time per rule enables an application in ci approaches which answers rq4partially.
if we want to calculate the overall time we also have to include the time it takes to correct the wrongly extracted automations.accordingtotable1 25ruleswerenotverifiedthefirsttime.
because of the feedback included in the rule we assume that ittakes 10s to correct such a rule.
for the remaining four plus tworules we assume that it takes at most 2min per rule to correct it.
these assumptions are also backed by the feedback of the users ofourtoolsatsiemens.therefore weendupwithatotaltimeof .91s 10s 120s .91s 20minfor all rules or s per rule.
thus rq4could be answered too.
.
correct application in the last step of our evaluation we want to answer whether our approachisapplyingthesecurity configurationguidescorrectly.
incorrectlyimplementedrulescanresultfromfaultsintheadmx l importer the verification process or the powershell library.
here our idea was that after applying a security configuration guideto a system the system should be configured as specified in the guide.forthisexperiment weusethestandardizedovalchecks as ground truth.
thus we used guides which are windows related andforwhichwehaveautomatedchecks.therefore weusedinthisstep different security configuration guides from the cis which 12allthestepsareconductedbyrunningdifferentcommandsfromthecommand line.
we ran every command times and averaged the elapsed time to evaluate the speed of the single steps.
configuration .
ghz intel core i7 with gb ram python .
.
.
the only steps implemented in powershell are the application viz.
the check for compliancestepastheseweredesignedtobeexecutedonthesystemundertest inour case awindows basedsystem withoutinstallinganyadditionalsoftware.powershell version .
.
was used.are listed in table totaling over rules four windows based os s six components of the office package and two browsers.
we conducted the evaluation as follows first every securityconfigurationguidewasautomatedthroughthesameprocess as explained in .
next we set up a clean environment for every system.13additionally we installed a scap compliant scanner onthemachines i.e.
thecis cattool .next weexecutedthe checksinthe cleanenvironmenttocomparethecleanstatewiththe hardenedstatetoshowthattheimplementationofguidesmakes thesystemmoresecure.afterwards theguidesareimplemented usingtheautomationgeneratedasdescribedin .nowthechecks are rerun to test whether the implementation was correct.
the resultsaredepictedintable3.
wealsopublished thecheckreports beforeandaftertheimplementationongithub .withinthis repository one can find for every checked guide a before.html and after.html containingtheresultoftheautomaticcheckcreatedusing the cis cat tool.
notethatweonlyconsidertheruleswhichhaveovalchecksfor thecalculationofthepercentages.weseethatfortheossbetween .9and26.
oftherulesarealreadysetupinacompliantway whereas nearly no rule is pre configured securely for the other components.nevertheless even26.
ofalreadyfulfilledrulesof the oss imply that the majority of the settings are configured inan insecure way on a clean system.
after applying the rules the percentageofcompliantrulesisbetween95and100 forallguides.
that we do not reach compliance relative to the results of the cis cat checker tool is due to errors in the guides some of them in the automated check others in the descriptive text.
for example somechecksareoverspecified i.e.
theyexpectmorechanges than actually occur when implementing the corresponding configurationsetting therule .
.
.1ofthewindows10benchmark changesonlyasingleregistryentry butthecorrespondingcheck refers to three different entries.
also some rules have automatic checks which test for wrong values.
for example the check for the rule1.
.
.4ofthewordguideexpectsadifferentvalue namely0 than the value which is set if the rule is implemented manually followingthesecurity configurationguide.thus wehaveinthis rule precisely the difference of implementation and check we want to overcome with our approach.
finally there were some errorsregarding the description of the implementation provided in the guides.
for example rule .
.
.
.7of the word guide specifies that thesettingshouldbeenabled althoughtitleanddescriptionsuggest disablingthesetting.anothererrorinaguideactuallyisduetoa misspellingoftheadmx ltemplatefileprovidedbymicrosoft.for example rule .
.
.
.
of the outlook guide specifies the value to be implement as when online always retrieve the crl but our tool couldnotvalidatethisvalueforthissettingbecauseofamisspellinginatemplatefile.there thevalueiswrittenas whenonlinealways retreive the crl.
all in all we achieved compliance for rules i.e.
.
after implementing the guides.
for the oss we have the highest absolutegainofcompliantrules between237and404rules but in relative numbers we are only gaining between and 13for the os s we have set up every system in a new vm by installing the os directlyfromthelatestisodown loadablefrommicrosoft.asavmprovider weused virtualbox.
for the other components e.g.
chrome or powerpoint they were directly installed on a clean windows instance.
605table3 rulesperguidecomplianttothegivenguidebeforeandafterimplementingguideautomatically.highestvalueofa column dark gray lowest light gray.
guide of rules oval before after google chrome for windows .
.
internet explorer .
.
.
microsoft office .
.
.
microsoft access microsoft excel microsoft outlook .
.
.
microsoft powerpoint .
.
microsoft word .
.
windows .
.
.
windows .
.
.
.
windows .
.
.
windows server .
.
.
.
.
whereasfortherest wehaveagainofover90 .pleasenotethat our approach can also implement the settings which were already compliant on a clean instance but we have chosen this scenario becauseitseemedmorerelevantandnatural.thealternativewould havebeentocreateaninstanceinwhicheverysettingisconfigured to a non compliant value.
discussion.
inrq1 we asked for the percentage of rules for which we can automatically extract the implementation.
if our approach extracted the implementation only for a small fractionof rules it would be useless in real world applications.
since weextracted for of all rules and of automatable rules an implementation we can rule out this concern.
inrq2 welookedforthepercentageoffalsenegativeandfalse positives of our extraction process.
if these numbers were too high the administrators would spend much time identifying them so that our approach would become pointless.
with and of the automatable rules wrongly classified this is not the case.
inrq3 we searched for the percentage of rules that we can automate after correcting the extraction process s errors.
if this numberweretoolow administratorswouldspendthesameamount of time for implementing the remaining rules and the gains of our approachwouldbesmall.ourresultsshowthatwecanautomate oftheautomatableruleswithourapproachanddramatically reduce manual implementation.
inrq4 we asked for the time taken to execute our approach.
if thestepsweretootime consuming itwouldbemoreefficienttodo itmanually andourtoolingwouldbeunnecessary.with245.91s implementations description follow the below steps to disable location services .tap settings gear icon.
.tap security location .
.scroll to the privacy section.
.tap location .
.toggle to the off position.
listing8 exampleofanimplementationaspartofaruleinan android security configuration guide.for the tools themselves and .91s for the complete process our approach is more efficient than the manual approach.
inrq5 wesearchedforthepercentageofruleswhicharecorrectly implemented according to the automatic checks.
if our approachimplementedtheruleswrongly itwouldbeuseless.with over97 ofcorrectlyimplementedrules ourapproachimplements almost all rules correctly.
insummary ourevaluationshowedthatourapproachisfeasible and effective.
generalization and further work themainlimitationofourextractionstepisthefactthatthisextraction is only possible because of the highly schematic structure ofthedescriptionswrittenbycisanddisa.iftheymodifytheir template for these descriptions we will have to adjust this stepentirely.
thus we hope that future guides will have the neededinformation in a machine readable form.
a limitation of our implementation of windows related guides is the dependency on the lgpo.exe.
if microsoft decided to remove this tool for changing windowssystem settings wewould havetoreplace coreparts of the presented approach.
we admit that our approach is only an intermediate solution.
insteadofconvertingguidestoexecutablesbyusersorthirdparties it wouldbemorepracticalforpublisherstoattachmachine executable codesorlinkstothemtotherulesastheyare checking.
nevertheless as long as the publishers do not distribute the guides so that we can quickly and automatically implement them we need tools like those we presented in this paper.
ui name location namespace securename location providers allowedvalue on network gpsoff network gps listing9 exampleofadefinitionforanandroid relatedsetting.
implementations description set the following parameters in etc sysctl.conf or a etc sysctl.d file net.ipv6.conf.all.accept ra 0net.ipv6.conf.default.accept ra run the following commands to set the active kernel parameters sysctl w net.ipv6.conf.all.accept ra sysctl w net.ipv6.conf.default.accept ra sysctl w net.ipv6.route.flush listing example of an implementation in an ubuntu linux security configuration guide.
our approach is tailored to windows and its policies.
thus the approachcannotbeportedtootherplatformswithoutsignificant adjustments.nevertheless wearedevelopingsimilarapproaches for linux oss and android in particular and try to achieve similar results there as well.
in listing one can see the implementation of an androidrelated rule.
it describes highly schematically the actions to implement.
thus the difficulty of the extraction process as described in figure is comparable to that for the windows related guides.
theverification step is more difficult because we do not have asimilardefinitionofpotentialsettingsandthesetofvaluesthey can have.
in windows we can extract this information from the admx lfiles butinandroid thereare toourbestknowledge nocomparablefilesavailable.toportourapproachtoandroid we created such definition files for several settings.
for the setting location onewouldfindanentryinthisdefinitionfileaspresentedinlisting9.withthisinformation wecanverifythat offisavalid valueforthissetting.furthermore wecanusetheinformationthat we can translate offto network gps for thetransformation to a low levelautomation.finally wecanimplementtheruleonagiven androiddeviceviatheandroiddebugbridgeandthetranslated value.
our work on android just started and there are many open questions howcouldbethesyntaxofanandroiddefinitionfile?
how can we automatically create such a definition file?
which settingscanweautomaticallyset e.g.
viathedebugbridge and which settings cannot be set or only if we have rooted the device?
howcanwehandledifferentandroidversionsandthefactthatwe canautomaticallyconfigureasettingin oneversion e.g.
viathe debug bridge and in another version it is no longer possible?
for the automated implementation of general linux guides please have a look at listing here we have the implementation of a rule of a ubuntu guide.
we can see that there is still a schema of how the implementation is described.
nevertheless it is morecomplicated.
in this example there are two different steps oneconcerning the modification of a file the other the execution of shellcommands.hence inadditiontoextractingthecode snippets wehavetoderivethesemanticsof setfilecontentto andrunaswell.
ifwewantedto verifythatthecodesnippetsarevalid wewould havetoknowthesyntaxofthespecificconfigurationfileandthe semantics e.g.
if net.ipv6.conf.all.accept ra isacorrectlinein thisfile.furthermore wewouldhavetoknowthelegalparameters of the program called in the second snippet.inourfutureresearch wewilltrytoextractthisinformation e.g.
from the source code the documentation or sample configuration filetocreatedefinitionfilesforthemostcommoncommandsand configuration files.
in summary we think that our approach canbe ported from windows to linux based systems but whether a comparably high percentage of rules from which automations can be extracted can be reached remains to be seen.
in the future work is necessary to provide the foundations that make security automation easier.
the main factor that made our approachpossiblewasthatmicrosoftprovidesmachine readable information about configuration options for their systems in the form of admx l files.
it follows that vendors should support security automation by providing machine readable information about security configuration options and their implementation.
related work many studies have been conducted in the field of misconfiguration e.g.
.
especially the study of dietrich et al.
i s relevant for our research.
their study provides strong evidencethat security misconfigurations are more common than usually assumed.
this emphasizes how important and yet underestimated thisfieldofresearchcurrentlyis.furthermore theyhaveidentified thelackofknowledgeandexperienceascorefactorsforsecurity misconfiguration and arguethat we need moreautomation in the whole process to make systems more secure.
by using securityconfiguration guides we want to tackle the first problem with our automated implementation the second.
additionally many researchers explored how to detect and how to avoid misconfigurations .
rahman etal.
analyzed thousands of infrastructure as a code iaac scripts to identifyinsecureconfigurationsandsecuritysmells.theyusedthese smellstocreatealinterforcreatingmoresecureiaacscripts.although their linter is comparable to the hints we give to the administrators wearetargetingdifferentproblems.wheretheyare extractingknowledgefromtheiaacscriptsonhowtoconfiguresystems securely we already have this information and have to apply it.
furthermore as discussed before we think that iaac scripts are notsufficienttospecifysecurity configurationguides.similarwork was done by santolucito et al.
.
their framework configvaims atsimilarproblemsasourverificationstep.incontrasttothem we cannot learn secure configurations.
instead these are defined in theguides andtheconstraintsdonothavetobelearnedbutcan be extracted from the admx l files.
similarly spex developed by xu et al.
is not applicable in our case as we do not have the source code of the programs we want to configure.
raabetal.
createdthe elektraframeworktovalidatethe accesstoconfigurationvaluestodetectmisconfigurationsassoonaspossible.wetriedtoachievethesamewithoura prioriverification process.
in their study they investigated how free libre and open source software floss can be configured and the problem of validating configurations for it.
one finding is that presently configuration validation is encoded in a way unusable for external validationorintrospectiontools.althoughwindowsisnotafloss weencounteredthesameproblem.thisiswhywehadtoimplement ourverificationmechanisminsteadofsimplyusinganexistingtool.furthermore elektraistailoredtowardsdeveloperswhocreatenew 607software not for administrators of existing software and it cannot handle the windows policy settings we have to change according to the guides.
thus we could not apply elektra.
a similar approach to elektra was developed by xu et al.
withthesameproblemssowecouldalsonotuse itinourcase.in their study they have shown how thegrowing complexity of theconfigurationofsystemsisoverwhelmingusersandsystems administrators.
they did not investigate windows systems yet manyoftheirfindingsapplytoourdomain too.forinstance users havetremendousdifficultiesbecausetheydonotknowwhichparameterstosetandthatthisinducesupto50 oftheconfiguration errors.thissupportstheclaimthatweneedsecurity configuration guides created by experts to be used by system administrators.
wang et al.
present an approach at automatic reverse engineeringofanapplication saccess controlconfigurations.althoughtheapplicationdomainissimilartoourcontext wecouldnotapply theirworkforourneedaswedonothavethesourcecodeofthe programs we want to configure securely.
therealsoisalotofresearchinthefieldofextractingimportant parameters or configuration values from human readable docu ments .
yang et al.
present an approach to automatically extract web api specifications from the documentationofasoftwaresimilartotheextractionofourconfig urationvaluesfromthesecurity configurationguidelines.however the fact that our documents do not contain as many links made thisapproachunfeasibleinourcase.usingnlp wongetal.
developedanapproachatextractinginformationfromprogramdoc umentationtoimproveautomatedtesting.theyusegrammarrulestoidentifyrelevantcommentsandextractconstraintsfromthem.in our case the security configuration guides describe concepts from ahigherlevelthenprogramdocumentation.furthermore wedo not need to extract the constraints from the security configuration guide.
thus this approach was also not applicable in our context.
closest to our work regarding our aims of providing rule byrule implementation is the openscap project .
openscap maintainsits security configurationguides forvarious linuxsystems in a git repository where each rule is represented by one file usually thefileholdsreferencestootherfilescontainingartifacts for automated implementation and check.
however we cannot use openscap.
first openscap cannot implement the rules from the windows basedguides.second ifopenscapcouldimplementthem we would first have to add the scripts manually to the guides of cis or disa.
we think that the guides in the context of openscap areonestepaheadofwindowsguidespublishedbycisordisa becauseoftheconnectionbetweenimplementationandchecking.
inthefuture wehopethatthepublishersdistributetheirwindows guides similarly to openscap in a form that is as easily implementable as checkable.
we consider our approach an intermediate solution to bring the automatic implementation of windows based guides to a comparable level as long as this is not the case.
ongoing activities regarding further improvements of automating security as carried out by the ietf sacm security automation andcontinuousmonitoring workgroup aswellasafirstindicationofthedirectionworktowardsscapversion2asoutlinedinatransitiondocument haveaclearfocusoncheckingsecurityconfiguration settings and disregard their implementation which is precisely the gap we want to close in this work.tosumuptherelatedwork someapproachesusenlptoextract settingsfromthe documentation orthesourcecodeofa program but to our best knowledge no approach extracted the settings fromsecurity configurationguides.furthermore someapproaches like elektra help to improve the configuration of newly developed software but we cannot use them to configure existing and closedsource windows systems.
we can automatically implement the guidesofsomelinuxvariantswiththeopenscapapproachifthe publishers distribute them with the scripts necessary for open scap.
however we cannot use openscap to implement existing windows based guides automatically.
thus we tackled these gaps in the literature and put the developed components together to demonstrate that our proposed approach and our poc implementation are achieving promising results.
conclusion thecomplexityofcontemporarysystemsrenderstheirconfigurationincreasinglydifficult.thisleadstovulnerabilitiesattackerscanexploittoattackthesystems.forasingleorganization itisimpossi ble to know all the configurations to make a specific system secure.
many organizations use public security configuration guides to overcomethelackofknowledge whilemanyoftheseguidessupport automated compliance checking they do not provide support for automated implementation.
inthispaper wedemonstratedanapproachthatcanautomatically implement windows security configuration guides with minimal manual effort.
our contribution further encompasses a proofof conceptimplementation astep by stepdocumentationofthe process and the evaluation of our approach using existing guides.
ourevaluationhasshownthatwecanautomate83 oftherules without any manual effort using our nlp extraction.
furthermore our extensive benchmark with different guides and over 2014rules with automatic checks showed that the implementation of our approach can implement at least of the rules correctly.
withourapproach andtheresultsofits evaluation webelieve we can furthermore contribute as follows firstly we have demonstrated howorganizations thatrely onpublicly availablesecurityconfiguration guides can be aided in reducing effort as well asreducing errors in the implementation of these guides.
secondly we have shown how machine readable information supporting automated implementation for windows systems can be represented and included in scap guides.
we hope that our results encourage publishersofsecurityguidestosupportbettertheautomatedimple mentationoftheirguidesbyenrichingthemwithsuchinformation for windows as well for other target systems.
the design of scap v2 has already started our work offers timely and relevant input for the further development of scap towards a standard thatmeetstherequirementsofbothpublishersandconsumersof machine readable security configuration guides.
thirdly our research underlines the need for machine readable specificationsof security configurationsettings standardization and support of a format for this purpose by vendors would sig nificantly aide in all tasks concerned with configuring systems securely.
we plan to release substantial parts of our python code base.
608references stevenbird ewanklein andedwardloper.
.
naturallanguageprocessing withpython analyzingtextwiththenaturallanguagetoolkit.
o reillymedia inc. .
henk birkholz jarrett lu john strassner nancy cam winget and adam w. montville.
.
security automation and continuous monitoring sacm terminology.
internet draftdraft ietf sacm terminology .internetengineering taskforce.
work in progress.
nancycam wingetandlisalorenzin.
.
securityautomationandcontinuous monitoring sacm requirements.
rfc .
rfc8248 cis.
.
cis cat pro.
andreacontinella mariopolino marcellopogliani andstefanozanero.
.
there s a hole in that bucket!
a large scale analysis of misconfigured s3 buckets.in proceedingsofthe34thannualcomputersecurityapplicationsconference san juan pr usa acsac .
acm new york ny usa .
constanze dietrich katharina krombholz kevin borgolte and tobias fiebig.
.
investigatingsystemoperators perspectiveonsecuritymisconfigurations.inproceedingsofthe2018acmsigsacconferenceoncomputerandcommunicationssecurity toronto canada ccs .acm newyork ny usa .
disa.
.
disamicrosoftwindowsserver2016stigbenchmark.
available from server 2016 v1r13 stig scap 1 2 benchmark.zip.
accessed we used the version current version is .
a. k. jha s. lee and w. j. lee.
.
developer mistakes in writing android manifests anempiricalstudyofconfigurationerrors.in 2017ieee acm14th international conference on mining software repositories msr .
.
https dongpu jin myra b. cohen xiao qu and brian robinson.
.
preffinder gettingtherightpreferenceinconfigurablesoftwaresystems.in proceedingsof the 29thacm ieee internationalconference onautomated softwareengineering vasteras sweden ase .acm newyork ny usa .
org .
.
l. keller p. upadhyaya and g. candea.
.
conferr a tool for assessing resiliencetohumanconfigurationerrors.in 2008ieeeinternationalconference on dependable systems and networks with ftcs and dcc dsn .
.
https vladimir i levenshtein.
.
binary codes capable of correcting deletions insertions and reversals.
in soviet physics doklady vol.
.
.
microsoft corporation.
.
local group policy object utility.
microsoft.com en us download details.aspx?id accessed .
microsoft corporation.
.
security policy settings.
https docs.microsoft.com en us windows security threat protection securitypolicy settings security policy settings adam w. montville and bill munyan.
.
security automation and continuous monitoring sacm architecture.
internet draft draft ietf sacm arch .
internet engineeringtaskforce.
work in progress.
rahul pandita xusheng xiao hao zhong tao xie stephen oney and amitparadkar.
.
inferring method specifications from natural language apidescriptions.
in proceedings of the 34th international conference on software engineering zurich switzerland icse .
ieee press piscataway nj usa .
martin preisler and marek haicman.
.
security automation for contain ers and vms with openscap.
in usenix lisa .
washington.
available from markus raab.
.
safe management of software configuration.
in proceedings of the caise doctoral consortium at the 27th international conference on advancedinformationsystemsengineering caise2015 stockholm sweden june .
.
markus raab.
.
improving system integration using a modular configu ration specification language.
in companion proceedings of the 15th international conference on modularity m laga spain march .
.
markusraabandgerg barany.
.
challengesinvalidatingflossconfiguration.
in open source systems towards robust practices 13th ifip wg .
international conference oss buenos aires argentina may proceedings.
.
a. rabkin and r. katz.
.
static extraction of program configuration options.
in2011 33rd international conference on software engineering icse .
.
akondrahman chrisparnin andlauriewilliams.
.thesevensins security smells in infrastructure as code scripts.
in proceedings of the 41st internationalconference on software engineering montreal quebec canada icse .
ieee press piscataway nj usa .
red hat inc. .
openscap.
accessed .
saltstack inc. .
saltstack.
accessed .
marksantolucito ennanzhai rahuldhodapkar aaronshim andruzicapiskac.
.
synthesizing configuration file specifications with association rule learning.
proc.
acm program.
lang.
oopsla article oct. pages.
m. sayagh and a. e. hassan.
.
configminer identifying the appropriateconfiguration options for config related user questions by mining online forums.ieee transactions on software engineering .
.
tse.
.
patrick st ckle bernd grobauer and alexander pretschner.
.repository to demonstrate the steps of the automated hardeningprocess.
swh dir c3803619f51702199b19405547e2be2f2f55bdd2.
patrick st ckle bernd grobauer and alexander pretschner.
.
repository with the check results for cis guides before and after implement ing the guides.
swh dir b5c15f48b2c288f58533c9354bea3703ffbbb0dd.
patrick st ckle bernd grobauer and alexander pretschner.
.updated version of the step repository with windows server2019.
swh dir 13ffd9d2566c64afdedd414336a95a35605392d7.
ya yunn su mona attariyan and jason flinn.
.
autobash improving configurationmanagementwithoperatingsystemcausalityanalysis.
sigopsoper.
syst.
rev.
oct. .
lin tan ding yuan gopal krishna and yuanyuan zhou.
.
icomment bugs or bad comments?
.
sigops oper.
syst.
rev.
oct. .
chunqiang tang thawan kooburat pradeep venkatachalam akshay chander zhewen aravindnarayanan patrickdowell androbertkarl.
.
holistic configurationmanagementatfacebook.in proceedingsofthe25thsymposium on operating systems principles monterey california sosp .
acm new york ny usa .
david waltermire and jessica fitzgerald mckay.
.
transitioning to the security content automation protocol scap version .
technical report.
nist.
available from transitioning to scap version final.
rui wang xiaofeng wang kehuan zhang and zhuowei li.
.
towards automatic reverse engineering of software security configurations.
in proceedings of the 15th acm conference on computer and communications security alexandria virginia usa ccs .acm newyork ny usa .
edmund wong lei zhang song wang taiyue liu and lin tan.
.
dase document assisted symbolic execution for improving automated software testing.
inproceedings of the 37th international conference on software engineering volume1 florence italy icse .ieeepress piscataway nj usa .
tianyinxu longjin xuepengfan yuanyuanzhou shankarpasupathy and rukma talwadker.
.
hey you have given me too many knobs!
under standing and dealing with over designed configuration in system software.inproceedings of the 10th joint meeting on foundations of software engineering bergamo italy esec fse .
acm new york ny usa .
tianyin xu xinxin jin peng huang yuanyuan zhou shan lu long jin andshankar pasupathy.
.
early detection of configuration errors to reducefailure damage.
in 12th usenix symposium on operating systems design and implementation osdi .
usenix association savannah ga .
https tianyinxu jiaqizhang penghuang jingzheng tianweisheng dingyuan yuanyuan zhou and shankar pasupathy.
.
do not blame users for misconfigurations.in proceedingsofthetwenty fourthacmsymposiumonoperating systemsprinciples farminton pennsylvania sosp .acm newyork ny usa .
tianyinxuandyuanyuanzhou.
.
systemsapproachestotacklingconfigu rationerrors asurvey.
acmcomput.surv.
article70 july2015 41pages.
j. yang e. wittern a. t. t. ying j. dolby and l. tan.
.
towards extracting webapispecificationsfromdocumentation.in 2018ieee acm15thinternational conference on mining software repositories msr .
.
zuoningyin xiaoma jingzheng yuanyuanzhou lakshmin.bairavasundaram andshankarpasupathy.
.
anempiricalstudyonconfigurationerrorsin commercial and open source systems.
in proceedings of the twenty third acm symposium on operating systems principles cascais portugal sosp .
acm new york ny usa .
hao zhong lu zhang tao xie and hong mei.
.
inferring specifications for resources from natural language api documentation.
automated software engineering 01dec2011 .