a grounded theory based approach to characterize software attack surfaces sara moshtari rochester institute of technology rochester ny usa sm2481 rit.eduahmet okutan rochester institute of technology rochester ny usa axoeec rit.edumehdi mirakhorli rochester institute of technology rochester ny usa mxmvse rit.edu abstract the notion of attack surface refers to the critical points on the boundary of a software system which are accessible from outside or contain valuable content for attackers.
the ability to identify attack surface components of software system has a significant role in effectiveness of vulnerability analysis approaches.
most prior works focus on vulnerability techniques that use an approximation of attack surfaces and there have not been many attempts to create a comprehensive list of attack surface components.
although limited number of studies have focused on attack surface analysis they defined attack surface components based on project specific hypotheses to evaluate security risk of specific types of software applications.
in this study we leverage a qualitative analysis approach to empirically identify an extensive list of attack surface components.
to this end we conduct a grounded theory gt analysis on previously published vulnerability reports and weaknesses with a team of three software developers and security experts.
we extract vulnerability information from two publicly available repositories common vulnerabilities and exposures cve and common weakness enumeration cwe .
we ask three key questions where the attacks come from what they target and how they emerge and to help answer these questions we define three core categories for attack surface components entry points targets and mechanisms.
we extract attack surface concepts related to each category from collected vulnerability information using the gt analysis and provide a comprehensive categorization that represents attack surface components of software systems from various perspectives.
the paper introduces new attack surface components that did not exist in the literature.
the comparison of the proposed attack surface model with prior works indicates that only .
of the identified code level attack surface components are studied before.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software creation and management security and privacy software and application security.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
software security attack surface grounded theory qualitative analysis acm reference format sara moshtari ahmet okutan and mehdi mirakhorli.
.
a grounded theory based approach to characterize software attack surfaces.
in 44th international conference on software engineering icse may pittsburgh pa usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
.
introduction with thousands of new vulnerabilities being discovered every year software security is more increasingly becoming a day to day concern for organizations across the world.
software security practitioners use a wide range of security analysis techniques to improve the confidentiality integrity and availability of software systems.
these techniques often directly or indirectly rely on understanding application s attack surfaces a set of points on the boundary of a software system where an attacker can try to enter cause an effect on or extract data from .
attack surface analysis the process of identifying applications attack surface components a.k.a points plays a key role in numerous methods for security risk analysis vulnerability detection and software testing .
prior software vulnerability detection and testing approaches consider sink source entry point and api function calls as parts of the attack surface however these studies primarily focus on the analysis itself rather than identifying attack surface components.
there are a few studies that elaborate on the notion of the attack surface consider entry points exit points channels etc.
as attack surface components and test and validate them as existing theories .
they focus on limited scope and example based demonstration of attack surfaces of operating systems and web applications using the attack surface metaphor.
these studies show that applications with smaller attack surfaces are less vulnerable.
while there has been a significant interest by practitioners and in the literature to study attack surface components of a given system unfortunately we lack a generic comprehensive guidance to support security research engineers in identifying attack surfaces of a given system.
to the best of our knowledge there is no prior research that takes a comprehensive approach to characterize and identify attack surface components in software systems.
in this paper we take a grounded theory gt based approach to characterize software attack surfaces and develop a comprehensive attack surface model to be reused by researchers and practitioners.
grounded theory is a qualitative approach that ieee acm 44th international conference on software engineering icse authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
icse may pittsburgh pa usa sara moshtari ahmet okutan and mehdi mirakhorli extracts theories from unstructured data and leads to discoveries directly supported by empirical evidence .
we extract and analyze vulnerability reports from common vulnerabilities and exposures cve data published by mitre corporation .
in addition we analyze entries in common weakness enumeration cwe data an extensive catalog of different types of software and hardware weaknesses describing root causes of vulnerabilities .
we leverage the grounded theory to identify high level concepts which are related to software systems attack surface from vulnerability reports and weaknesses and use straussian gt as a systematic inductive method for conducting qualitative research of identifying attack surface components.
our gt analysis starts by asking three key research questions research question where are the critical entry points in a software system that are used by attackers to get in?
research question what assets or components in a software system are targeted by attackers?
research question how do attack surfaces emerge and what types of mechanisms are utilized to reach the targets?
to answer these research questions we consider three core theories related to each research question which are entry points targets and mechanisms respectively.
we extract the concepts related to each theory from gathered vulnerability data and define a generic attack surface model based on the emerged concepts.
during the gt process we find that concepts related to each theory can be categorized in four major groups software source code code its executable program the system and the network environment.
then we identify attack surface components under each category and compare the proposed attack surface categorization model with the literature.
the comparison results indicate that almost all attack surface components defined in the literature are covered by the proposed attack surface model while prior works cover only a small portion of the concepts identified by our analysis.
the result of quantitative comparison shows that in the best case only and of the network andprogram level mechanisms and of thenetwork level entry points identified by this paper are covered in the literature.
on average only .
of the studied code level attack surface components are covered by previous works.
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows section provides an overview of the methodology used in this empirical study section presents the findings of our research and section compares our results with those in the literature.
section discusses the results section describes verifiability and threats to validity and section concludes with final remarks.
methodology attack surface refers to the amount of code functionality and interfaces of a system exposed to attackers .
in this study we rely on publicly available vulnerability repositories to identify common attack surface components in software systems.
vulnerability databases describe vulnerabilities using natural language and do not include technical data.
in order to identify attack surface components we use an approach based on the grounded theory gt .the straussian gt is preferred over the classic glaserian gt approach because the study is led by research questions and existing concepts in the literature are used during the analysis .
the straussian grounded theory encompasses the following activities defining research questions theoretical sampling open coding constant comparisons memoing axial coding and selective coding.
the gt process was performed by the authors who have had and years of experience in software design development test and maintenance and and years of experience in vulnerability analysis and secure by design respectively.
all three authors involved in all gt steps and the validation step that is discussed in section .
figure shows how the straussian gt was applied.
over one year the authors met weekly to discuss merge and finalize the codes concepts and categories.
all collected data derived intermediate data that contains codes and concepts and the final attack surface categories are shared with the research community through a public github repository .
.
research questions in straussian grounded theory approach researchers may define research questions upfront.
while following the approach we consider broad and open ended research questions for detecting attack surface components.
getting inspired from the apparent attack surfaces of a house research questions are defined based on the past experiences of the authors and concepts from the literature.
for example in a house front and back doors windows garage door climbable trees or tables can be entry points and the attacker would consider precious items in the house such as safe box as target.
there might be some mechanisms in building a house such as emergency stairs that could make the house more vulnerable.
using the similarities of a software system and a house from the perspective of a cyberattacker we identify the concepts for software applications to help define attack surface components.
we focus on three research questions listed in section during the gt process and try to do coding in a way that can find theories from data to answer these questions.
.
data collection given the topic of interest of this study we need access to software vulnerability reports the description of these vulnerabilities indepth analysis of how they occurred as well as vulnerable code snippets and their patches.
thus we targeted open data resources that contain different types of vulnerabilities and vulnerable code snippets.
.
.
theoretical sampling.
it is the data collection process that is based on the concepts derived from data .
in theoretical data sampling unlike conventional approaches all data are not collected at the beginning.
data collection and analysis is a circular process.
concepts that are identified in each cycle lead to more data collection until the saturation occurs .
.
.
data sources.
we obtained vulnerability information from two publicly available vulnerability repositories common weakness enumeration cwe cwe enumerates a list of common security weaknesses and categorizes them based on authorized licensed use limited to lahore univ of management sciences.
downloaded on august at utc from ieee xplore.
restrictions apply.
a grounded theory based approach to characterize software attack surfaces icse may pittsburgh pa usa topic of interest attack surface components memo writing notes related to entry points targets and mechanism research questions ?data collection via theoretical sampling random selection of cves open coding coding ofcve reports axial coding identifying the relationship and links between codes selective coding sorting concepts and put data into central categories constant comparison comparing immerged codes concepts with existing codes concepts theories attack surface components memo writing notes and mind maps of the attack surface components constant comparison comparing immerged codes concepts with existing codes concepts data collection via theoretical sampling selection of cves and cwes axial coding identifying the relationship and links between codes memo writing notes and mind maps of the attack surface components constant comparison comparing immerged codes concepts with existing codes concepts data collection via theoretical sampling search based selection of cves figure the grounded theory approach applied to our work different views to help practitioners in securing their applications .
it provides a concise description of the weakness common consequences likelihood of exploitation demonstrative examples and reference to other resources.
we reviewed all these information pieces to extract attack surface components.
common vulnerabilities and exposures cve the mitre corporation cve is an open platform to list publicly disclosed vulnerabilities .
we used the cve list and additional information provided in the national vulnerability database nvd to extract vulnerability meta data.
we used issue tracking systems to obtain further discussions about cves source code repositories to identify fixes for vulnerabilities and further resources to extract other related information if existed.
figure shows the information model of the vulnerability data collected.
the summary of the data sources used retrieve vulnerabilities from mitre and nvd we obtained vulnerability reports from mitre cve and nvd by consuming their public data feeds.
vulnerabilities disclosed in cve are assigned a unique identifier cve id a concise description a list of affected software releases and a list of