uml is back.
or is it?
investigating the past present and future of uml in open source software joseph romeo marco raglianti csaba nagy michele lanza reveal software institute usi lugano switzerland abstract since its inception uml the unified modeling language has been touted as the way to go when it comes to designing and documenting software systems.
while being an integral part of many university software engineering programs uml has found little consideration among developers especially in open source software.
reasons for this include that uml shares some shortcomings with other forms of documentation e.g.
limited availability outdatedness inadequate level of detail .
we present a study to investigate the evolution and the current situation regarding the use of uml in open source projects.
we mined and analyzed 13k github projects developing strategies and heuristics to identify uml files through their extensions and contents for a quantitative analysis of two decades of evolution of the usage of uml.
we explored the popularity of uml derived characteristics of projects leveraging uml and analyzed the authors creators and maintainers of uml artifacts.
our study confirms that uml is indeed still under utilized.
at the same time we found evidence of a resurgence coinciding with the popularity of human readable text based formats defined and used by tools like plantuml and mermaid.
we discuss how identifying and addressing the new challenges implied by this resurgence could impact the future of uml.
index terms uml human readable text based uml software design evolution software documentation evolution i. introduction ieee.
personal use of this material is permitted.
permission from ieee must be obtained for all other uses in any current or future media including reprinting republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes creating new collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
.
icse55347.
.00155andrew watson said that the history of visual modeling can be divided cleanly into two eras before uml and after uml .
the period before uml was a time of division and strife named the method wars era .
booch rumbaugh and jacobson a.k.a.
the three amigos creators of three popular object oriented development approaches combined their efforts towards a single unified modeling language uml .
the adoption of uml as a standard by the object management group in marked the end of the method wars and the beginning of the after uml era.
uml is one of the most prominent modeling languages used in software design and development .
it has been used for automatic code generation for embedded systems to create workflow diagrams for business processes to design measure maintain comprehend and reuse software systems.
we focus on uml usage indesigning and documentingsoftware systems.
despite the apparent popularity of uml in academic publications its history hints at a progressive stagnation.
minor revisions of the uml specification have been issued with an average yearly pace between and .
uml .
took over two years to be released losing the momentum.last but not least uml .
.
the latest version of the specification dates back to december without any updates in more than six years.
one of the main shortcomings of uml from a practitioner s perspective is the availability and quality of its tool support .
uml s decline in popularity since 20041exacerbated the problem.
this decline culminated with the discontinuation of language support in one of the major integrated development environments ides microsoft visual studio removed uml support in due to underutilization by clients to focus development efforts on features deemed more relevant for a larger share of the user base.
given the benefits of uml diagrams for system comprehension design and documentation e.g.
uml studies with the lindholmen dataset we aim to understand why uml is still underutilized focusing on open source software oss .
we investigated 13k oss repositories to find those containing uml identifying commonalities and differences.
after tagging all uml files through their extensions and contents we found that only .
of the repositories in our dataset out of contained uml diagram files in the last years.
in the same time span uml file formats have significantly changed.
our findings show the progressive abandonment of dedicated uml graphical tools first and changes in the role of ide plugins later.
more importantly we found empirical evidence of a resurgence of uml after coinciding with the advent of human readable versionable and easily maintainable textbased uml files e.g.
plantuml mermaid .
this resurgence did not modify the natural tendency to neglect documentation and its maintenance.
we conclude by analyzing the relationships among uml repository activity community and human factors focusing on uml artifact authors and their commits.
uml s decline in popularity and language stagnation are now countered by a renewed interest in human readable textbased uml.
dropping special tools in favor of generic text editors these formats introduce new challenges.
for example each tool uses a slightly different subset of uml sometimes with an ambiguous specification.
moreover an effective and consistent layout of visual elements is usually impossible with these tools severely impacting their effectiveness .
1see 2see argue that watson s split needs to be revised and that a third era has already started.
only a convergence between language specification evolution uml human readable text file formats standardization and improved tool support can address these issues for a new or real?
golden age of uml.
ii.
umland thestate of theart uml is a visual modeling language with a formal specification standardized in by the object modeling group.
touted as the de facto standard for modeling software systems uml allows developers to visually describe the system what it does and how.
specialized software is used to create uml diagrams with an emphasis on their syntactic correctness.
software engineering courses in university computer science curricula teach uml to students as a tool to reason about software its design and its documentation .
the relevance of uml in teaching is not matched by its usage in practice though in a survey with software architects langeet al.
found that uml in industry only loosely adheres to the official specification .
nevertheless uml is a valid instrument to teach topics related to software architecture.
rukmono and chaudron found that peer feedback on uml diagrams can improve students learning of software design .
high quality documentation increases the success chances of a software project .
this is especially true for uml diagrams and documentation based on visual modeling.
software design diagrams promote active discussion in homogeneous and cross functional teams .
developers achieve better functional correctness when making changes with accurate and up to date design diagrams .
although most results agree on the usefulness of uml some exceptions exist.
scannielloet al.found that uml models produced in the requirements analysis process influence neither the comprehensibility nor the modifiability of source code .
gravinoet al.found that the time to accomplish comprehension tasks for less experienced participants is negatively affected when uml design models are provided in addition to source code .
there is a necessary trade off between correctness quality and time to complete software maintenance tasks when leveraging uml diagrams .
uml drawing software tools leverage the visual nature of the language providing drawing capabilities similar to whiteboard sketches mixing pen and paper with digital means .
bergstr omet al.investigated the automated assessment of uml class diagram layouts via machine learning since element spacing and rectangle orthogonality play a fundamental role in the perceived quality of a uml class diagram .
human readable text based uml takes away control from the diagram s creator for example on how elements are laid out their spacing and where connecting lines are drawn.
this impairs what rukmono and chaudron found to be key aspects of uml diagrams understanding and usability .
badreddinet al.investigated the underutilization of models in oss and a potential language based solution umple .
robleset al.and hebiget al.already investigated uml models in the lifespan of github projects by focusing onimages and a limited subset of non image file extensions .uml and .xmi .
while the classifier proposed by hoquanget al.
has been leveraged to identify class diagrams manual analysis was performed on the remaining images to discriminate other types of diagrams.
our work focuses on the evolution of text based representations of uml as a more reliably parsable and easily manageable format and the umple format is one of those we analyzed.
previous studies used surveys with developers and software practitioners to investigate their perception and usage of software modeling .
ho quanget al.analyzed the role of modeling in oss development .
analyzing projects containing uml files they used a method similar to ours to retrieve uml files for project selection but our study aims to address different research questions and to provide empirical evidence based on the analysis of a large dataset of uml artifacts spanning years.
besides updating the analysis of uml usage in oss with the trends in the last years the phenomenon emerging between and present new and distinctive characteristics that warrant specific attention.
the resurgence of uml with human readable text based formats one of the main findings of the present study is indeed an emerging phenomenon that prompts for better approaches and tools.
for example we need to address layout issues without giving back the ease of use and maintainability gained by making the graphical representation almost a side effect.
iii.
researchquestions given the advantages that the use of uml should provide according to the literature and the fact that a great effort is spent in teaching the language in universities the fundamental meta question of our analysis is meta question why is uml still underutilized?
as any why question has no imminent answer we focus in the following on four distinct research questions pertaining to the format diffusion demographic and the designers of uml diagrams which we answer through an empirical study.
we define a strategy to semi automatically capture uml artifacts based on file formats.
this necessary step to collect data on the use of uml leads to our first research question rq1format what formats are uml diagrams found in?
with a dataset of years of history of semi automatically gathered uml artifacts we focus on the evolution of uml usage trends at large from the beginning to the current state rq2diffusion how widespread is uml in open source software?uml non uml tagged filesextension based heuristic tagginguml files taggingfor each uml extension file29 tagged uml extensionsexample counter examplefor each uml candidate extensionexample counter exampleexample search01 dropnon uml andnon parsable55 uml extensions uml toolsimport exportextensionsextension exploration .
uml ... uml .
repositories74 candidate uml extensions not in dataset extensions27 dropped extensions.html.jpg....cddz.mfj... githubdataset creation repositoryinformationcloned repositoryextension explorationuml files taggingtagged filesauthor anti aliasing repositoryinformation author analysislocalexample counter example rq4rq1rq2rq3 author analysisrqsfig.
.
approach overview left and detailed uml extraction right different characteristics of the projects using uml with respect to activity e.g.
commits releases participation e.g.
pull requests contributors or community engagement e.g.
watchers stars could be used to advocate for the ubiquitous adoption of uml.
if uml would contribute positively to certain metrics e.g.
participation its use should be further encouraged based on these benefits.
otherwise the metaquestion might be dismissed by just saying that uml is under utilized because its practical usefulness is overestimated.
which leads to rq3demographic what types of projects include uml diagrams?
finally our focus shifts from repositories to contributors to analyze the characteristics of key figures in the lifecycle of uml artifacts.
if no significant difference can be found in the repositories can human factors related to uml contributors those actively working with uml artifacts motivate the under utilization of uml?
hence our final research question rq4designers who is creating and maintaining uml diagrams?
iv.
datasetcreation we used the seart github search3 ghs tool from dabicet al.
to gather an initial set of github projects.
after excluding forks to avoid polluting the dataset with social forks we selected projects with at least commits to eliminate toy repositories.
we selected projects with at least contributors to ensure the need for collaboration which increases the utility of diagrams.
we selected projects with at least stars to ensure projects are considered useful by the oss community.
our final dataset consists of repositories which we cloned locally on april .
we performed a deep cloning for each project to analyze their entire history.
we extracted withcloc the number of lines of code locs for each project and removed those with less than 10k locs.
3see loc in many different languages we found of them for example c c but also c c headers and json.
we usedclocmainly to remove from our dataset emptied projects which kept the statistics we used as ghs filtering criteria.
we stored summary information about each repository in a postgresql database.
table i provides descriptive statistics about the complete dataset.
table i statistics of thedataset with13 projects metric min median mean max total commits k .0m contributors k .5m files k .6m locs 46m .
b stars k .1m non unique total contributors.
v. mining andanalyzingumlrepositories in figure we show an overview of our approach to mining and analyzing the repositories on which we base our study.
we split the meta question into four research questions rq1 on the usage and the nature of uml in oss repositories.
for each research question we give an overview then we present our methodology results and findings.
a. rq1 what formats are uml diagrams found in?
file extensions are an efficient way to discriminate file types but they are not sufficient to uniquely identify uml diagrams.
thus to obtain a handle on uml artifacts useful to address all the rqs we implemented strategies to manually find examples and counter examples of uml diagrams for different file extensions.
for each potential uml file extension i.e.
those with at least a uml example we devised heuristics to tag semi automatically the files that contain uml.
in the following we describe each step of the uml extraction procedure.
in figure right we show a zoomed in overview.
extension exploration.we created a list of candidate uml extensions using the following approach we searched for top uml diagramming tools on google and identified popular tools for creating uml diagrams.
we downloaded and installed each tool to determine the supported file extensions.
we checked their import export and save functionalities.we could not install or run programs for example due to licensing issues.
for those we relied on the documentation or youtube videos to determine which file extensions were supported.
we complemented this approach by searching for all extensions with uml in the name or in any part of the file path and present in at least two repositories.
after generating the list of candidates we removed any extensions for which we found no examples in our dataset i.e.
a tool s unused import export format along with any extension used by known non uml file types e.g.
.java .jar .am .
example and counter example.for each file extension we searched for an example and a counter example.
extensions for which we could find at least an example are valid uml extensions.
those for which we could find at least one counter example are not uml specific.
we randomly selected retrieved and manually inspected one file for each extension to confirm whether it was a uml diagram or not.
we were left either with an example or a counter example.
if for example we had a counter example for .txt files we then searched all .txt files to find an example of uml.
in this search we tried to reduce the number of files to be inspected before finding an example.
if we were looking for a uml example we first analyzed the files whose path contains the string uml .
then we searched for the following keywords in the file names case insensitive architecture uml diagram sequence class usecase state activity component deployment object communication composite interaction collaboration package profile andtiming part of this keyword list is comprised of the names of the uml diagram types .
we inspected these files first.
for extensions with more than files we explored a statistically significant sample confidence level margin of error .
then we removed extensions that are too generic e.g.
.html .md 4and formats whose content we cannot parse automatically e.g.
.jpg .png .
to recap the procedure has multiple steps with branches see figure right .
if a randomly sampled file for an extension is an example uml file with that extension we mark the extension as uml not yet exclusive .
then we look for counter examples for the extension to see if this is a umlexclusive extension or if we can find both uml and non uml files with this extension.
if we find a counter example this is not a uml exclusive extension.
if the first randomly selected file is a counter example not a uml file with no examples found in the second step it corresponds to a format to discard no uml files found with that extension .
4the exclusion of these file extensions is a potential limitation of our study but it is mitigated by the fact that to the best of our knowledge no tools except enterprisearchitect can import html or markdown files to produce uml diagrams rendering the collaborative maintenance of such artifacts impractical seeuml tools extensions.mdin the replication package for a list of extensions importable and exportable by each tool .
.zargo.argo.pgml.zuml.prj.diagram.dia.uxf.uml.xmi.ecore.ucls.umlclass.mmd.plantuml.pumlextension199920002001200220032004 .zargo.argo.pgml.zuml.prj.diagram.dia.uxf.uml.xmi.ecore.ucls.umlclass.mmd.plantuml.pumlextension200520062007200820092010 .zargo.argo.pgml.zuml.prj.diagram.dia.uxf.uml.xmi.ecore.ucls.umlclass.mmd.plantuml.pumlextension201120122013201420152016 .zargo.argo.pgml.zuml.prj.diagram.dia.uxf.uml.xmi.ecore.ucls.umlclass.mmd.plantuml.pumlextension201720182019202020212022 0204060number of repositories0204060number of repositories0204060number of repositories0204060number of repositories0204060number of repositories0204060number of repositories fig.
.
number of repositories for most popular uml files modified each year.
top extensions for each year in red.uml files tagging.some file extensions are not used for uml purposes exclusively e.g.
.dia .drawio .graffle .
we tag each uml file in our dataset not only based on its extension but by semi automatically parsing its content.
for each file with an extension coming from the previous step we detect uml content via extension specific regular expressions after de compressing files .
for example .ecore files are uml files for the eclipse modeling framework if they contain either the word eclass or epackage .
by devising such strategies we automatically tagged almost every uml file in the dataset.
where an automatic approach was not feasible we checked the files manually.
this was needed for files of extensions .asta .cmof .yuml .
this step consisted in a progressive refinement of the strategies until all files with all extensions resulted in a uml or non uml tag.
table ii shows the uml extensions considered in the rest of the study.
table ii repositorieswithtaggeduml files out of552 repositorieswithuml seesectionv b extension repos extension repos .puml .diagram .uml .pgml .dia .prj .xmi .zuml .plantuml .asta .ecore .session .ucls .iuml .zargo .mdzip .uxf .yuml .mmd .gliffy .mdj .platuml .vpp .umlprofile .pu .cmof .umlclass .ump .argo there are two assumptions we made i for each file we examine only its first version assuming that the nature of a file does not change only its content does ii if multiple files with the same name and extension exist in different paths we analyze only one of them assuming that files with the same name have the same type.
this simplification for the manual analysis impacts only identification of the tagging strategies.
the applied heuristics tag each file in the different paths as uml or non uml and each file is counted independently.
results.figure shows the evolution of the most popular uml extensions by number of repositories using them since .
for each year we plot the number of repositories actively making changes with at least one commit to uml files for each extension.
the red bars represent the top extensions found in the most repositories for that year.
the .xmi .argo .pgml .zargo and .dia are the only uml extensions used from to .
the .zargo .argo and .pgml extensions are used by argouml and .xmi is a standard for many graphical uml tools.5dia is a diagramming tool.
5it is worth noting again in this context that extensions such as .xmi can also be used for non uml content.
as described previously in this section we consider only the uml tagged files for each extension.
the regular expressions we devised count only .xmi files with actual uml content.
the same applies to other generic extensions e.g.
.dia .ecore .
to is still dominated by .xmi and .zargo but .dia s use increases and .ecore appears.
the eclipse modeling framework emf an eclipse plugin for graphical modeling and model based automatic code generation uses .ecore files.
from to .xmi .dia and .ecore remain popular while .ucls .uxf and .uml start to become popular.
the .uml extension contains many types of uml files including ecore emf xmi and plantuml files.
the .ucls extension is used by the objectaid uml explorer eclipse plugin.
the .uxf extension is the uml exchange format similar to xmi .
from to the previously popular extensions are supplanted by .mmd mermaid .plantuml and .puml plantuml .
in the two text based uml diagramming tools i.e.
plantuml and mermaid are the most used.
given the above we can see three main periods.
early on from to we see the usage of graphical uml modeling tools and generic diagramming tools.
from to eclipse plugins took over as the most popular.
finally from to we see the rise of text based uml.
interestingly plantuml s use did not rise until despite being released in .
similarly mermaid released in gained popularity in and made it into the top extensions in .
one event that possibly contributed to this shift is the release of visual studio code vscode in .
given how popular eclipse plugins were from to developers liked uml modeling tools to be integrated into their ide.
since its release in vscode has become the most popular ide for developers.6it has extensions i.e.
plugins for uml diagrams in plantuml mermaid and umlet.
from to we see a huge uptick in the overall number of repositories actively working with uml mainly due to the rise of plantuml.
this could be due to the advantages that text based uml modeling tools offer.
compared to graphical uml modeling tools it is arguably easier to version control text based uml diagrams for example having meaningful diffsthat can be checked for correctness during code reviews.
summarizing rq1investigates how uml tools and formats evolved in the last two decades.
we present the trends highlighting the novel ones and the recent history.
theunderutilizationof uml emerges from the number of repositories containing uml artifacts.
thewhyof the meta question is related to the tools and formats themselves.
for example a fragmented ecosystem of tools has maintainability and interoperability problems leading to underutilization section vi .
rq1findings f1plantuml has been the most popular uml diagramming tool since uml s resurgence year.
f2mermaid i.e.
.mmd surpassed .uxf and .uml extensions in .
the other human readable text format becomes the second most popular after plantuml.
f3text based uml diagramming over the past few years has supplanted uml graphical editors.
6see rq2 how widespread is uml in open source software?
for this rq we analyze the history of uml s diffusion to re assess the current status of the practice providing insights on the evolution that brought uml to be an underutilized language.
we look at the percentage of repositories that contain at least one uml diagram since their creation.
we analyze the popularity and activity on uml files.
method.after identifying candidate uml extensions and tagging uml files for rq1 we further restrict the dataset we first introduced in section iv to repositories containing uml diagrams resulting in repositories.
table iii summarizes descriptive statistics about the dataset of uml repositories.
table iii statistics of thedatasetwith552 uml repositories metric min median mean max total commits k .9m contributors .3k files k .3m locs 13m .7m stars k .3m non unique total contributors.
results.the usage of uml in our dataset is not widespread.
we found only .
of repositories out of that contained at least one uml diagram at some point in time.
we investigated whether the usage of uml diagrams has increased or decreased over time.
since the number of active repositories changes over time we normalize the number of repositories with uml diagrams over the number of active repositories per year i.e.
having at least one commit on the main branch in that year .
figure shows the percentages of repositories with uml diagrams and of repositories actively modifying uml files at least one uml file commit in the year since the year .
.
.
.
.
.
.
200020042008201220162020repositories working with uml total active repositoriesyearpercentage actively modifying umlpercentage with uml fig.
.
percentage of repositories with uml at its peak about .
of active repositories contained a uml diagram.
the fraction of repositories actively modifying uml is even lower i.e.
at a maximum of .
of repositories modifying at least one uml file in .
the current percentage of repositories actively using uml blue circles hovers around .
slightly above the latest local minimum in .
less than one third of the projects containing uml saw activity in uml files in .the overall percentage of repositories with uml red triangles follows a similar trend before but it has been increasing since .
the use of uml peaks around but in the last five years the divergence between projects merely containing uml and those actively modifying it has been increasing.
summarizing rq2takes a step back and considers aggregate uml usage and maintenance data.
we imply as further discussed in section vi that if we do not take into account the shortcomings of the new wave of uml tools and formats this resurgence wave might not bring uml out of the underutilization condition i.e.
whyuml will remain underutilized .
rq2findings f1uml in oss is not widespread with a peak of only .
of active repositories having a uml diagram.
f2uml hit peak diffusion in then it decreased to below .
just to see a steady resurgence that is still going on since .
f3usage and active maintenance of uml follow different trends since .
the first is increasing while the second stays almost stable in percentage.
c. rq3 what types of projects include uml diagrams?
assuming that uml s presence should influence or be influenced by the development process we hypothesize that a measurable effect should appear in some metrics related to the repository activity or to the community of developers contributing to the project.
to confirm or refute this hypothesis we analyzed what types of projects contain uml diagrams comparing projects by their main language and github metrics related to activity and community e.g.
commits issues contributors .
method.to analyze correlations between project metrics and the presence of uml artifacts we compared uml and non uml repositories with respect to the following metrics commits contributors forks open issues open pull requests releases stars total issues total pull requests andwatchers.
for each metric we performed a d agostino pearson normality test to verify if the data was normally distributed.
since in both cases the data was not normally distributed we used the mann whitney u test on each metric to determine if there was any statistically significant difference.
for those metrics where we found a statistically significant difference between the two samples we used cliff s delta to determine the magnitude of the difference.
we were also interested in possible correlations between the main language of the repository and the usage of uml.
therefore we grouped uml repositories by main language as reported by github s language statistics.
results.given that uml diagrams are used to describe various aspects of a system we hypothesized that repositories with higher activity and larger communities would be more likely to have uml diagrams.
this was not the case.the two groups of uml and non uml repositories have a statistically significant difference on the number of commits open and total pull requests stars and open issues mannwhitney u testp .
but only the number of commits has a non negligible effect positive correlation with presence of uml artifacts cliff s delta .
small effect .
we investigated the potential effect of the choice of programming language on the use of uml.
in figure we show the percentage of repositories with uml by main programming language.
percentage of repositories with umljava c go dart groovy objective c rust php c python c ruby typescript javascript kotlin shell swiftmain programming language fig.
.
percentage of repositories with uml by language we see java as absolute first by a large margin followed by c and the others with less than half its popularity.
the choice of programming language seems to affect how likely a repository is to have uml.
java repositories are three times more likely to have uml than repositories in other languages.
the lack of a clear separation between languages except for java makes it difficult to identify common distinguishing characteristics among those more likely to have uml diagrams.
java and c which support class based objectoriented programming oop are in the top spots.
following them at number three there is go which does not have classes.
then again we find languages which support classbased oop near the bottom of the list like kotlin and swift.
since uml was built to support oop methodologies it is also interesting to find c which is not an oop language above python c and kotlin.
although we see a clear difference in the likelihood of a repository to have uml depending on its main language we do not see any patterns in the types of languages for which this is more likely.
as part of our future work we plan to further investigate the relationships between all the project s languages i.e.
not only the main one and the use of uml.
summarizing rq3investigates if thewhyof the metaquestion is connected to any significant improvement in relevant metrics.
apart from a slightly increased number of commits the activity and community metrics we examined were not affected by the presence of uml artifacts in the repository an argument in favor of the underutilization i.e.
uml is underutilized because it does not improve developers engagement with the project .rq3findings f1repositories with uml have a slightly but significantly higher number of commits.
f2except for the number of commits there is no difference in activity and community metrics between uml and non uml repositories.
f3java is the most likely programming language to use uml with of repositories times the average of the other languages .
d. rq4 who is creating and maintaining uml diagrams?
the use of uml diagrams does not seem to influence the metrics of activity in the repository we considered but interesting relationships could be revealed considering the project contributors.
this question needs a thorough analysis of proxies such as the contribution period i.e.
as a proxy for involvement in the project .
we analyze creators and maintainers of uml diagrams compared to developers.
we investigate how these roles overlap and the characteristics of authors with dedicated project management roles contributing to uml diagrams.
method.to answer rq4 we needed to integrate authors information with the list of tagged files after removing author aliases .
we expanded on the work of gote and zingg by tuning the algorithm to github repositories.
we eliminated names and emails that we found were common placeholders in our dataset e.g.
anon github.com .
we specifically ignored matches of the following names unknown anonymous anon andnone.
we also excluded emails containing the wordsunknown anonymous devnull noreply none none androot localhost.
in addition we considered names in the domain of email addresses for those who host their own email accounts i.e.
mail jdoe.com .
when extracting the email we compare the domain instead of the base if the first or last name appears in the domain.
the postgresql database is augmented with the resulting derivative information e.g.
author anti aliasing author analysis .
a complete dump of the final database is available for replication and further exploration onfigshare.
contribution period of uml vs. non uml committers.
the first attribute we analyze is the average contribution period the period between the first and the last commit of a contributor.
in figure we show three box plots with the distribution of the average contribution period of uml and non uml committers.
the top box plot shows the distribution without filtering and the middle and the bottom ones are obtained by removing contributors with less than and commits respectively.
the box plots of uml committers are only slightly affected by filtering.
on the contrary the median contribution period of the non uml committer box plots moves from days with no filtering to days when filtering out contributors with less than commits.
7see 000uml committer non uml committer 000uml committer non uml committer average contribution period in days uml committer non uml committerfig.
.
average contribution periods of uml vs non uml committers.
all contributors top contributors with at least commits middle and contributors with at least commits bottom .
this huge shift is due to the large number of occasional contributors in terms of source code.
this phenomenon is almost non existent for uml committers.
for this reason in the following analyses we show only the results after removing contributors with less than commits.
the median contribution period of uml committers is days versus days for non uml committers.
we confirmed that this difference is statistically significant mannwhitney u testp .
cliff s delta .
large effect .
uml committers contribute to the repository for a significantly longer period more than twice .
in figure we see a scatter plot of the same average contribution where each point represents a repository.
any point above the red line is a repository where the average contribution period of the authors of uml commits is greater than the average contribution period of the other authors.
average contribution period of non uml committers in days 000average contribution period of uml committers in days alsa project alsa lib rolisteam rolisteamslope fig.
.
average contribution periods of uml vs. non uml committers we marked two outlier repositories in red in the scatter plot.
the first is the one with the lowest average contribution period of non uml committers while still having a high average contribution period of uml committers rolisteam rolisteam.
the contributors forrolisteam rolisteamcan be seen in table iv with the uml committers marked with the site apicon.table iv contributors for rolisteam rolisteam site apuml committers github profile name contribution period commits renaud guezennec site ap vladar4 etienne tyler schmidt tomaz canabrava milan irigoyen paul brown gissu ben cooksley yann escarbassiere patrick jos e pereira gr egoire barbier ibpx we can see the repository has a single maintainer renaud guezennec.
most of the remaining contributors had all of their commits on the same day author contribution period of .
the main maintainer is the only person who has also created or modified any uml diagrams which explains the high average contribution period of uml committers.
the other marked repository has the highest average contribution period of uml committers alsa project alsa lib.
table v shows the top authors by number of commits.
table v top5 contributors bynumber ofcommits for alsa project alsa lib site apuml committers github profile name contribution period commits jaroslav kysela site ap takashi iwai clemens ladisch takashi sakamoto abramo bagnara this project is similar torolisteam rolisteam only one contributor modified any uml diagrams.
however in thealsaproject alsa librepository many other contributors have been active for a long time making numerous non uml commits.
number of uml committers vs. non uml committers.
we investigate how many contributors in a repository are uml committers.
figure shows a scatter plot of the number of uml versus non uml committers.
number of non uml committers log scale 0102030405060number of uml committers embox emboxiluwatar java design patterns kubernetes sigs cluster apiumple umpleslope fig.
.
number of uml vs. non uml committersin almost every single case the number of non uml committers is significantly higher mann whitney u testp .
cliff s delta .
large effect than the number of uml committers repositories under the red dashed line .
we investigated more in detail a few different cases iluwatar java design patternswith a ratio close to .
umple umplewith more uml than non uml committers kubernetes sigs cluster apiwith more non uml committers but still more than uml committers andembox embox as representative of the typical case.
theiluwatar java design patternsproject consists of an educational repository used to teach java design patterns.
every pattern follows this template a java example a uml diagram and a readme with a description and the embedded uml diagram.
any author wanting to add or update a design pattern must do the same for the corresponding uml diagram.
theumple umpleproject is the repository for the umple programming language.8as a model oriented programming language umple heavily relies on uml diagrams justifying it being the perfect outlier.
kubernetes sigs cluster apihouses a set of apis for managing kubernetes clusters and keeps a markdown book which documents the apis9 e.g.
their implementation usage extension .
the documentation and proposals for new features contain a wealth of uml diagrams to support the text.
the diagramming work is uniformly spread among contributors.
each author makes an average of less than uml commits.
the previous three repositories are in stark contrast with the typical repository in our dataset for which we consider embox emboxas an example.
this repository has authors and only have actively worked on uml diagrams.
the top contributors by the number of commits in table vi include both uml committers.
this is closer to what we saw in the contribution periods of thealsa project alsa liband rolisteam rolisteamrepositories.
table vi top5 contributors bynumber ofcommits for embox embox site apuml committers github profile name commits uml commits anton bondarev anton kozlov site ap alex kalmuk denis deryugin eldar abusalimov site ap number of commits by uml vs. non uml committers.
we wanted to see whether uml committers contribute more to projects than non uml committers.
we hypothesized that uml committers are more likely to be main contributors uml committers should be more familiar with the project and more capable of making diagrams they want developers to be able to contribute easily so they provide diagrams that help onboard they want users to use their project and diagrams are a helpful tool to convey how it works.
8see 9see the main contributors were not the main uml diagrammers as inembox embox.
previously we analyzed outliers but uml committers make almost times more commits than non uml committers mannwhitney u testp .
cliff s delta .
large effect .
in figure we see a box plot of the average number of commits by uml and non uml committers.
fig.
.
average number of commits by uml vs. non uml committers note that we show the box plot without outliers to focus on the general trend but we found repositories where uml committers make times more commits.
these repositories are similar torolisteam rolisteam with a single contributor who makes most commits and is the sole uml committer.
dedicated uml diagrammers.how often are there dedicated uml diagrammers i.e.
those who modify uml diagrams but do not modify source code ?
looking back at table iv it seems unlikely that the .5k commits of renaud guezennec are all uml related.
we analyze uml committers who did not modify source code files.
in table vii we show the repositories we found.
only .
of repositories have dedicated diagrammers.
manually analyzing the repositories in the list more in depth we see that almost half of them contain little to no source code file c de .
table vii dedicateddiagrammers file c de little ornosourcecode .
repository name github profile name commits adorsys open banking gateway dora nziali adorsys xs2adaria lavrenova olga levandovska apache isis alexander schwartz deegree deegree3 danilo bretschneider file c de edmcouncil fibo mike bennett file c de hyperledger aries rfcsbrent ashcherbakov vinomaster file c de kubernetes enhancements patrick ohly file c de openshift enhancements enxebre file c de progit progitigor murzov anthony gaudino programmevitam vitamclemence boyer edith uportal project uportal christian cousquer file c de w3f polkadot spec fabio lama wix detox wixmobile w3f polkadot specis a specification repository progit progit is a book edmcount fiboholds a specification for an ontology andkubernetes enhancements hyperledger aries rfcs andopenshift enhancementsare repositories used to discuss enhancements or features for other repositories.wix detoxis a source code repository but the author who modified only uml diagrams is a bot account for publishing documentation.one example of a dedicated diagrammer in a repository with source code isdaria lavrenovain theadorsys xs2arepository.
their github profile shows that they are a program manager pm .
based on their commit history which is related to documentation and roadmap planning entirely it looks like they are program management work foradorsys xs2a.
olga levandovskahas a similar commit history in the same repository and is indicated as pm in their github profile so we can assume they also have a similar role.
dora nzialiofadrosys open banking gateway a different repository of the same owner has a similar commit history todariaandolga but no reference to pm activities in the github profile.
still given the similarity it looks likeadorsys has pms dedicated to updating roadmaps and documentation including uml diagrams.
in our dataset there are only few software systems where people are dedicated to uml diagramming without contributing to source code this is indeed a rare occurrence in oss.
summarizing rq4focuses on developers who create and maintain uml artifacts.
there are very few uml committers which supports the idea that uml is not being used to its full potential.
if developers in a collaborative development platform contribute almost exclusively to source code and not to uml diagrams it might imply that they do not perceive uml diagrams as useful as the source code itself.
this is just one of the potential causes and it needs further investigation.
rq4findings f1uml committers tend to be among the longerstanding members of their respective projects.
f2uml committers make times more commits.
f3there are almost never dedicated uml diagrammers.
only .
of repositories have contributors who modify uml diagrams and not source code.
vi.
discussion the rise and fall of uml cannot be reconstructed by file extensions alone but through the extensions we could find a reliable source to analyze uml s long term evolution.
uml has never been widely popular in open source software.
our approach led to insights on how the nature of uml support changed from standalone graphical tools to ide plugins to human readable text.
despite its relative popularity in this latter form the graphical quality of the rendered diagram thus its usability is still subject to many compromises.
in terms of our considered activity metrics uml repositories are not significantly different from non uml ones except for a slightly higher number of commits .
what stands out though is that the majority of them use java as their main language.
we attempted to cluster languages of uml repositories to find commonalities but to no avail.
further research on how uml is used in repositories of different languages might shed light on the features that make uml so appealing for certain languages.contributors who modify uml files on the other hand are longer standing and more active members of a project.
although only a small percentage of developers usually contribute to uml there are exceptions where uml is a collaborative effort e.g.
kubernetes sigs cluster api .
nevertheless although commits are a coarse grained unit of measure the number of uml commits per single author is still minimal less than inkubernetes sigs cluster api .
new tools and human readable formats should consider several aspects to keep this growing trend of uml adoption in oss development e.g.
layouts reducing tool fragmentation separating presentation and content concerns .
focusing on artifacts partially obscures the motivations behind some of the highlighted phenomena.
nevertheless making these phenomena intelligible and more transparent for the software engineering audience especially beyond the modeling community could spark new studies on thewhysdriving them.
underutilization.going back to our initial meta question the underutilization of uml is in our opinion tied to the lack of standard unified tools.
the software market in the early 2000s generated so many alternatives that the fragmentation created a babel of uml realization dialects competing with the official xmi specification which in the end shared xml s fate.
most commercial tools have expensive licensing options making them unlikely choices for volunteers.
a textual representation created and modified in any text editor increases thepoolofpotentialcontributors.
the fact that this potentialdoes not result in aneffectiveincrease indicates that some factors counterbalance this benefit.
we argue that one of them is the shortcomings of current tools for human readable formats e.g.
lack of layouting control .
reinforcing the economic explanation there is a focus on simplerepresentations without dedicated tooling where the serialization of the model is the text itself.
this agrees with the surveys indicating that uml is more often used with a loose syntax.
the goal is not model driven development but rather having a satisficing i.e.
satisfactory and sufficing model to support the design phase or to become part of the system s documentation for program comprehension.
nevertheless in most repositories only few contributors deal with uml artifacts and those who are not developers are even fewer.
if we do not take into account the shortcomings of the new wave of uml tools and formats the resurgence wave might not bring uml out of the underutilization condition.
textual vs. visual model.what is given up in the current implementations of text based uml is the visual power tied to element positioning and layout.
we highlighted how core developers usually cover uml creator and maintainer roles.
familiarity with source code may influence their tendency to prefer a textual representation for graphics.
human readable uml formats do not need to be complicated to be usable for complex systems but some original features of the visual language must be re incorporated to maximize effectiveness.
implicit validation of the model with a non ambiguous grammar for the language can guarantee syntactically correct models reducing the burden of correctness for the creator.appropriate layout strategies could give back the visual expressiveness and clarity that separates functional from dysfunctional uml diagrams.
finally we argue that one of the advantages of tools like plantuml and mermaid is that they provide a subset of the uml specification in a digestible format.
the most useful features are the easiest to use.
for example a class diagram with a few entities is just a few lines of text moving back the focus on the design and the relationships of composing elements.
automatic layout of elements in a consistent and controlled way will probably be the make or break feature of such tools.
finally a reflection on teaching uml in academic courses.
our study informs and justifies the presentation of currently trending tools e.g.
plantuml mermaid and encourages shifting the emphasis from the graphical to the conceptual model distilling it into human readable textual formats.
vii.
threats tovalidity construct validity.in rq1we investigate uml extensions as a way to capture uml files.
the list of uml extensions cannot be exhaustive.
since the resulting list is used throughout our analyses we mitigate this risk by integrating multiple strategies to obtain the final dataset of repositories and their uml files we search for popular uml tools and include their supported input and output formats we search for examples and counter examples of uml diagrams by analyzing all uml file extensions in our dataset we apply progressive refinement of our file tagging strategies for each extension until saturation to be able to capture all uml files.
in our initial dataset we filter projects based on criteria that are not directly related to the project s level of documentation.
while the attitude towards documentation in general can indicate the possibility to find uml filtering based on such criteria e.g.
a minimum amount of documentation would misrepresent the actual popularity of uml.
while developers may use temporary diagrams e.g.
sketches for live discussion they usually do not persist them.
we focus on uml artifacts intended for long term project support transient ones are out of the scope of our study.
internal validity.discriminating uml and non uml content in files can be subjective.
the first author collected examples and counter examples of uml files.
dubious cases were discussed among the other authors until a consensus was reached.
to further mitigate this risk we restricted our analysis to the files that could be described non ambiguously by automatic uml tagging strategies e.g.
regular expressions for file content to identify specific uml signatures or exhaustively manually annotated.
external validity.we extract our dataset from open source projects hosted on github.
this is a threat to the generalizability of our results to other types of projects e.g.
closed source developed in a company .
when creating our dataset we perform a trade off to have a large enough sample while mitigating the risk of underestimating the presence of uml due to simple projects.
on the other hand this filtering strengthens our conclusions on the underutilization of uml.viii.
conclusion uml has been taught as the be all and end all of software design and modeling to generations of students.
on the other hand we find practitioners using small subsets of uml at best often in an informal imprecise declination.
only a tiny fraction of relevant github projects include any form of uml diagrams.
something in the chain fell apart between academia and practice.
the new wave of interest about uml represented by the recent resurgence of human readable textbased formats should be met with prompt reaction.
we need to address the shortcomings we foresee like the diminished value of a diagram with an uncontrollable layout to leverage the advantages that textual representations bring for example ease of parsability reviewability and comparability.
the timeliness with which the community will increase its awareness of the implications of the recent evolution will hopefully make a difference in the survivability of uml in its new incarnation.
uml is back and popular again but still underutilized.
the lack of maintenance that new formats of uml diagrams seem to experience is nothing new for the research community.
what is different is that for these types of artifacts we could find better ways to support design and documentation efforts.
uml is a precious resource for large software systems and tool support cannot ignore some of the trends we highlighted first and foremost the widening gap between repositories merely containing and those actively modifying uml files.
in this regard standalone tools disconnected from the evolving source code can become more of a hindrance than a help.
finally projects with and without uml are almost indistinguishable from the surface but there is a large gap between contributors who work on uml artifacts and those who do not.
the lack of dedicated figures responsible of creating maintaining and evolving uml diagrams should make us rethink the role of uml closer to developers than to the mythical figure of the software architect.
the alternative is to embrace a no code philosophy augmented by large language models dreaming again the 2000s dream of round trip engineering and using phone pictures of whiteboard sketches as gpt xy prompts asking to produce a text based uml diagram.