flow experience in software engineering abstract so ware engineering se requires high analytical skill s and creativity which makes it an excellent context for experiencing flow.
although previous work in the se context has identi fied how positive a ffect and development tools can support the flow experience there is still much to uncover about the characterist ics of so ware developers flow experiences.
to address this gap in knowledge we conducted a qualitative critical incident technique cit questionnaire n on the flow facilitating facto rs and characteristics of flow in the se context.
e most important flowfacilitating factors in developers work included optimal challenge high motivation positive developer experience dx and no distractions or interruptions .
e flow experiences were characterized by absorption effortless control intrinsic reward and high performance .
our study identi fies the features of flow commonly addressed in flow research however it also highlights how it use especially development tools that provide positive dx as well as being able to work without excessive distractions and interruptions are important facilitators of developers flow.
ccs concepts human centered computing human computer interaction empirical studies in hci so ware and its engineering so ware creation and management keywords so ware engineering so ware development flow experience acm reference format saima ritonummi val eri siitonen markus salo henri pirkkalainen and anu sivunen.
.
flow experience in so ware engineering.
in proceedings of the 31st acm joint european so ware engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of so ware engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
h ps introduction flow is defined as enjoyment and absorption in an activity that requires high levels of skills provides increasing levels of challenges and is intrinsically motivating for an individ ual.
an essential element of flow is an autotelic experience that is engaging in an activity that is rewarding in and of itself .
as working in software engineering se requires high an alytical skills deep involvement in problem solving and creativity developers work can be expected to be a great sou rce of flow.
however the technology driven nature of the industry also has its unique characteristics including continuous learning e.g.
updating individual skills to keep pace with constantly evolvin g tools and the importance of developer experience dx of the tools developers work with which can affect work related flow.
moreover flow is important for work motivat ion.
motivated employees are more engaged in their tasks and perform better .
motivated developers have been found to be more productive and remain in the organization while demotivated software engineers are more likely to have turnover intentions and take sick leave .
because the software industry is a substantial segment of the global economy the motivation and productivity of those working in it impact not only individual well being but also the performance of the sector .
for decades flow has been a widely researched topic in psychology .
more r ecently it has been explored in se.
however more research needs to be conducted in this field.
previous studies of flow in the se context ha ve examined how emotions can indicate being in flow the barriers to experiencing flow and regarding information technology it use how dx affects flow e.g.
.
scholars have also investigated how flow relates to developers productivity and the overall saima ritonummi faculty of information technology university of jyvaskyla jyvaskyla finland saima.e.ritonummi jyu.fi valtteri siitonen faculty of information technology university of jyvaskyla jyvaskyla finland valtteri.m.e.siitonen jyu.fi markus salo faculty of information technology university of jyvaskyla jyvaskyla finland markus.t.salo jyu.
fi henri pirkkalainen unit of information and knowledge management tampere university tampere finland henri.pirkkalainen tuni.fi anu sivunen department of language and communication studies university of jyvaskyla jyvaskyla finland anu.e.sivunen jyu.fi esec fse december san francisco ca usa copyright held by the owner author s .
acm isbn .
thiswork islicensedunderacreativecommonsattribution4.0international license.
esec fse december san francisco ca usa s. ritonummi v. siitonen m. salo h. pirkkalainen a. sivunen assessment of their work performance and satisfaction .
while some aspects of developers work that influence the experience of flow have received attention in recent years developers flow still requires a more holistic examination to gain a deeper understanding of its different dimensions in se .
furthermore research addressing flow in this field has usually focused on students e.g.
college students participating i n programming courses or part time developers e.g.
scholars which calls for more studies on professional developers.
in addition although flow has been studied in the human computer interaction hci context since the 1990s it can be argued that our understanding of the human centric aspects of se e.g.
how developers interact with it and each other and of the patterns in employees it use that can facilitate flow has been limited.
therefore this study aims to comprehend flow in se and given the technology intensive nature of developers work in the context of hci.
we address the abovementioned research gaps by using a qualitative critical incident technique cit approach .
we ask the following questions what are the characteristic s of software developers flow experiences?
how can software developers fl ow experiences be facilitated?
we are also interested in which stages of the development process flow experiences occurred in most often and which technologies were involved in the se experiences.
to answer these questions this study used a qualitative cit questionna ire that included open and closed ended questions about an outstandingly strong flow experience in the respondent s work.
the cit is a useful method for collecting detailed descriptions of critical incidents that have significantly influenced an individual s activities either positively or negatively .
primary data collection was conducted via prolific an o nline panel that facilitates the collection of high quality questionnaire responses .
we obtained responses from individuals working in se who describ ed their flow experiences.
the findings highlighted that antecedents of flow especially optimal challenge and context specific situational factors such as positive dx with integrated development environments ides help make work smoother and more enjoyable facilitating flow.
this study contributes to research on the human aspe cts of se e.g.
and the contextual understanding of flow in se.
to the best of our knowledge this is among the first empirical attempts to holistically examine flow experience s among professional software developers.
the study s findings increase our knowledge of flow in se and provide a foundation for further research on the topic.
the practical implications for man agement and developers include the benefits of identifying flow facilitating practices and tools.
applying these can provide opportunities to experience more frequent flow experiences in se.
also more flow can improve developers performance self actualization work motivation and work engagement .
background and related work in psychology flow is defined as an optimal experience and a state of enjoyment and deep concentration associated with intrinsically motivated activities .
the characteristics of developers work e.g.
complex problem solving that requires a specific set of skills enable assigning intrinsic rewards to work which makes software development an excellent flow activity .
in this study flow experiences refer to csikszentmihalyi s conceptualization of flow .
therefore other concepts often used in the se conte xt e.g.
control flow and workflow are not discussed here.
the se concepts describe processes whereas flow experience describes an individual s inner state .
.
the flow experience the concept of flow originates from positive psychol ogy and studies on autotelic activities .
autotelic activities are enjoyable and intrinsically rewarding that is they are rewarding in and of themselves and are not done for extrinsic rewards such as money.
in the literature flow is often considered as having three conditions under which it can occur when the perceived challenges presented by the activity correspond to one s skills when there are clear proximal goals for what is being done and when the activity provides immediate feedback about the progress being made.
the characteristics of being in flow include deep involvement in the activity often described as intense and focused concentration a merging of action and awareness loss of reflective self consciousness a sense of control an altered sense of time and autotelic experience .
together the conditions and characteristics of flow constitute the dimensions of flow see figure .
some researchers have adopted a three dimensional view in which flow is characterized by absorption enjoyment and intrinsic interest e.g.
.
in their review norsworthy et al.
suggest that most conceptualizations of flow conditions or flow antecedents seem to fall under optimal challenge e.g.
clear goals and immediate feedback and high motivation while the experiential dimensions of flow fall under absorption e.g.
intense concentration merging of action and awareness altered sense of time and loss of reflective self consciousness effortless control e.g.
sense of control and intrinsic reward e.g.
autotelic experience .
figure dimensions of flow flow is associated with goal directed activities that provide increasing challenges .
thus flow usually occurs when the mind or the body or both is stretched to its limits and something challenging and worthwhile is accomplished as a result .
in conditions of flow perceived challenge skill balance clear goals immediate feedback characteristics of flow intense concentration merging of action awareness loss of reflective self consciousness altered sense of time sense of control autotelic experience 619flow experience in software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa addition to intrinsic motivation the motivational aspect of flow is also linked to a sense of achievement and creativity as creative thinking typically requires the use of a considerable amount of psychic energy and perseverance i.e.
the ability to discover and formulate new problems .
although flow is often regarded as a motivational state there are differences in how different personalities experience situations.
individual s with an autotelic personality are motivated by intrinsic rewards they are more likely to feel in control of their actions and be motivated in situations that involve high challenges and require a high level of skills for non autotelics these conditions can be demotivating .
since software development involves creativity and complex problem solving many of those working in the field likely have autotelic personalities.
this study focuses on the participants descriptions of their experiences and the facilitators of their flow.
although flow conditions share commonalities with flow facilitators they a re not entirely synonymous.
while the conditions of flow describe the interaction between the individual and the activity facilitators include other circumstances such as other people and sit uational factors which can be context specific e.g.
related to one s job characteristics .
.
flow and related concepts in hci intrinsically motivated goal directed activities make it use a great potential source of flow experiences.
as is the case with any flow activity the conditions of flow in the hci context incl ude tasks that provide enjoyable challenges .
though there are different streams of flow research in th is context one common approach is the associati on of four dimensions to flow in it use control curiosity intrinsic interest and attention .
these four dimensions have also been conceptualized as technoflow the last three have been termed cognitive engagement .
similarly agarwal and karahanna introduced the concept of cognitive absorption a state of deep involvement with software characterized by temporal dissociation focused immersion heightened enjoyment control and curiosity.
the a ssociati on of positive appraisals with it use e.g.
being able to work f aster or make fewer errors has been described as techno eustress .
although they share similarities with flow dimensions these concepts highlight the interaction between the user and it.
at the same time as there are multiple streams of flow research in t he hci field it has been suggested that a unified conceptualization of flow is needed to design better and more engaging artifacts as well as user experiences ux that satisfy both functional and hedonic needs e.g.
fun excitement immersion and flow for interaction .
one challenge in examining flow in the hci context has been viewing flow experience and technology as ontologically separate entities even though the properties of individuals and technology are not separate but entangled i.e.
they both possess relational attributes that shape the activitie s that the individual and the artifact can perform .
furthermore examining the flow enabled by it use in the work context provides an opportunity to identify patterns in work practices that support employees ability to experience flow .
research has identified various outcomes of work related it use including techno work engagement the positive and negative effects of technology mediated interruptions the autonomy paradox and either increased or decreased job performance .
although the overall effects of it use at work seem to be paradoxical this study addresses the positive outcomes of it use for developers especially how the use of different tools and other work characteristics are related to their flow experiences.
.
flow in se flow has received considerable attention in the work context e.g.
and the it work context e.g.
.
in contrast only a few empirical studies have focused on the psychological phenomenon of flow experience in se e.g.
.
there are even fewer studies on professional full time developers.
scholars have suggested that developers emotions can correlate wi th their perceived progress in their tasks and indicate whether they are in flow .
moreover feeling creative has been attributed to being more productive and experiencing more flow during the workday .
studies o f developers productivity have found that developers tend to feel productive when they have attaina ble clearly defined goals or requirements and the possibility of working without excessive distractions interruptions or context switches which can help reach flow e.g.
.
in addition to the opportunities to experience flow there are many flow inhibiting factors in developers work.
these include a mismatch between the perceived challenge and skills working with insufficient requirements i.e.
lack of clear goals and interruptions especially during immersive tasks .
moreover having problems with technology is a consid erable flow barrier in developers work .
an example is weaknesses in development tools ux which can be costly for work productivity and even prevent the adoption of tools .
however it has been suggested that development tools that can provide positive dx support flow and intrinsic motivation in developers work .
much like the concept of ux dx comprises the cognitive affective and intentional aspects of hci such as intrinsic motivation and flow .
studies exploring dx have increased our understanding of developers interactions w ith development tools such as ides they have also provided concrete design guidelines for facilitating good dx for these to ols e.g.
.
method qualitative studies o f flow experiences are important for gaining a context specific understanding of the phenomenon because they allow participants to describe these experiences in their own words .
to investigate flow in the context of se we used a cit based qualitative questionnaire.
the cit is an established qualitative method for collecting self reports of critical incidents such as outstandingly negative or positive experiences.
this technique is especially suitable for capturing human behavior in contexts that are episodic in nature e.g.
work tasks .
in addition to being widely used in the work context th is 620esec fse december san francisco ca usa s. ritonummi v. siitonen m. salo h. pirkkalainen a. sivunen method has been utilized in it use research e.g.
and se research .
cit studies can be conducted either by making direct observations or by collecting retrospective critical incident reports .
retrospective self reporting is also common in flow studies e.g.
.
because the flow state is characterized by deep absorption in an activity retrospection is argued to be the most effective way to access this state .
another important consideration in flow studies is determining which experiences count as flow and which do not .
so with predetermined measurements e.g.
the balance between perceived cha llenge and skills can be challenging .
hence one strategy that has been suggested is to provide respondents with a description of flow and ask them whether they have experienced it.
if they have they are asked to describe their experience in detail which is similar to the cit approach.
in this study we collected retrospective reports of critical incidents i.e.
flow experiences .
.
data collection we designed a qualitative online questionnaire1 in limesurvey to gain context specific insights into flow experiences in developers work.
the questionnaire included open and closed ended questions based on established phrasings used in cit research e.g.
and flow questionnaires e.g.
.
initially we provided a brief definition of flow to ensure that the respo ndents were familiar with the concept.
this paper focus es on the open ended questions in which the participants were asked to recall and describe an outstanding flow experience they had had in as much detail as possible q2 the factors that facil itated the flow q3 and the technologies involved in the experience q1 .
the questionnaire included other questions not discussed in this study e.g.
queries regarding what prevent ed the respondent from experiencing more flow in their work .
the questionnaire also comprised closed ended questions designed to collect additional information on the experiences such as the duration of the experience q5 how long ago the experience occurred q6 how often the respondent experience d similar flow at work q8 and which stage s of the deve lopment process was the experience related to q4 .
the participants were allowed to choose all applicable stages planning development programming testing implementation and maintenance in addition to an open field for other stages .
it was important to allow this freedom because the stages can vary among different development methodologies e.g.
agile devops .
further more the closed ended questions included an assessment of the positive effect of the experience on the respondent s work i.e.
how critical the incident was pe rceived to be q7 as well as statements about work related flow q9 based on flow operationalizations in the work context .
these statements were used in the data analysis phase to help de termine whether the experiences described in the responses c ounted as flow or not .
task about flow.
the questionnaire was created in finnish and transla ted into english.
the translation was proofread by an english language professional to ensure that the central concepts had been accurate ly translat ed.
before carrying out the study the questionnaire was pretested by three developers to make sure that the questions were understandable.
the data were collected in two phases between decemb er and april .
the pilot study was conducted by contacting international software companies and responses were obtained.
after the pilot data were found to be of sufficient quality primary data collection was conducted using the prolific online panel a useful service for collectin g high quality data see e.g.
.
we employed the same questionnaire design in both phases but to target developers in prolific we applied prescreening criteria for people working in software intensive industries .
we also added attention check questions as suggested by the prolific guidelines and we only accepted responses from participants with a minimum of previous submissions with an approval rate of or higher.
th is resulted in responses of which were included in the final sample.
see table for demographic information of the sample .
table final sample demographics n gender employment status male female other not disclosed .
.
.
.
full timer part timer freelancer other entrepreneur not disclosed .
.
.
.
.
.
age education not disclosed .
.
.
.
.
doctoral degree master s degree bachelor s degree high school or equivalent below high school not disclosed .
.
.
.
.
.
the weighted average of the respondents ages was years.
the sample comprised nationalities the most common were portuguese .
finnish .
british .
polish .
and italian .
.
the most frequently mentioned job titles were software developer software engineer full stack developer web developer front end developer and programmer.
.
data analysis first we established exclusion criteria for the responses.
following the cit criteria and suggestions made for research on flow we excluded responses that did not describe an outstandingly strong flow experience .
this included responses to software intensive industries in prolific include information services and data processing software and video games.
621flow experience in software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa the flow statements with an average of .
q9 i.e.
the characteristics of flow were not clearly present in the description of the experience experiences that did not have a particularly positive or effective outcome q7 and respondents who could not declare how long ago th e experience occurred q6 i.e.
i don t know responses .
participants who failed at least one attention check question or misundersto od the assignment were also excluded.
misunderstanding the assignment included describing a stressful experience or workflow for example.
while being in an intense flow is not always only a positive experience flow can easily result in strain the taxing experiences we excluded did not include any element of flow but rather described a particularly demanding experience .
descriptions about workflow depicted what happened in terms of process e.g.
a continuous flow of tickets to the team but they did not describe a flow experience.
we also excluded responses from full time students whose experiences were unrelated to work.
in total we eliminated questionnaires which result ed in a final sample of .
the selected responses were analyzed following the c ontent analysis approach and guidelines by berg .
content analysis is commonly used in cit studies because it is useful for identifying classifying and categorizing the relevant factor s that underl ie the phenomenon of interest .
we s tarted with open coding and we labeled the emergent themes in a preliminary manner to understand the characteristics of developers flow experiences q2 and the facilitating factors of those experiences q3 .
open coding was done primarily by the first author and the preliminary codes were discussed among all authors.
the responses that mention ed similar themes were coded with a descriptive label.
both new themes specific to flow in se and categories consistent with flow research emerged from the data and the preliminary codes.
context specific findings revealed in particular the importance of positive dx.
the codes consistent with flow research included various dimensions of flow such as optimal challenge flow antecedent and deep absorption in the activity flow characteristic e.g.
.
most responses comprised many themes and each response was coded with all the themes that were mentioned in it.
after coding the data and checking for frequency and patterns the preliminary codes and their contents were discussed among all the authors and refined if needed .
in establishing the refined codes i.e.
final categories we maintained the data driven nature of the findings and referred to flow research when applicable.
flow facilitators were grouped into two main categories flow antecedents and context specific and situational facilitators while flow characteristics were grouped into flow experience dimensions and flow outcomes although we did not specifically ask about outcomes many participants described them one example was being highly productive .
in naming the categories that clearly referred to the antecedents experiential dimensions or outcomes of flow we adopted the overarching constructs identified by norsworthy et al.
in their scoping review of flow studies.
this categorization helped us to creat e mutually exclusive categories and avoid possible ove rlaps between the constructs e.g.
intense concentration and merging of action and awareness as opposed to using the nine dimensional flow model.
table summarizes the coding process of one respondent s response .
table coding process transcript unit q2 while developing software for some motors at work i ended up being very involved and i really enjoyed coding in what seemed like a similar language to assembly.
during that phase i was extremely excited to go to work.
flow experience characteristics preliminary code refined code main category concentration absorption flow experience excitement intrinsic reward flow experience transcript unit q3 the software and programming language combined with a challenge that i knew i was capable of solving.
flow facilitating factors preliminary code refined code main category challenge skill balance optimal challenge flow antecedent good dx positive dx context specific facilitator in addition to coding the descriptions with the respondents thoughts about the experience we also looked at the activity being performed when the flow occurred i.e.
the stage of the development process related to the experience q4 and at the technologies and or software involved in the experience q1 .
results this study identified the characteristics of developers fl ow and the flow facilitating factors in their work.
first we briefly examined the circumstances of the experiences including the development process stage i.e.
the activity and the technologies involved.
as e xpected development programming was mentioned in the majority .
of the responses of the final sample n followed by the rewarding feelings of implementation testing debugging and conducting maintenanc e activities such as c ode refactoring and updating legacy code see table .
table flow and the stages of the development process activity n development programming implementation testing planning maintenance other .
.
.
.
.
.
622esec fse december san francisco ca usa s. ritonummi v. siitonen m. salo h. pirkkalainen a. sivunen similarly the technologies mentioned most often included tools used especially during the development stage such as programming languages mentioned by .
of the respondents ides .
frameworks .
platforms .
and dev ops tools .
.
the tools quoted most often included visual studio code python java javascript and react.
hardware mostly computers was mentioned by .
of the participants .
in contrast .
stated that their flow was not related to the use of technology but to being able to use their creative and problem solving skills for example.
over one third .
of the respondents declared that their flow lasted for hours and .
reported hours which means that the experience was over after the workday or within hours.
surprisingly many participants mentioned even longer flows of days .
weeks .
and even more than one month .
when they worked on project s that constantly provided opportunities to experience flow.
however the respondents also mentioned shorter micro flows that lasted less than an h our .
.
regarding frequency the majority reported experiencing flows sometimes .
or often .
.
experiencing flow very often .
rarely .
or very rarely .
was less common.
.
flow facilitating factors in developers work flow facilitating factors were grouped into two main categories flow antecedents and context specific and situational facilitators .
flow antecedents included optimal challenge .
and high motivation .
.
context specific and situational facilitators included positive dx .
no distractions or interruptions .
social support .
timetables .
other resources .
and positive mood and energy level .
.
the most significant flow facilitating factors in developers work were optimal challenge high motivation positive dx and no distractions or interruptions see table .
table flow facilitating factors in developers work flow antecedents n optimal challenge challenge skill balance clear goals immediate feedback .
high motivation intrinsic motivation achievement motive .
context specific and situational facilitator s n positive dx .
no distractions or interruptions .
social support .
timetables no time pressure sense of urgency .
other r esources .
positive m ood and energy level .
the most prominent flow facilitator was optimal challenge which included most importantly appropriate challenge skill balance .
this was characterized by working on a task that offered the right amount of challenge e.g.
a good learning curve and being able to reach flow because of one s skills experience or expertise.
the right proportion of challenge skill and passio n or excitement about the topic.
i may have challenges that are adequate to my skills but they mean almost nothing without passion.
for me this is the key that enables a true feeling of flow.
unity developer for some optimal challenge meant very c hallenging tasks problem solving and even being out of their comfort zone .
further l earning new skills and applying new knowledge e.g.
learning to use a new technology or acquiring skills needed f or a task was viewed as intriguing and flow inducing .
i was developing an aws based microservice architecture.
it was a new topic for me and required a lot of learning.
still i experienced strong moments of flow because i felt i had enough time and freedom to implement and explore the technology and its pote ntial.
senior software engineer optimal challenges also included having clear goals and receiving immediate feedback about the progress being made .
although clear goals are important for any flow activity for devel opers this could mean among other things working on a project with well defined requirements.
immediate feedback entailed getting into an efficient loop of positive feedback either with people or the technology and seeing the expected results emerge i.e.
r eceiving timely feedback .
we got into a positive feedback loop with the tweaks we were making which motivated everyone to stay focused until the end of the workday.
people were able to clearly see the impacts of the decisions we made with each deployment.
high motivation was also an important flow facilitator for developers.
this state was described as feeling motivated dedicated or passionate about a topic or having a strong curiosity about a topic.
intrinsic motivation could arise from something one enjoy ed or fe lt was meaningful working on an intriguing task or being good at something right from the start.
some participants mentioned that they felt intrinsically motivated because they were contributing to a cause e.g.
national security or public health or s imply because they knew they were creating something useful for end users.
i was excited and interested in the subject.
i worked furiously because i thought it was the best thing in the world at the time.
software developer achievement motive arose from wanting to reach high standard results making an impression or showing off one s skills.
623flow experience in software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa it was my first task for that job and i wanted to impress my boss.
also i really enjoyed working on th e assignment.
software developer although intrinsic motivation suggests that one expe riences flow an activity they find intrinsically rewarding intrinsic reward will be discussed in .
as a characteristic of the flow experience i.e.
being in flow whereas motivation is the reason to engage in the activity.
the most important context specific situational facilitator in developers work was positive dx .
this included descriptions of development tools e.g.
ides and frameworks that were easy to use a joy to use intuitive helpful and powerful as well as tools that made work easier and or faster i.e.
more efficient by offering flexible and customizable features.
i knew what i was and everything worked out as i had planned.
unity and visual studio worked together as expected and i felt i really knew how to use the se technologies.
software specialist it works perfectly every time.
it allows me to concentrate on my work and never lets me down.
front end developer it is simple fast and predictable.
everything worked like a charm.
developer in some cases positive dx was associated with immediate feedback effortless control and high performance e.g.
increased productivity more about effortless control and high performance in .
.
good and correctly configured tools.
short feedback loop i.e.
the effects of the changes made could be quickly verified a comprehensive test set to ensure that the changes were very unlikely to break any existing functionality .
senior software developer the features of the ide were just what i needed to b e able to focus on getting the code out quickly.
it didn t get in the way and only enhanced my productivity.
the keyboard shortcuts and all the built in tools made it an easy one stop shop for getting all the information i needed to be productive.
software developer another important situational facilitator was no distractions or interruptions which involved having distraction free moments for focused work in a calm environment e.g.
a break fr om meetings instant messages or questions from colleagu es or not having too frequent context switches .
one way to achieve interruption free work and mitigate any possible distraction was to isolate oneself by using noise canceling headphones and or listening to music.
i think that the over ear noise canceling headphones and the good playlist enabled the flow experience.
social support was also a facilitator of many respondents flow experiences.
this entailed working in a supportive team where members were receptive to ideas helped each other w orked together toward a shared goal communicated efficiently and had mutual respect for each other.
a few participants mentioned that their flow occurred when they were pair programming.
my colleague and i shared the work fairly equally and kept communicati ng regular ly and constant ly.
we shared ideas and praised each other.
the work was fun as it was difficult but rewarding.
social support also involved receiving encouragement from colleagues and online communities.
a sense of pride in having colleagues over your back cheering you on senior software specialist interestingly timetables .
were shown to facilitate flow in two ways .
in some circumstances there was no time pressure and it was possible to work with reasonable timetables or at o ne s own pace with the opportunity to get absorbed into the task do it till it works .
i was working with a colleague and we were given enough time to be calm and focused and research the work properly.
developer in other cases there was a tight schedule or pressure due to being behind schedule which created a sense of urgency that enabled the flow experience.
my previous experience the relative mix of easiness and things yet to learn ... and i also was being pressured into this task quite fast.
software developer interestingly working without time pressure and a sense of urgency enabled absorption in their own way no time pressure provided the opportunity to explore and discover and urgency forced the respondents to focus fully on the pressing issu e. other resources included having the right kinds of tools e.g.
hardware software stable connections and server resour ces sufficient human resources and budget.
positive mood and energy level were perceived as affect ing the ability to get into flow.
being in the right kind of mood or having a good mindset i.e.
not being anxious or stressed as well as being well rested were experienced as helpful in reaching flow.
.
characteristics of developers flow based on the responses we identified the topics that characterized the experiences the most .
these were grouped into flow experience and flow outcomes see table .
the dimensions of the flow experience were classified under absorption .
effortless control .
and intrinsic reward .
.
many respondents also described high performance .
as an outcome of their flow.
624esec fse december san francisco ca usa s. ritonummi v. siitonen m. salo h. pirkkalainen a. sivunen table characteristics of developers flow flow experience n absorption intense concentration time distortion merging of action and awareness .
effortless control effortless involvement sense of control .
intrinsic reward enjoyment satisfaction .
flow outcomes n high performance increased productivity increased creativity .
absorption was characterized by intense concentratio n time distortion e.g.
losing track of time and merging of action and awareness.
intense concentration was described as a full focus on the task immersion or engagement in an activity and co mplete absorption leading one not to hear or see anything around them.
many stated that this intensely focused state result ed in not wanting to take breaks and in some cases in being able to continue flowing even after a break.
intense concentration was often d escribed as occurring when coding or programming.
when i program automatic tests i am completely absorbed in my work and very focused .
i do not take breaks from work when i am thinking about a specific programming problem.
junior test engineer some respondents said that focus was achieved by being in an environment where one could concentrate in peace and quiet e.g.
isolating oneself or listening to music to block out distract ions .
however for others this intense involvement was not seen as entirely positive as it is possible to get too absorbed in programming.
absorption also included descriptions of time distortion meaning an altered sense of time .
this was explained as losing track of time time flying days passing fast and time standing still.
i was able to move through the code with speed and finesse losing track of time.
senior software engineer further more some participants felt a merging of action and awareness in the state of absorption which was described as forgetting everything around oneself the environment beco ming blurred or disappearing everything blending in being in the zone or getting lost in coding.
an interesting point put forward by one programmer was having no fear of making mistakes along the way as long as there was an interesting task that provid ed the right amount of challenge the focus is just at the right level .
the time and environment are nicely blurred and things happen not necessarily only the right things but when you have a nice challenge it doesn t matter.
senior game programmer developers flow was also characterized by effortless control which included both effortless involvement in the ac tivity and having a sense of control over one s actions.
in some cases this resulted in having increased willpower to accomplish the goal or feeling proud of being able to solve problems independ ently i felt really good when i didn t have to ask for help and could solve the problems i encountered myself.
i like my team members and there is no shame in asking for help but i just felt particularly good and was in a flow.
back end developer effortless involvement was described as everything going smoothly things working out as expected tasks solving themselves or work flowing like water running through a tap.
when you re in the flow of development everything works as expected and all is fine.
software developer interestingly effortless control was often associated with positive dx.
this heightened sense of control over one s acti ons and a feeling of effortless involvement in the activity resulted fro m tools that provid e positive dx which enabled smooth effortless and efficient working.
the respondents also reported another central aspect of flow the autotelic experience i.e.
experiencing the activity a s intrinsically rewarding .
intrinsic reward entailed enjoyment and satisfaction .
enjoyment was described as having a euphoric experience a great rush joy being excited having fun and feeling energetic among other things.
satisfaction entailed getting a rewarding feeling from certain tasks that induced flow.
many participants disclosed that they loved what they did for a living and could not get enough of coding.
i lose track of time hunger and thirst and my focus is completely on the task at hand.
i do not think about anything else.
this is quite a euphoric experience.
it s one of the best feelings anyone can feel in my opinion.
i can spend hours at a time just lost in the moment.
nothing matters except my creation.
i think t his feeling is one of the best things about programming.
unity developer things went exceptionally well i felt motivated and ready for any challenge.
i enjoyed my work more than usual and i was eager to see the finished results.
fullstack software engineer satisfaction could also emerge from something because it was helpful in one way or another such as re platforming a legacy system developing something useful for end users and working 625flow experience in software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa on a project that was important for compliance national security or public health.
finally the developers flow was characterized by high performance .
this included both increased productivity and increased creativity .
increased productivity was described as being productive or efficient e.g.
having a productive day or completing weeks worth of work in one day making progr ess either massive strides or steady step by step progress finishing tasks or as some participants vividly put it being on fire.
i worked for about two hours and got a lot of stuff done.
i was completely absorbed in the code and the stuff i was creating.
front end developer clients requested features that i was able to pump out test document and deliver quickly.
when there is a quick turnaround and i see directly how pleased the clients are with the new features everything just seems right.
software engineer in many cases productivity was described as not getting stuck or not encountering major issues while developing i.e.
no problems occurred that could have disrupted the flow and the focus on the task .
some respondents even mentioned the outcomes of these fecund sessions an enhanced product more powerful so ftware or a functioning solution with all the goodies.
in addition to increased productivity high performance included increased creativity .
creativity is an important aspect of flow activities .
in the sample it was characterized as using creative skills or creative thinking turning thoughts into reality playing with new technologies exploration and open ing one s mind to new possibilities finally working out a piece of functionality on an app by understanding how the programming language work ed in terms of saving data both in the device and on the cloud.
making progress after this realization was very rewarding and i saw things in a new light.
my mind was opened to new possibilities and the softwa re became more powerful as a result.
learning new stuff adding more functionalities to the website and all the endless possibilities that i started imagining .
at last the things i thought only geniuses could do.
front end developer in conclusion many perceived to be high performing in flow and described the experience with absorption effortless control over their actions and a feeling of intrinsic reward.
discussion this section discusses the theoretical and practical implica tions of this study.
our study contributes to research on the human centric aspects of se by providing a contextual understanding of the flow experience in the se context .
in particular it identifies the factors that can help facilitate said experience in developers work.
while the characteristics of developers flow are important the most valuable input of this study is the identification of the most significant flow facilitating factors in se.
a summary of its key contributions and the related l iterature is presented in table .
the practical implications include determining how flow can be facilitated at both the individual and organizational levels by fostering practices and using development tools that support flow.
table key findings and related work key facilitators of developers flow related work optimal challenge the findings highlight how optimal challenge can emerge from it use e.g.
interactions providing immediate feedback improving developers sen se of control.
high motivation while intrinsic motivation is essential for flow achievement motive was also important facilitator for many developers flow experiences.
positive dx negative dx has been associated with less flow.
this study identified positive dx as one of the most important facilitators of deve lopers flow supporting research on the user experience of development tools .
no distractions or interruptions a working environment with no distractions or interr uptions to disrupt focus was perceived as important for facilitating flow while exces sive interruptions and distractions both it mediated and from the physical environment have been identified as critical flow barriers in se.
key characteristics of developers flow related work absorption effortless control intrinsic reward in se the three dimensional conceptualization of flow is more descriptive than the nine dimensional model .
whereas some three dimensional operationalizations include enjoyment absorption and intrinsic motivation the findings suggest that motivation is an antecedent rather than a characteri stic of flow .
high performance high performance was considered an outcome of the fl ow experience .
it was also associated with it use and specifically positive dx.
626esec fse december san francisco ca usa s. ritonummi v. siitonen m. salo h. pirkkalainen a. sivunen .
theoretical contributions the results of this study highlight the importan ce of having tasks that present the right amount of challenge.
the optimal balance between challenges and skills seems to be among the most important facilitating factors for experiencing flow in the se context in contrast the lack of such balance constitutes a significant barrier .
the activity in this case work need s to provide increasing challenges in order to maintain the ideal state where flow occurs and avoid boredom due to excessively easy tasks as well as anxiety due to too difficult ones .
the optimal challenge which includ es the perceived challenge skill balance clear goals and immediate feedback is important for flow activities not only because accomplishing small scale goals can increase enjoyment but also because these goals serve the important purpose of working toward the project s overall aim.
in particular immediate feedback was intertwined with it use and receiving unambiguous and timely feedback from the syste ms which helps adjust subsequent actions .
this improv es the sense of effortless involvement and the sense of control i.e.
effortless control as well as developer experience.
the developers associated effortless control also with using development tools that allowed them to feel their work progressing effortlessly and with control.
the mentioned flow experiences often involved working with tools that provided positive dx that is the tools that make work easier faster and effortless.
in other words many of the respondents who had a positive dx with development tools when they experienced flow as sociated it use with positive outcomes .
positive dx e.g.
ide s providing functionalities that made work smoother and more enjoyable contributed to optimal challenge by providing timely feedback about the progress being made .
this allow ed the developers to feel effortless control over their actions.
this positive dx may also increase enjoyment during the experience which is an important aspect of flow.
previous studies have made hands on recommendations for designs that support dx and flow e.g.
.
this study adopted a more holistic perspective on flow in developers work.
positive dx is an important fa cilitating factor and part of developers flow experiences but there are also negative consequences of it use such as inopportune interruptions which can result in the inability to reach flow .
the participants reported that not having distractions while working and proactively blocking out disturbances by using noise canceling headphones and or listening to music helped them reach and maintain flow.
as expected being highly motivated was an important flow facilitating factor in developers work.
the autotelic exp erience comprises a motivational component being motivated and an experiential component enjoying the activity .
the respondents vividly described their intrinsic motivation for what they do.
this could be either because they worked with s omething they enjoy ed or because they wanted to achieve a personal goal e.g.
produce high quality work .
although flow activities are autotelic i.e.
rewarding in and of themselves the incentive to achieve something as a byproduct of flow has been investigated by flow research ers e.g.
.
the findings demonstrated that the achievement motive was a flow facilitating factor.
they also documented motivat ion linked to situations involving difficult challenges rather than easy ones and requiring high levels of skills.
hence it is possible that software development attracts autotelic personalities who feel confident in their skills and control over their actions .
for these individuals being highly driven and working on something intrinsically motivating results in experiencing the activity as e njoyable.
further intrinsic reward i.e.
enjoying what one does and having fun proved to be an important aspect of developers work.
the distinction between intrinsic motivation and intrinsic r eward can be hard to make which explains the different conceptualizations of flow.
some models suggest that intrinsic motivation is subsumed in the experiential dimension of the autotelic experience while others consider motivation to be an antecedent of flow.
the findings suggested that motivation describes an incentive t o act on perceived opportunities rather than an experiential aspect of being in flow .
the nine dimensional model of flow views intense concentration altered sense of time the merging of action and awareness and loss of reflective self consciousness as separate dimensions .
however it has been suggested that absorption could be a better term to cover the experience of intense and focused concentration in which the environment disappears and one loses track of time and the feeling of being a social actor not to mention that loss of reflective self consciousness can be by definition hard to acknowledge and self report .
indeed we found that these experiences of inte nse flow were best described as absorption which support s the view that this is the defining characteristic of the phenomenon .
some participants report ed that their flow lasted for less than an hour which suggest s that these could have been instances of micro flow .
however because the purpose of a cit study is to un cover particularly positive or negative experiences the percentage o f these short flow sessions was quite low .
surprisingly we also found that many respondents experience d deep absorption and flow for several consecutive days or even weeks.
this kind of long flow could indicate high levels of intrinsic motivation o r outside pressure e.g.
tight production schedules .
high performance i.e.
being in a high functioning state can be considered an outcome of flow rather than a characteristic of being in flow.
however in this study this characteristic is discussed among those of developers flow experiences because the being highly productive or highly creative was repor ted by many respondents.
high performance was attributed to the internal experience of facing the optimal level of challenge and intensely focusing on the task as well as to the aforementioned positive dx which made it possible to be more productive.
in addition high performance was associated with increased creativity based on curiosity and exploration.
engaging in creative thinking curiosity and exploration are features of flow activities especially in it use which is why considering ux design is essential in facilitating immersion and flow in the hci context .
overall the characteristics of developers flow were similar to those of flow experiences in other context s whereas the flow facilitators included more work and 627flow experience in software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa se specific factors especially positive dx and the chance not to be distracted or interrupted.
.
practical implications this study has two practical implications.
first the findings highlight possible ways to experience more flow at work.
t hey demonstrate that flow occurs particularly when engaging in intrinsically motivating tasks that offer just the right amount of challenge .
when this is the case one can be confident about one s skills and feel that they are being somewhat tested .
therefore working in a role or applying for a role or tasks th at provide this kind of challenge is important for experiencing flow as is a role where one finds the tasks motivating and exciting.
t he motivational aspect is important not only for facilit ating more flow but also for keeping employees more engaged and i mproving their performance .
one of the most interesting aspects that emerged from the data was the positive effect of it use on developers work .
in addition to the rather obvious observation that access to the requir ed technological resources i.e.
hardware and software is n ecessary the findings emphasized the imp ortance of positive dx.
this was often associated with effortless control and working on tasks with ease and control.
providing developers with development tools that enable excellent dx and make work easier faster more enjoyable and thus flow inducing or providing them with the opportunity to choose the ir preferred tools is also essential in supporting their work performance.
the s econd managerial implication is facilitat ing more opportunities for focused problem solving without too many distractions and interruptions e.g.
instant messages meetings and context switching .
an essential aspect of any flow activity especially in se is the ability to focus deeply on the task at hand.
although there are personal preferences regarding ho w this intense concentration can best be reached it is clear th at reducing unnecessary disturbances and context switches as well as providing t ools to support concentrated work e.g.
noise canceling headphones or an option to work remotely can help developers have more control over their workdays and reach flow.
however planning meetings and other activities no t directly related to development are often important for the progre ss and success of projects.
there fore balancing tasks that serve different purposes and allocating time to focused work are key managerial consideration s for facilitating flow.
.
limitations and future directions flow is a very subjective experience .
therefore directly measuring it or defining a clear line between being in and not being in flow is difficult .
we addressed this problem by allowing the participants to describe experience s they felt were flow and by asking refining questions about these experience s to help assess whether the y could be considered flow .
however many flow questionnaire s are very long because they attempt to comprehensively cover th is experience they have thus been critiqued for being tedious and taking considerable effort to fill out .
to avoid a tedious questionnaire and to mitigate respondent bias we kept the questions concise and asked t he participants to describe their experiences in their own word s. the cit method also has its limitations including the recall bias related to retrospective reporting the possible misinterpreta tion of these reports and the ambiguity associated with coding rules and category labels .
moreover the definition of flow provided at the beginning of the questionnaire could have inspired some respondents.
possible problems related to online panels include data quality issues e.g.
respondents not giving their full attention to the task when filling out the questionnaire and sample related issues such as super users who can distort results and weird sample barriers though sample representativeness can be more easily reached using online panels .
to address the risk of inattentive respondents we added two attention check questions.
this study uncovers the context specific characteristics of flow in se and opens an avenue for further investigations .
as more research on professional developers flow is needed an interesting aspect to explore is dx and how it can support flow e.g.
by designing ides that provide better feedback .
other topics to examine include the social aspect of developers work and collective flow in development teams as well as the particularly positive effective outcomes of flow i.e.
other key outcomes including more engagement in an activity or positive changes in one s well being in addition to being highly productive .
the f low facilitating factors identified in this study and flow barriers could be analyzed more closely to compare the ir similarities and differences.
scholars could also study if there are differences in the flow facilitating factors as well as in the ability to reach flow between junior developers and mor e experienced developers.
data availability the data included many instances in which the respondents or their organizations could be identified.
to protect the ir privacy the participants were assured that only the research group would have access to their responses.
link to the questionnaire is provided in .
data collection.