onboarding vs. diversity productivity and quality empirical study of the openstack ecosystem armstrong foundjem ellis e. eghan bram adams mcis laboratory queen s university polytechnique montr eal canada a.foundjem bram.adams queensu.ca ellis.eghan polymtl.ca abstract despite the growing success of open source software ecosystems secos their sustainability depends on the recruitment and involvement of ever larger contributors.
assuch onboarding i.e.
the socio technical adaptation of newcontributors to a seco forms a significant aspect of a seco sgrowth that requires substantial resources.
unfortunately despitetheoretical models and initial user studies to examine the potentialbenefits of onboarding little is known about the process ofseco onboarding nor about the socio technical benefits anddrawbacks of contributors onboarding experience in a seco.
toaddress these we first carry out an observational study of newcontributors during an openstack onboarding event to providea catalog of teaching content teaching strategies onboardingchallenges and expected benefits.
next we empirically validatethe extent to which diversity productivity and quality benefitsare achieved by mining code changes reviews and contributors issues with out openstack onboarding experience.
among otherfindings our study shows a significant correlation with increasinggender diversity for both females and non binary contribu tors and patch acceptance rates .
.
onboarding also has asignificant negative correlation with the time until a contributor sfirst commit and bug proneness of contributions.
index t erms onboarding mentoring collaboration contributors knowledge transfer software ecosystems open source.
i. i ntroduction substantial research conducted by both the academic and industrial sectors over the past two decades has attributed most of the success of open source software oss projectsand ecosystems secos to the strong involvement of con tributors both volunteers and paid employees of involvedcompanies .
apart from attracting and retaining tal ented contributors another major challenge faced by softwareprojects and secos is the practical training of new contrib utors specifically the onboarding experience of newcontributors.
despite sharing similar goals seco level onboarding programs differ from onboarding programs of individual projectssince a seco is not just the sum of its parts but also aset of independent and interrelated oss projects workingtogether for a common objective .
on the one hand individual projects use different workflows and technologies requiring different skill sets and have independent sets offeatures and release roadmap.
on the other hand projects haveto collaborate with other projects that they depend on.
suchcross project coordination implies the need for onboardingto cover inter disciplinary processes and tools compared tothe more domain specific training individual projects provide.secos have to ensure that despite differences in roadmaps all of their projects can be integrated at set times and canachieve major seco milestones such as a joint seco release e.g.
eclipse openstack linux distributions .
thus seco level onboarding programs should enable new contributors to learn and master both the general secoprocesses and concepts and the specific workflows and toolsof the individual seco project s in which they want tobe active contributors.
several existing works have exploredonboarding as an event within proprietary and open sourcesoftware communities .
however these studies focus onindividual projects.
only a few studies have investigated thebenefits and drawbacks of contributors one time onboardingevent in large organizations .
thus little is known yetabout the benefits and drawbacks of contributors onboardingin the context of secos.
therefore we aim at reducing the gap in current literature regarding understanding the process and impact 1of onboarding in on open source secos by conducting an empirical study of the openstack seco.
we choose theopenstack seco among other contenders such as gnome the apache foundation eclipse cran or the linux kernelbecause it is one of the world s fastest growing open sourcesoftware ecosystems .
openstack has over 100k commu nity members distributed across countries managed by aconsortium of about supporting companies and organizestwo major onboarding events yearly in different geographicallocations.
first we follow a mixed method research approach by first performing a direct observational study of new contributorsto identify the activities performed during a two day open stack onboarding event and identify any perceived challengesand benefits of seco onboarding.
next we conduct a quanti tative study of the submitted code changes code reviews andissues of contributors of the openstack ecosystem tomeasure the correlation between onboarding experience andcontributor diversity productivity and contribution quality.
our findings show that the openstack seco uses a wide variety of content and strategies to train new contributors duringseco level onboarding trying to address challenges in volved in seco onboarding.
we also identified eight benefitsexpected by seco onboarding stakeholders.
our quantitativevalidation of three of these expected benefits shows thatparticipating in onboarding correlates with amongst others more gender diversity both female and non binary a median of less buggy code contributions a median increase of in the average code churn 1any usage of the words impact or influence refers to the correlation sense of these terms and does not imply causality.
ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee a median shorter time to get code contributions accepted for female other contributors a .
longer average retention rate for female male non binary contributors in the seco a median .
higher pull request acceptance rate.
ii.
b ackground and related work a. the seco onboarding process given that secos constitute a complex set of interdependent project cross project teams working together for a common goal a seco s onboarding program is a continuous process that usually has two phases i top level training and ii more traditional project specific training .
first the top level training introduces new contributors to the seco s overall complexities such as its organization overall workflow seco wide tools processes etc.
such ac tivities also provide networking opportunities between new comers and mentors across the seco s sub projects.
then newcomers move to sub project specific training under the guidance of a personal mentor to learn the ins and outs ofa specific sub project in the seco.
the expected outcome of the overall seco onboarding process is that new contributorscan make their first accepted contribution.
for example the openstack seco has a dedicated openstack upstream institute oui responsible for organizing its onboarding process.
oui is necessary since openstack ranks among the largest open source collaborative communities globally with a codebase size of over 20m loc and produces a new seco release every six months .
due to its vast diversity in projects with over project subproject technical standards and social norms new contribu tors may experience difficulties understanding the roadmap ofopenstack which can significantly slow down contributions to the codebase.
the oui organizes the openstack onboarding process in two phases a two day physical top level training event followed by several months of one to one online mentoring.
the physical event serves to share knowledge on the cross project processes planning and dependencies and tools suchas zuul for ci cd and storyboard for issues tracking designed to coordinate seco level activities.
likewise the online mentoring phase focuses on processes and tools specificto sub projects as well as each project s own work culture.since openstack seco is distributed across different geo locations the oui has to balance the in person top level training event s location and time to be equally accessible across new contributors.
b. related work prior studies mostly focused on the project specific onboarding phase.
sharma et al.
explored the relationship between successful short term onboarding results and job satisfaction contributors intention to either leave or remain active withan organization .
their results suggest that job satisfactionis directly related to both onboarding success and turnover intention.
however they found no relationship in workplacequality.
our study identified eight benefits of onboarding at theseco level and found that contributors who did onboardingstay longer in the seco than those who did not.
fagerholm et al.
explored onboarding in a pilot program organized and sponsored by facebook under the educa tion modernization program for oss projects in collaborationwith universities across the globe.
a study conducted with students showed that participants who were deliberately mentored during the entire onboarding process were more motivated and committed than their counterparts who did notfollow the onboarding process.
our study also shows thatcontributors who did onboarding were self motivated and more productive than those who did not do onboarding.
viviani et al.
took a different approach and focused on onboarding in smaller companies that follow a fast software release cycle.
they observed a stronger bond among developers mainly due to close mentoring relationships betweencore reviewers and younger developers.
contrarily our studyfocuses on large and complex seco.
however we also found new contributors collaborating with mentors expert novice collaboration and expert expert and novice novice collaboration.
britto et al.
adopt a model to measure the state of onboarding in software organizations.
steinmacher et al.
qualitatively study systematic literature reviews and responses from various practitioners including an interview study across several oss projects to understand the obstacles newdevelopers in an ecosystem from actively contributing to projects.
in our research we found challenges associated with seco onboarding.
using the github ecosystem as a case study casalnuovo et al.
investigate the effects of socialization on a developer joining a new project a process which the authors refer to as onboarding.
they analyze the information of developerscontributing to a total of github projects.
their anal ysis shows that both the social and technical factors of prior connections and experiences that developers established with experienced team members of a new project have a lastingeffect that substantially affects these new members produc tivity.
our work found that contributors who participated inthe mentoring program were more productive than those whodid not participate.
labuschagne et al.
studied the impact of the onboarding program at mozilla and found that onboarding does not relate to contributor retention.
they did not control for prior experience or self motivation of contributors.
at the same time we show that self motivation and commitment are challengessecos should manage.
the onboarding program correlates to a high retention rate productivity quality and diversity.
on the other hand zhang et al.
studied how companies collaborate within openstack by measuring productivity at the release level while we focus on the release before openstackintroduces onboarding .
even though their work is not directly related to onboarding at the seco level it however explores 1034contributors paid and volunteered productivity which in our case refers to project level mentoring for onboarding contributors.
given that related work has focused mostly on projectspecific onboarding this paper first studies in detail the top level seco onboarding phase through an observational study.
onboarded secos participants can start contributing to the codebase after obtaining both the i top level and ii projectspecific know how.
thus we quantitatively study the correla tion between their later contributions in terms of productivity code quality and diversity and the overall onboarding process that they followed.
iii.
o bserv ational study of top level seco onboarding phase a. study design to understand how a regular top level onboarding training is organized in a seco we conducted an observational study of new contributors at an openstack onboarding event heldin berlin germany on november .
in particular we aim at investigating the following preliminary research questions prq what and how are the topics taught during a seco onboarding event?
prq what are the challenges involved with organizing and sustaining a seco onboarding program?
prq what are the benefits of a seco onboarding program?
we describe this observational study s design and present the results of the prq 1below.
meanwhile we will discuss the results of prq 2and prq 3in section iv.
participant selection.
participants for our observational study consist of the pre registered individuals who completedthe two days onboarding event in berlin.
all participantssigned a non disclosure agreement consent form with openstack willfully granting openstack the permission to record and document all activities during the entire onboarding event.
these participants command good programming skills in at least python have formal college university education incomputer science or a related field and no prior experience with openstack or similar seco.
their average age was years and they exhibited a high demographic diversity in terms of continents and gender male female and non binary .
weobtained this confidential demographic information data either from the participants themselves before the observation studystarted or from the openstack d i working group s private records of contributors identities to which we obtainedaccess.
study procedure.
the observational study involved participants p1 ... p72 and mentors m1 ... m12 including the observer ob1 first author .
at any given instance each of the tables has six participants and a mentor with at least one mentor leading atask or an exercise.
participants are encouraged to choose their seats and team members freely.
besides the high quality audio visual equipment that openstack provided ob1 also usedfield notes to document mentors and participants activities during the entire onboarding event.
to understand the participants various activities ob1 used an observational approach with a low degree of interactionwith participants but a high hawthorne effect all the72 participants were aware that they were under observation.moreover as mentors assign new tasks to participants ob1would randomly ask a participant to describe the actions takenduring the task using the think aloud protocol on 2x12 randomly selected participants of the tables.
qualitative data analysis the first author initially transcribed audio visual recordings and field notes of all the participants.
the first and second author used a combination of inductive and deductive coding at sentence paragraphlevel to analyze the transcribed text to find patterns and themes relevant to the three prqs.
these themes are further grouped regrouped to form a hierarchical structure known as an affinity diagram which enables us to visualize how concepts of high level themes are emerging from basic low level codes labels.
inductive coding with no pre conceived themes patterns the first and second authors independently apply inductive coding on of the transcriptions in the first iteration to createan initial coding scheme.
at the end of this iteration the coders had and codes respectively.
after several discussions and three more iterations of coding more informative codesemerged and we merged low level codes.
both authors agree on a set of codes and a three level hierarchical structureof code categories.
deductive coding in this step two coders independently apply the existing codes from the inductive coding step on the entire transcribed text to identify code examples.
then calculate the inter rater reliability irr score usingthe cohen kappa coefficient .
we perform three iterations of deductive coding and achieved iir scores of .
and a final score of .
these iterations involved mergingfive existing codes renaming or moving codes to fit different categories and splitting up some code categories.
the result of our coding is available online and we present the final abstraction of high level codes in the affinity diagram in fig.
.
b. prq what and how are the topics taught during a seco onboarding event?
we grouped the teaching contents tc under theoretical material th hands on content ho and the strategies used to implement both the th and ho see .
our online repository contains a detailed set of activities and tasksthat participants performed.
using the observational study stranscripts and notes we could also determine the relative weight of the three groups of tc based on the allocation of time and resources to their corresponding content.
mentors dedicate of the training materials to th which aims to establish a solid foundation for understanding the openstack community and the major concepts involvedin making open source contributions to the seco.
examples of th contents are knowledge on community 1035fig.
.
materials taught during onboarding and their observed impacts on individual mentees i the seco e and companies in the seco c .
concerns mission and guiding principles andcontribution workflow but also more personal skills like active communication skills why it is crucial to develop this skill and later on practice onthese skills and rational analytical reasoning participants are encouraged through puzzles training archives to develop critical thinking abilities .
an essential part of this training material focuses on the specifics and differences of seco level seco process and tools concepts and project level project level pl process and tools concepts communities and workflows.
for example the need to synchronize each project s release cycle with that of the seco stimulate cross project collaboration and deal with different workflows and tools e.g.
storyboard issue trackerat seco level vs. launchpad in several individual projects .
participants reacted to the thdifferently i am now getting more confident with my understanding of zuul and rechecks especially when m6 explained the concepts a few minutes ago that was a great explanation!
p51 .
yet another participant appreciates the mentors efforts i think a load of materials has been too overwhelming but the mentors makeit look too easy for me to follow the concepts.
p29 mentors dedicate of the training materials to ho which involves hands on training and deep dives into challenging hackathon tasks .
the ho component provides participants with a walkthrough of typical real world scenarios and tasks that openstack contributors face regularly.
the ho component startswith the necessary steps of creating accounts with the openstack foundation gerrit code review tool storyboard issuetracker mailing list and irc channels for communication .
mentors also guide participants to install and configure their virtual working environment which comprises a virtualbox with possibly a ubuntu image pre installed a copy ofthe openstack development environment aka devstack on sandbox issue trackers such as launchpad and storyboard the code review environment gerrit and git.
moreover the openstack sandbox environment repository provides virtualservers for testing openstack projects functionalities in an iso lated environment.
also mentors ask participants to perform tasks of varying difficulties covering technical areas.
such as documentation implementing new features tracking issues using storyboard launchpad reviewing source code bestpractices on commit messages and code quality and ci cd.
ob1 asked a participant to think aloud while performing a ho task i want to run several unit test cases and an integration test.
i use the tox framework to run unit testing so i call the tox command on my terminal p7 mentors use a variety of teaching strategies that facilitate collaboration and competitiveness among participantsthroughout the training sessions .
these strategies enhance participants understanding of the teaching content by making the sessions interactive.
the most observed strategiesinclude the following ice breaker and breakout session .
training sessions begin with an introductory activity by both mentors and participants to create an atmosphere of familiarity that facili tates collaboration among participants novice novice collaboration and mentors novice expert collaboration .
breakoutsessions during the event further strengthen this collaboration.
expert novice feedback .
mentors usually use this 1036strategy to teach practical skills that require a trial and error approach.
therefore they allow participants to make several attempts while the mentors keep providing constructive feed back until the participants arrive at the answer.
teaching by demonstration .
mentors often demonstrate how things work while explaining the underlying concepts this approach enriches participants with confidence towards the mentors and the ecosystem.
reward harvesting .
mentors use reward strategies to motivate participants to be competitive and work in a group while completing challenging exercises within an allocatedtime frame.
the first participant to figure out the best solution to a task within that time frame is rewarded with a token a swag or a sticker.
this strategy required participants to applycritical and analytical thinking.
novice novice collaboration .
mentors encourage participants to work in small groups of two people at each table and discuss their problems solutions table wise.
participants were mostly positive regarding the strategies which mentors used.
p48 said i like the hands on section most and of course the sticker prizes.
besides other participants appreciated different strategies differently thetestimony on mentoring was great!
i love it.
p15 meanwhile p31 congratulates the strategy and know how of the mentors mentors were great inspirations and knew their stuff well.
also mentors use real life scenarios to explain difficult con cepts i admired the explanations of different projects andhow they form an ecosystem.
p1 iv .
p erceived challenges and benefits of seco onboarding based on the observed onboarding activities shown in figure challenges and benefits emerged.
during ourobservation challenges and benefits encountered substantially more and deeper discussions than others leading to significantly more words in the transcriptions of the audiovisual recordings.
below we discuss in detail these threechallenges prq and five benefits prq .
a. prq what are the challenges involved with organizing and sustaining a seco onboarding program?
challenge vast expertise needed for secos onboarding at the seco level has several challenges beyond the project level onboarding.
in particular since a seco is not just the union of hundreds of smallerprojects but involves the collaboration of hundreds of crossproject teams with diverse interacting technologies see the cross project dependencies challenge .
given that the onboarding participants do not know the different seco projects the initial onboarding event cannot make any assump tions.
it should target the overall seco contribution process.
to cover a wide variety of topics and tools see prq this also implies that mentors should have polyvalent skill sets toguide the participants be prepared with the deep dives exer cise.
usually participants have very different levels of knowledge and skill set m2 which in turn impacts mentorshipsustainability.
furthermore there should be ongoingcommunication between the seco level onboarding process and the onboarding process within individual projects ofthe seco see mentorship within companies for example to update learning materials to projectlevel developments.
challenge self motivation and commitment it is challenging for seco to identify individual barriers against self motivation commitment.
therefore active participation in an onboarding experience is tantamount to asuccessful outcome hence every stakeholder should be fullyinvolved and committed.
successful mentoring requires active commitment both from the mentor and the mentee.
m9 also another mentor advocates people learn in different waysat different speeds which means a commitment to active mentoring requires more than a handful of quick irc chats.
m7 this challenge has direct links to the adapting with diverse learning needs challenge.
challenge mentorship sustainability secos and companies face challenges finding available mentors to guide mentees.
this is partly because of challenge above and partly because mentoring requires substantialeffort to prepare and keep material up to date.
constrained companies may prefer to prioritize their experts time on tasksthat will bring more financial profit to the company at the detriment of supporting mentees.
at the observed onboardingevent participants were briefed that if there aren t enough mentors on every table .
.
.
float around the room checking inon people especially during exercises.
m1 b. prq what are the benefits of a seco onboarding program?
benefit mentoring enhances diversity .
gender diversity gd out of the participants at the observed onboarding event .
declared themselvesas female .
as non binary and .
as male.
moreover for corporate diversity cd we found evidence of different companies involved with openstack andsponsoring events and hiring both cat and cat contributors.
we also observed that mentors and participants had di verse technical skill sets that cut across different project cross project teams.
such technical diversity td brings value to the seco since it drives cross project teams forward through more mixed reviews contributions and viewpoints.by expanding that diversity we re able to develop a variety of opinions for the open infrastructure project as a whole ultimately .
m9 benefit mentoring enhances productivity .
during onboarding mentors assign real life exercises and tasks to participants such as creating patch sets fixing bugs testing and ci cd zuul and submitting new features anddocumentation.
all participants actively participated inthe coding activities and successfully submitted acceptablecommits.
this not only trains the participants in the field but also encourages them to adopt a collaborative workflow often by themselves both with other participants novicenovice and with mentors experts novice .
ob1 observed how mentors were pairing participants to work on exercises i.e.
p33 and p35 seated on table group were exchanging ideasconstantly throughout this exercise.
moreover m11 asked participants to run different test cases in each project that you cloned.
if you need help mentors are seated on yourtables and they will assist you in running the test cases.
benefit enhances seco qa best practices .
mentors presented various techniques and best practicesrelated to quality assurance e.g.
test driven development ci cd code reviews and asked participants to practice those skills.
also mentors presented a couple of bad and good examples of code that respect openstack standards.
some of these best practices include writing good commit messages and proper code documentation.
m9 shows a couple of bad examples of commits that reviewers rejected because they violated the best practices which openstack enforces.
benefit overcoming imposter syndrome effect .
new contributors to an ecosystem often feel overwhelmedand inadequate preventing them from collaborating freelywith the other contributors in the ecosystem perceived ashaving more talent .
thus it is important for secos to take measures to ensure that they help participants to identify and start fighting eliminating the imposter syndrome .
as a new developer fresh out of college coming into any new team can be very intimidating.
everyone around youknows so much more than you and you feel that you re animposter with so much to learn .
.
.
p1 .
the onboarding program is aware of the effects of the imposter syndrome and sensitizes participants to overcome those especially by letting mentors and past mentees share their experiences.
benefit evolution of ecosystem as mentors transfer skills to mentees they produce a largerpool of talent and enable the perpetual growth of the seco growth and maturity .
in turn previous mentees return to the onboarding program as mentors to help encourage participants to grow within the seco m7 mentored me during my last year of college and i have been very fortunate to work with them and continue being their mentee.
.
.
.
mentoring helps manage immature skill sets required to grow into a senior engineering role in the future.
m3 .
v. q uantitative validation of perceived benefits in this section we empirically evaluate the extent to which onboarding can achieve the three major perceived benefits identified in prq3.
we could quantify and measure these three benefits by studying months of historical contributions code changes issue reports and code reviews in the open stack seco.
indeed we measure diversity productivity and quality.
specifically we investigate these three researchquestions rq1 does onboarding correlate with seco diversity?
2to measure gender diversity at openstack contributors identity is not publicly available for confidentiality purposes.
fig.
.
timeline of stratified categories used in our study.
cat is our control group while cat and cat are the experimental groups.
each group uses data of seven openstack releases months .
rq2 does onboarding correlate with new contributors productivity?
rq3 does onboarding correlate with new contributors code quality?
a. study design categorization of contributors.
openstack s onboarding program is publicly advertised with free training events travel support is available taking place in different countries.
hence anyone is encouraged to do onboarding not just people whocould afford the travel expenses.
therefore to measure the impact of onboarding on the openstack seco we consideredthree categories of contributors in our study see fig.
.the first category cat constitutes contributors who joinedopenstack before onboarding events were introduced and could not benefit from any official onboarding.
the second category cat comprises new contributors who did notparticipate in any onboarding event even though the onboard ing program did exist when joining openstack.
finally the third category cat are contributors who participated in the onboarding program.
each of the three categories plays an essential role in our study.
in particular for each rq and metric we firstcompare the distribution of the metric values between cat and cat .
if significant differences exist we perform asecond comparison between cat and cat to control for any confounding factors such as changes in the development process that were put in place simultaneously when openstack introduced the onboarding program.
only if no significant changes exist between cat and cat both of whom consist of contributors who did not do onboarding can we correlate the differences between cat and cat with the introductionof onboarding.
data collection.
given the three categories of contributors cat cat and cat we first use the clustered random sampling technique to randomly select cat first time contributors who joined through the oui onboarding program from different geographic areas reflecting the distributed nature of secos in our sample.
this yielded cat par ticipants across seven openstack releases from juno to pike .
then we used random sampling to select an equal number of individuals in cat .
for those two categories we made sure to exclude any openstack contributor who 1038later on after making contributions decided to participate in onboarding exclusions .
finally we mapped the 3x427 selected contributors across all three categories to their activities in the following openstack repositories gerrit code review system git and launchpad storyboard issues trackers .
based on this integrated information we extract contributors activities re lated to commits patch sets bugs reported reviews blueprints declared gender and affiliation for each category s studiedperiod.
all experimental data and relevant materials are hostedonline for replication or third party reuse.
metrics and statistical tests.
we adapt existing metrics from the chaoss project meyer et al.
and jansen see table i to measure the extent to which expected benefits of onboarding are achieved at openstack.
our study analyzes these metrics at the individual contributors level then aggregates them to the seco level split across the three categories of contributors.
some metrics are general while others like technical and corporate diversity are seco specific.
note that there is only a weak pearson correlation of .
between effort and tfc i.e.
they measure different phenomena.
we then analyze and compare contributor activities among the three categories using several statistical tests.
we usesurvival analysis to measure the amount of time it takesfor an event such as making the first commit to occur.
a non parametric log rank test is further used to compare the survival curves of multiple groups.
if .
the tested survival curves are non overlapping.
for other metrics we use the kruskal wallis h test kwh to compare metric distributions of the three contributor categories at once.
in case of a statistically significantdifference .
a dunn posthoc test is used to identify which of the three categories has a different distribution of metric values.
as such dunn evaluates cat vs. cat cat vs. cat and cat vs. cat .
finally wemeasure the effect size cliff s delta which quantifiesthe effect of significant differences.
as explained earlier we expect that if onboarding correlates with a change in say aproductivity metric then cat the control group and cat2 treatment group should have no statistically significantdifference.
in contrast there should be a statistically significant difference between cat and cat and hence cat .
b. rq1 does onboarding correlate with seco diversity?
this rq aims to understand the correlation between onboarding and i gender representation gender diversity within the openstack seco ii the distinct skill sets of contributors technical diversity and iii the degree to which different corporations organizations contribute code or sponsorevents corporate diversity .
gender diversity we observed a statistically significant increase of with large l effect sizes in termsof contributors declared as either female or non binary within cat compared with cat at the expense of contributors who reported male gender .
fig.
3a showstable i contributor level seco level and or company level sharp metrics used in our study .
rqs.
metrics descriptionrq1 diversitygender gd proportion of new contributors who selfdeclare as male m female f or nonbinary n .
technical td the number of different project teams technology new contributors are in volved in .
corporate cd sharp the number of sponsoring compa nies that contribute commits to the seco .rq2 productivitydensity den commit density i.e.
the median propor tion of contributed churn over the submitted commits .
time to first commit tfc number of days it takes for contributorsto have their first commit accepted andmerged into the codebase.
retention rt the proportion of contributors per category still contributing to the codebase after n days .
patch acceptancerate par probability of a contributor s contribu tion pull request pr to be accepted higher values are better par accepted prs submitted prs rq3 qualityeffort eft a measure of the number of pull request versions attempts necessary before a contribution is accepted lower values are better minimum value of eft median attempts actualcommits bug inducing com mits szz sharppercentage of submitted commits thatintroduce bugs .
pull request github or change request gerrit how the percentage of contributors who declared themselves as female increased to compared to the values for cat cat .
similarly for contributors who declaredthemselves non binary the percentage significantly increased from to .
the main reason for these increases seems to be the fact that a significantly smaller proportion of contributors explicitly declared themselves as having male gender which thus far has been the over represented gender in open source devel opment .
there are different interpretations possible.
themost likely explanation supported by the fact that we did not find a significant difference in gender between cat and cat2 is that onboarding helped to attract a larger proportion ofcontributors of female gender while providing confidence toothers to declare themselves as non binary instead of sticking to a binary gender.
self disclosed gender at openstack is not open to the general public it is available in internal profiles for confidentiality purposes.
however there could stillbe confounding factors.
for example maybe contributors with male gender are less likely to participate in onboarding events.
more research is needed to better understand this.
technical diversity td people who followed onboarding irrespective of gender are more polyvalent than a gender diversity gd b hired vs. v ols fig.
.
left median gd in of each category f emale m ale and n on binary right hired vs. volunteer v ols contributors in cat cat and cat .
fig.
.
overview of technical diversity showing the number of commits made across different numbers of projects left and the number of projects peoplecontribute to per declared gender right .
other contributors.
technical code diversity measures the number of distinct projects modules to which a developercontributes source code.
fig.
shows that people who joinedopenstack without onboarding cat not shown cat contribute to at most three projects whereas people who joined through onboarding cat often are contributors in more thanthree projects.
for example in cat .
of individualscontribute to only one project .
contribute to two and only .
contribute to three projects only contributors withnon binary or male gender contributed to two or more projects in cat .
on the other hand in cat .
contribute tothree core projects .
contribute to four projects and .
to five or more projects contributors who declared male or non binary gender are mostly contributing to three andfour projects while contributors who declared female gender are even contributing to five or more projects significantdifference between female and other genders .
this supports our earlier findings about gender diversity section v b1 .
furthermore we find a statistically significant difference large effect size between cat and cat in terms of td and the number of commits made by cat contributors issignificantly higher than those by cat contributors median of compared to .
corporate diversity cd refers to the way in which the cat and cat contributors who contribute code to aseco are distributed across companies.
it also measures if aparticular company has a monopoly of over or more ofthese contributions which could influence the work culture of the seco or in the worst case departure of key contributors could cripple the seco .
studies show that companies contributing to the openstack codebase have an uneven distribution of comfig.
.
the evolution of the number of companies noc solid blue line for each of the studied openstack releases before cat yellow and after cat green the introduction of onboarding.
the black dashed line represents the top noc responsible for of a release s commits and the red dashed lines shows the total commits per release cycle.
mit across those companies.
also we found that none of the sponsoring companies noc had a disproportionate amount of contribution either by cat or cat contributors.
furthermore of cat contributors were hired by companies compared to of cat contributors and this difference is statistically significant with a value of3.006x10 40and a large l effect size.
we also observed that no single company has a dominating share of contributors and contributions .
furthermore fig.
3b shows how the number of new contributors that remained volunteers instead of being hired dropped substantially from in cat to in cat .
in otherwords onboarding seems to be correlated with higher chancesof being hired by openstack companies.
only of cat contributors were hired by the companies that sponsor the onboarding events of the hired cat contributors were employed by companies withinopenstack that do not sponsor onboarding median days to hire for cat is .
vs. .
for cat .
while overall the high percentage of is positive for the ecosystem as a whole the sizeable proportion of contributors hired by non sponsoring companies could be interpreted as a form of brain drain and low return of interest for the companies organizing the onboarding training.
on a positive note though we observe that seven of the top cat contributors in the seco were hired by sponsoring companies which improves their onboarding roi.
on the other hand cat s hired contributors switch more easily fromone company to another.
this could indicate that the expertiseof cat contributors is useful and sought after in different 3we used rankdata on tfc szz and effort to rank and sort the vectors of contributors in ascending order according to each of these three metrics separately.
since a contributor can be better in one metric but worse in the other rankdata then aggregates the scores to identify the top contributors.
1040fig.
.
comparison of commit density between cat and cat .
p .
.
.
.
.
.
time in daysprobability of survival fmn p .
.
.
.
.
.
time in daysprobability of survival fmn fig.
.
survival curves for time until the first accepted contribution per gender in cat left and cat right .
contexts or could be due to technology transfer between ecosystem companies.
for example one given contributorstarted contributing to the nova project in the pike release cycle with ibm switched to huawei and later to futurewei all between february th august 1st .
c. rq2 does onboarding correlate with new contributors productivity?
commit density den onboarding correlates with increased contributor productivity.
fig.
shows a increase in the median density of cat contributions compared to cat contributions which is a statistically significant difference with large effect size while no difference was ob served between cat and cat contributions .
this indicates that people who did onboarding consistently produce a higheraverage churn across their contributions.
time to first commit tfc onboarding correlates with a median or lower time to first commit for female male non binary contributors.
fig.
shows the survival curves with values obtained using the log rank test for the time until first commit in number of days for thethree categories of contributors split across the three genders.
only for cat we obtained statistically significant results among the genders.
furthermore we obtained a significantdifference with large effect size between cat against cat across all three genders.
it takes days for half of thefemale male non binary contributors in cat to make theirfirst commits while in cat it takes at least days for any contributor either gender to get their first commit accepted.
retention rate onboarding correlates with a longer average retention rate across the three genders in the seco i.e.
cat contributors are active much longer than cat and cat contributors which is beneficial for p .
.
.
.
.
.
time in daysprobability of survival fmn p .
.
.
.
.
.
time in daysprobability of survival fmn fig.
.
survival curves for the time until cat left and cat right contributors leave.
e. fig.
.
comparison of patch acceptance rate between cat and cat the sustainability and cohesion within a community.
we observed from the survival analysis chart that ofcontributors were active for days in cat and days four seco release cycles in cat .
while there is a probability of cat contributors either gender abandoningthe seco project within days not shown this retentionperiod is days for cat cat non binary contributors days for males and days for females.
therefore contributors on average were productive for a significantly longer time in cat than in both cat and cat large effect sizes with self declared female contributors with onboarding experience persisting longer than any other declared gender.
patch acceptance rate par onboarding correlates with a significant increase in the percentage of acceptedpull requests i.e.
gerrit change requests i.e.
contrib utors are more successful in getting their patches accepted.
fig.
top shows that the median par for cat contributorsis .
to .
times higher compared to cat contributors.
our evidence suggests that contributors self declared asfemale outperformed the other genders not shown in both cat and cat in terms of par large effect size .
d. rq3 does onboarding correlate with new contributors code quality?
effort cat contributors require less effort to have their commit accepted.
based on our observation and results in fig.
contributors who joined the ecosystem withoutan onboarding training cat on average require sig nificantly more attempts to get their contributions acceptedthan those who were onboarded cat with value of .621x10 77and large effect size.
1041fig.
.
an overview of effort needed by cat contributors.
y fig.
.
likelihood of bug inducing commits across cat .
since this observation only holds for cat this provides initial evidence for the hypothesis that onboarding enables contributors to better master the codebase workflow and guidelines of an ecosystem.
more research is needed to furthervalidate this claim.
bug inducing changes contributors who did onboarding produce code that is less likely to introducebugs.
using the pydriller implementation of the szz al gorithm our results show that the median probabilityof a commit introducing a bug is for cat compared to for cat .
in other words accepted patches areless buggy for cat even though cat contributors submit a higher quantity with more complexity of code changes thancontributors from the other categories as previously discussedin rq1 for td .
these differences are significant with a value of .290x10 57and a large effect size.
not only are patches of cat contributors less buggy they also requiredless attempts to be accepted see previous metric .
vi.
d iscussion based on the observational study findings we notice how the themes in the affinity diagram form aholistic set of socio technical activities relevant to onboard ing in a complex seco.
such onboarding is more thangiving a tutorial on creating a feature branch or running a test suite.
mentors spent substantial effort explain ing the interactions and differences between the openstack seco and the individual projects inside the seco.knowledge on community concerns is another essential pillar of the teaching content as well as activities totrain participants active communication skills and rational analytical reasoning.
combining such topics with the more technical hand on activities requires i the use of a host of engaging teaching strategies as well as fig.
.
radar chart of the studied metrics showing that onboarding cat3 has significant differences and improvements over cat .
the metrics are those of table i bug inducing commits szz effort eft time to first commit tfc retention rt patch acceptance rate par density den diversity gender gd f technical td and corporate diversity cd .
ii a continuous online onboarding process that goes well beyond the initial onboarding event.
while such an onboarding process requires an investment both financially and in terms of in kind secos expect that theprocess can boost new recruits productivity and the qualityof their contributions and foster an inclusive and diverse community able to sustain the seco.
in particular we observed that as the community grooms new contributors they later become resourceful to the community by impacting other new contributors growth by becoming mentors themselves.
the idea is that the community evolves mentees become mentors and contributors stay longer withinthe community.
our quantitative evaluation found evidence that some of these major expectations indeed seem to hold.
the radar chartin fig.
shows the extent to which the diversity productivity and quality of onboarded contributors cat differ from contributors without onboarding cat .
for each metric thechart plots the median values for cat at the contributor seco gd or company level cd szz using log scale.
in particular onboarding correlates with improved diversity gd f td and cd and productivity tfc rt par and den metrics since contributors in cat recorded significantly higher values in these metrics against cat contributors.however onboarding correlates with reduced bug inducing commits szz and efforts eft .
given that cat contributorsseem to spend less effort in making quality code changes commits .
on the other hand cat spent more time making their first accepted contributions tfc in terms of productiv ity they also expend more effort which are more likely to be bug inducing.
onboarded contributors stay longer in the secoand make diversity more visible but not necessarily within one seco project or company or with a company sponsoring theonboarding process.
other potential benefits still need to beempirically evaluated.
finally several challenges could potentially complicate or even inhibit the onboarding process.
a substantial amount of these challenges relate to people management notably thesteady supply of motivated participants and capable mentors.
1042while successful onboarding could yield new future mentors both the seco and academia should monitor this continuity carefully not to overload the same group of experts.
at thesame time the latter have to keep on reinventing their teachingstrategies to effectively teach the minimum material coveringas much as possible the workflow and requirements of both theoverarching seco and the individual projects to be productiveas fast as possible.
future research should explore and addressthese challenges.
vii.
t hreats to v alidity construct validity.
this study uses existing diversity productivity and quality metrics from the literature and open source communities such as chaoss .however concerning gender we relied on the self declared gender available in openstack s internal profiles .
furthermore we observed an onboarding event and mined readilyavailable data from version control issue reports and codereview repositories but did not have access to the private online communication between mentors and mentees after theonboarding event.
another threat relates to the impact of the participants awareness of our observation study on their behavior.
to mitigate this we observed selected people on a given task.we watched the onboarding event s video recording to validatehow other participants performed the same activity when not directly observing them.
internal validity.
confounding factors may have been responsible for some of the observed differences between cat and cat contributors i.e.
factors other than the introduction of onboarding could explain some of our findings.
our study design included the cat control group which similar to cat consists of participants that did not do onboarding tomitigate this threat.
hence if for a given metric no changesare observed between cat and cat the likelihood ofconfounding factors reduces but not to zero .
none of ourquantitative analyses observed statistical differences between cat and cat .
another threat concerns the effect of unreported bugs on the result of the szz bug inducing commit analysis which uses an implementation of the original szz algorithm .
tomitigate this we run szz on the entire history of openstack s official issue tracking systems launchpad storyboard .
also our study window spans releases for cat and for cat2 which gives ample time for contributors to make active contributions.
we base our study on the assumption that par ticipants contributors had no prior experience with any seco.however since some educational institutions introduce their students to open source development concepts and practices as part of their learning path this could be a confounding factorthat could affect our results.
since generic developmentconcepts form only a minor part of the onboarding process we believe this threat is minimal.
external validity .
while openstack is a representative modern seco our results may not generalize to other ecosystems.
that said the methods that we use in our observationaland quantitative studies are ecosystem agnostic.
hence practitioners and researchers could use our methods to identify andevaluate the impact of any ecosystem s onboarding program.as a side note the post covid era fosters a culture of onlinecollaboration that could disrupt the dynamics of in person events.
even though rodeghero et al.
studied onboarding during the covid pandemic at the project level it is still tooearly to understand the impact of this on the top level secotraining events or the seco onboarding process as a whole.for example the recent oui training event on october was virtual yet the turnout was much lower mentorsand participants than previous events.
future research isnecessary for the new reality of in person vs. virtual trainingevents in oss communities.
reliability validity.
except for confidential participant information we provide the necessary description and resources oss tools and dataset needed to replicate our research.
viii.
c onclusion this paper provides the first large scale mixed methods empirical study on onboarding in secos and is amongstthe first empirical studies in the domain of software en gineering onboarding in general.
though previous researchhas been conducted on onboarding within software projects these works did not provide a deeper understanding of the overall seco onboarding process which involves an initial top level onboarding phase followed by one to one project specific mentoring.
hence this paper aimed to understandthe onboarding process at seco level as well as to quantitatively validate the impact of seco level onboarding in terms of expected benefits regarding diversity productivity and quality of contributions.
our observation study of a top level openstack onboarding event yields a catalogue of six conceptual and eight hands on categories of socio technical onboarding content eightteaching strategies used eight expected onboarding benefits and onboarding challenges.
furthermore our quantitativeanalysis of openstack contributors and contributions shows that contributors who followed the onboarding process spendless time and effort to get their first commit accepted andproduce larger less bug inducing commits.
moreover we observe a strong correlation between onboarding and an increase in the gender and technical diversity of the openstack seco.
we provide our data set online .
the implications of this study are manifold and impact different stakeholders differently developers have empirical evidence that onboarding could be beneficial for them sinceit correlates with increased productivity and chances of beinghired by a company of the seco prospective mentors have an overview of the relevant topics and strategies theyshould prepare for and organizations and secos as a whole have empirical evidence that investments in onboardingcorrelate with increased productivity diversity and quality while they also have a list of challenges they should be aware of while mounting or operating an onboarding program.
1043references g. poo caama no e. knauss l. singer and d. german herding cats in a foss ecosystem a tale of communication and coordination for release management journal of internet services and applications vol.
.
y .
zhang m. zhou k. j. stol j. wu and z. jin how do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
an empirical study of openstack ieee acm 41st international conference on software engineering icse .
z. wang y .
feng y .
wang j. a. jones and d. redmiles unveiling elite developers activities in open source projects acm trans.
softw.
eng.
methodol.
vol.
no.
jun.
.
.
available s. bayati understanding newcomers success in open source community in proceedings of the 40th international conference on software engineering companion proceeedings ser.
icse .
new york ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.
available c. liu d. yang x. zhang h. hu j. barson and b. ray poster a recommender system for developer onboarding in ieee acm 40th international conference on software engineering companion icse companion may pp.
.
i. steinmacher c. treude and m. a. gerosa let me in guidelines for the successful onboarding of newcomers to open source projects ieee software vol.
no.
pp.
july .
i. rehman d. wang r. g. kula t. ishio and k. matsumoto newcomer candidate characterizing contributions of a novice developer togithub arxiv preprint arxiv .
.
g. g. sharma and k. j. stol exploring onboarding success organizational fit and turnover intention of software professionals journal of systems and software vol.
p. .
.
available y .
zhang m. zhou a. mockus and z. jin companies participation in oss development an empirical study of openstack ieee transactions on software engineering pp.
.
f. fagerholm a. s. guinea j. m unch and j. borenstein the role of mentoring and project characteristics for onboarding in open sourcesoftware projects in proceedings of the 8th acm ieee international symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement.
acm p. .
c. casalnuovo b. vasilescu p. devanbu and v .
filkov developer onboarding in github the role of prior social links and language expe rience in proceedings of the 10th joint meeting on foundations of software engineering.
acm pp.
.
s. bhartiya what open means to openstack linuxfoundation.org blog what open means openstack linux foundation december .
y .
dittrich software engineering beyond the project sustaining software ecosystems information and software technology vol.
no.
pp.
special issue on software ecosystems.
.
available article pii s0950584914000652 g. viviani and g. c. murphy reflections on onboarding practices in mid sized companies in proceedings of the 12th international workshop on cooperative and human aspects of software engineering ser.
chase .
piscataway nj usa ieee press pp.
.
.
available openstack foundation.
august links to oui archived materials.
.
available docs.openstack.org upstream training upstream archives.html j. a. teixeira and h. karsten managing to release early often and on time in the openstack software ecosystem journal of internet services and applications vol.
no.
p. apr .
.
available r. britto d. s. cruzes d. smite and a. sablis onboarding software developers and teams in three globally distributed legacy projects amulti case study journal of software evolution and process vol.
no.
p. e1921 .
i. steinmacher a. p. chaves t. u. conte and m. a. gerosa preliminary empirical identification of barriers faced by newcomers to open source software projects in brazilian symposium on software engineering.
ieee pp.
.
a. labuschagne and r. holmes do onboarding programs work?
in2015 ieee acm 12th working conference on mining software repositories may pp.
.
d. izquierdo n. huesman a. serebrenik and g. robles openstack gender diversity report ieee software vol.
no.
pp.
.
a. n. meyer g. c. murphy t. zimmermann and t. fritz enabling good work habits in software developers through reflective goal setting ieee transactions on software engineering pp.
.
j. meinicke c. p. wong b. vasilescu and c. k astner exploring differences and commonalities between feature flags and configuration options in proc.
int l conf.
software engineering software engineering in practice icse seip .
acm .
n. shrestha c. botta t. barik and c. parnin here we go again why is it difficult for developers to learn another programming language?
inproceedings of the 42nd international conference on software engineering icse .
a. rahman c. parnin and l. williams the seven sins security smells in infrastructure as code scripts in ieee acm 41st international conference on software engineering icse pp.
.
c. sadowski e. s oderberg l. church m. sipko and a. bacchelli modern code review a case study at google in proceedings of the 40th international conference on software engineering software engineering in practice ser.
icse seip .
new york ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.
available s. mizuno management for quality improvement the new qc tools.
crc press .
j. r. landis and g. g. koch the measurement of observer agreement for categorical data biometrics vol.
no.
.
a. foundjem.
january replication packages for our study on seco onboarding scripts dataset.
.
available zenodo.
s. yeasmin and l. a. albabtain escape the countries a vr escape room game in 3rd international conference on computer applications information security iccais pp.
.
c. mendez a. sarma and m. burnett gender in open source software what the tools tell in proceedings of the 1st international workshop on gender equality in software engineering ser.
ge .
new york ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.
available k. kohl silveira s. musse i. h. manssour r. vieira and r. prikladnicki confidence in programming skills gender insights from stackoverflow developers survey in ieee acm 41st international conference on software engineering companion proceedings icsecompanion pp.
.
a. filippova e. trainer and j. d. herbsleb from diversity by numbers to diversity as process supporting inclusiveness in software develop ment teams with brainstorming in ieee acm 39th international conference on software engineering icse pp.
.
m. alvi.
a manual for selecting sampling techniques in research.
.
available c. p. l. foundation.
august community health analytics open source software.
.
available a. n. meyer g. c. murphy t. fritz and t. zimmermann developers diverging perceptions of productivity.
berkeley ca apress pp.
.
.
available s. jansen measuring the health of open source software ecosystems beyond the scope of project health information and software technology vol.
no.
pp.
.
p. chapfuwa c. li n. mehta l. carin and r. henao survival cluster analysis in proceedings of the acm conference on health inference and learning ser.
chil .
new york ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.
available s. d. pawar and d. t. shirke nonparametric tests for multivariate multi sample locations based on data depth journal of statistical computation and simulation vol.
no.
pp.
.
m. allen the sage encyclopedia of communication research methods dec. .
.
available reference the sage encyclopedia of communication research methods f. armstrong f. khomh and b. adams broadcast vs. unicast review technology does it matter?
in ieee international conference on 1044software testing v erification and v alidation icst march pp.
.
c. jergensen a. sarma and p. wagstrom the onion patch migration in open source ecosystems in proceedings of the 19th acm sigsoft symposium and the 13th european conference on f oundations of software engineering ser.
esec fse .
new york ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.available s. h onel m. ericsson w. l owe and a. wingkvist importance and aptitude of source code density for commit classification intomaintenance activities in ieee 19th international conference on software quality reliability and security qrs .
ieee pp.
.
e. c. neto d. a. da costa and u. kulesza revisiting and improving szz implementations in acm ieee international symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement esem .
ieee pp.
.
c. mendez h. s. pedala z. steine hanson c. hilderbrand a. horvath c. hill l. simpson n. patil a. sarma and m. burnett open sourcebarriers to entry revisited a tools perspective .
g. avelino e. constantinou m. t. valente and a. serebrenik on the abandonment and survival of open source projects an empirical in vestigation in acm ieee international symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement esem sep. pp.
.
m. valiev b. vasilescu and j. herbsleb ecosystem level determinants of sustained activity in open source projects a case study of thepypi ecosystem in proceedings of the 26th acm joint meeting on european software engineering conference and symposium onthe f oundations of software engineering ser.
esec fse .
newyork ny usa association for computing machinery p. .
.
available v .
cosentino j. l. c. izquierdo and j. cabot assessing the bus factor of git repositories in ieee 22nd international conference on software analysis evolution and reengineering saner .
ieee pp.
.
i. steinmacher i. wiese a. p. chaves and m. a. gerosa why do newcomers abandon open source software projects?
in 6th international workshop on cooperative and human aspects of software engineering chase may pp.
.
j. li g. sun g. zhao and h. l. li wei robust low rank discovery of data driven partial differential equations in proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence vol.
no.
pp.
.
h. s. qiu a. nolte a. brown a. serebrenik and b. vasilescu going farther together the impact of social capital on sustained participation in open source in proceedings of the 41st international conference on software engineering icse montreal canada.
ieee toappear.
d. spadini m. aniche and a. bacchelli pydriller python framework for mining software repositories .
j. sliwerski t. zimmermann and a. zeller when do changes induce fixes?
sigsoft softw.
eng.
notes vol.
no.
pp.
may .
.
available s. kim t. zimmermann k. pan e. james jr et al.
automatic identification of bug introducing changes in 21st ieee acm international conference on automated software engineering ase .
ieee pp.
.
c. sadowski c. lewis z. lin x. zhu and e. j. whitehead jr an empirical analysis of the fixcache algorithm in proceedings of the 8th working conference on mining software repositories.
acm pp.
.
e. c. neto d. a. da costa and u. kulesza the impact of refactoring changes on the szz algorithm an empirical study in ieee 25th international conference on software analysis evolution and reengineering saner .
ieee pp.
.
g. rodr guez p erez g. robles and j. m. gonz alez barahona reproducibility and credibility in empirical software engineering a case study based on a systematic literature review of the use of the szz algorithm information and software technology vol.
pp.
.
m. hilton and a. begel a study of the organizational dynamics of software teams in ieee acm 40th international conference on software engineering software engineering in practice track icseseip may pp.
.
m. borg o. svensson k. berg and d. hansson.
szz unleashed an open implementation of the szz algorithm featuring example usage in a study of just in time bug prediction for the jenkinsproject.
s. f. wen learning secure programming in open source software communities a socio technical view in proceedings of the 6th international conference on information and education technology ser.
iciet .
new york ny usa association for computingmachinery p. .
.
available .
p. rodeghero t. zimmermann b. houck and d. ford please turn your cameras on remote onboarding of software developers during apandemic arxiv preprint arxiv .
.