a four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention zihan fang zihan.fang vanderbilt.edu vanderbilt university usamadeline endres endremad umich.edu university of michigan usathomas zimmermann tzimmer microsoft.com microsoft research usa denae ford denae microsoft.com microsoft research usawestley weimer weimerw umich.edu university of michigan usakevin leach kevin.leach vanderbilt.edu vanderbilt university usa yu huang yu.huang vanderbilt.edu vanderbilt university usa abstract modern software engineering practice and training increasingly rely on open source software oss .
the recent growth in demand for professional software engineers has led to increased contributions to and usage of oss.
however there is limited understanding of the factors affecting how developers and how new or student developers in particular decide which oss projects to contribute to a process critical to oss sustainability access adoption and growth.
to better understand oss contributions from the developers of tomorrow we conducted a four year study with students investigating the life cycle of their contributions from project selection to pull request acceptance .
during the study we also delivered a lightweight intervention to promote the awareness of open source projects for social good oss4sg oss projects that have positive impacts in other domains.
using both quantitative and qualitative methods we analyze student experience reports and the pull requests they submit.
compared to general oss projects we find significant differences in project selection p .
effect size .
student motivation p .
effect size .
and increased pull request acceptance rates for oss4sg contributions.
we also find that our intervention correlates with increased student contributions to oss4sg p .
effect size .
.
finally we analyze correlations of factors such as gender or working with a partner.
our findings may help improve the experience for new developers participating in oss4sg and the quality of their contributions.
we also hope our work helps educators project leaders and contributors to build a mutually beneficial framework for the future growth of oss4sg.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse december san francisco ca usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
concepts software and its engineering open source model humancentered computing empirical studies in hci .
keywords open source software social good cs education acm reference format zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang.
.
a four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention.
in proceedings of the 31st acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse december san francisco ca usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
introduction open source refers to both the concept and also the practice of making a program s source code openly available .
since the concept of open source software oss was first introduced in it has grown to involve not only academics and hobbyists but also professional software engineers influencing nearly of us companies by .
furthermore in recent years there has been significant interest in oss projects that have the potential to benefit society in a broader way such as through humanitarian efforts in domains like microfinance healthcare education and disaster relief .
this category of software projects is called open source software for social good oss4sg .
at the same time there has been an increase in the demand for professional software engineers as well as an associated growth in enrollment in undergraduate programs that prepare students for software jobs where oss is common .
ellis et al.
claim that student developers have characteristics which make them particularly well suited for participating in oss .
in addition as many computing students are future developers how and why student developers choose oss projects to contribute to may have implications for improving oss sustainability and growth.
however student contributions to oss are comparatively understudied.esec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang there is limited understanding of how students can gain practical experience with more realistic software engineering tasks as well as which methods educators can use to motivate students e.g.
for recruitment and retention through the lens of oss.
understanding the motivations of new or student developers oss contributions may be of particular import for oss4sg projects.
previous work demonstrates that despite their societal potential many oss4sg projects are inhibited by a lack of advertisement and awareness among professional developers .
for example huang et al.
found that it was more challenging for contributors to find oss4sg projects to work on even though there are many many many developers that might want to .
we hypothesize that one way to increase oss4sg project awareness is through educational interventions .
at many universities undergraduate software engineers contribute to oss projects as part of a course assignment .
oss contribution can give students practical experience with many software development tasks such as understanding triaged issue reports localizing faults in a legacy code base reading and writing documentation testing and submitting a formal pull or change request .
as a result many developers may first encounter oss as undergraduates and such assignments may be an opportune time to raise oss4sg awareness.
however prior studies of oss in educational contexts focused on how students and educators useoss e.g.
studying common mistakes in student contributions rather than on how students choose and learn from oss projects.
furthermore there have been no studies to date that have investigated the impact that oss4sg projects can have on students.
to help close this gap we present the results of a four year study of oss contributions from students across eight semesters of a senior software engineering course at university of michigan.
as the course final project students had to contribute to an oss project of their choice .
to investigate our hypothesis that an educational intervention can increase oss4sg contributions for the last four semesters we implemented a lightweight intervention introducing oss4sg to students on the course website1.
for all eight semesters the course content projects and homework assignments were the same with the exception of intervention related text.
additionally the same two instructors taught the course and student computing preparation remained consistent as enrollment and major declaration policies remained unchanged during the study period.
this consistency permits analysis of trends across semesters.
in total we collected and analyzed reports from students3contributing to different oss projects.
our analysis provides an understanding of the life cycle of student contributions to oss in general and to oss4sg in particular.
we also analyzed the effect of the lightweight intervention on oss4sg participation.
following previous work we determine which projects are oss4sg using the combined criteria of ovio and the digital 1no requirement or extra credit was applied to students contributing to oss4sg.
our intervention script is available in the supplementary materials.
2the covid pandemic occurred one semester prior to the implementation of the intervention.
to validate our analysis considering the effect of the pandemic we also analyzed the students data prior to and following the onset of covid see section .
3students were allowed but not required to work in teams of two.public goods alliance dpga which is derived from the united nation s sustainable development goals .
inspired by previous work that demonstrate key aspects in oss participation we focus on three key phases of the contribution life cycle when contrasting non social good non sg and oss4sg projects project selection project topic motivation pair programming decisions and the impact of our oss4sg intervention.
project experience subjective experiences lessons learned and programming languages used.
community reception pull request acceptance rates and the factors that most influence them.
we find statistically significant differences at all stages of this life cycle between students who engage with oss4sg projects and those who do not.
as some examples student motivations and selected project topics are different between non sg and oss4sg our lightweight intervention and to a lesser extent the covid19 pandemic influences the degree to which oss4sg projects are selected and pull request contributions to oss4sg projects are more likely to be accepted and merged into the main project.
to the best of our knowledge this is the first large scale in terms of students time and projects analysis of student oss4sg contributions.
the main contributions of this paper are the first large scale study of student oss contributions including data from students over four years .
an analysis of how the life cycle of student oss contributions project selection contribution experience and community reception differs between oss4sg and non sg projects.
a set of actionable recommendations and evidence for educators and student developers of which projects may be most effective for students and the impact of a lightweight intervention to bring social good to student attention.
ultimately we believe oss and oss4sg in particular are both morally and pragmatically important it helps software engineering as a community to contribute to humanitarian efforts more directly and provides an additional avenue for attracting and preparing students from all backgrounds to succeed in the workforce.
the goal of this research is to learn factors influencing student oss contributions in educational settings as well as with a goal of encouraging participation in oss4sg so that we can better support future oss contributions in general.
we believe our study also provides an important first step for leveraging the understudied potential of open source for social good.
background and related work in this section we discuss related work on open source software and social good oss4sg the intersection of oss and computing education and related educational interventions.
.
open source software and social good in recent years the role played by oss in key areas such as web services has been the subject of increasingly prominent discussions.
although some established software companies treat oss as a threat the more common view is that it generally positively impacts society business education and research and leadsa four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention esec fse december san francisco ca usa to a more open society because it partially addresses three key software challenges cost time scale and quality .
oss also changes the way people and organizations develop acquire use and commercialize software.
ellis et al.
emphasizes that oss can help increase interest in computing and provide career advancement benefits based on sustained participation .
as the oss landscape has changed participant motivations for joining oss projects have changed as well .
software developers are increasingly deciding to use their technical skills and oss to benefit the common good of society computing for social good has become a common topic in technical circles and developers are more likely to volunteer to write code that improves societal processes when given the opportunity .
simultaneously there has also been a growing global political interest in encouraging oss usage and access as more policy makers learn how essential oss is to our world s digital infrastructure .
the smooth integration of newcomers is critical for the sustainability and growth of oss projects .
approaches such as code for america and various hackathon events are one way innovative software solutions with a social conscience are encouraged .
however unlike oss focusing on technical development non sg finding oss projects with broader societal impact oss4sg to contribute remains a top challenge for developers and oss4sg has not yet been well studied by the research community in software engineering .
while prior studies explored general oss contributor obstacles none focused on student contributions to oss4sg projects.
additionally no research analyzed and compared developer disparities in oss and oss4sg within an educational context.
in this work we examine how student developers find and choose to contribute to oss4sg projects as a first step to alleviating this challenge.
.
open source software and education open source has been seen as a natural fit for education because it encourages collaborators to pool resources and expertise so as to build new ways of solving difficult problems .
some institutions integrate open source development into education with the view that participating in oss will help students to succeed in their careers .
because of its broad appeal oss can help increase interest in computing and it has also been shown to help retain involvement in computing over the long term despite the challenges students may face when participating in large scale software development projects .
furthermore students involvement in large scale software development projects enhances their academic curriculum through practical experience in real life software engineering practices .
oss4sg can be particularly appealing for students including those from less represented backgrounds e.g.
women students first generation students lbgtq students etc.
.
however project selection is a potential risk when using oss contributions in cs education.
project selection facilitates if and how students improve professional skills when contributing to oss the student s motivation perseverance and acceptance by the community are inherently related to the project chosen.
studies are also undertaken to analyze the strategies by which students can be motivated to engage in oss .
in addition inexperienced student software engineers can also create drawbacks for projects.
hu et al.
delineate common mistakes based on oss projects that often occur in student contributions e.g.
not following existing designs messy pull requests etc.
.
previous studies have also examined the factors that impact the acceptance of pull requests including the quantity of comments received the project s historical background and the developers reputation .
however no prior research has investigated the acceptance of pull requests specifically by students and the factors from the students perspective that influence the outcomes of their pull requests.
despite these challenges it is often believed that maintaining and developing oss can help students improve their resumes and their social and technical skills .
large tech companies like google yahoo and facebook have described the benefits of hiring people involved in the open source community .
in this study we provide initial investigation of non sg and oss4sg contributions by undergraduate software engineering students who are considered representative of the forthcoming oss developers which has not been examined in previous research.
.
educational interventions anintervention is a purposeful action by a human agent to create change .
interventions are commonly used in computing and stem education to improve programming performance or foster certain behaviors .
controlled experimental design is the primary method to explore whether such interventions have effects on specific populations .
the integration of social issues into computing curricula to guide students to be socially responsible professionals is still a work in progress .
bagli et al.
and goldweber et al.
have proposed interventions related to incorporating social good into computing curricula .
the intervention we evaluate in this paper is most similar to that proposed by goldweber et al.
where introductory computing assignments are reframed as social good problems to motivate students .
however rather than modifying internal course projects we propose an intervention exposing students to external oss4sg projects that are likely to have real world impact.
study design we investigate the life cycle of student developer submissions to oss projects with a focus on how this life cycle differs for contributions to oss4sg projects compared to standard i.e.
non sg oss projects.
to do so we analyze project reports submitted by computer science students working in teams working alone in a senior software engineering course at a large public university.
students were tasked with selecting an oss project to contribute to working on one or more active issues and submitting a pull request with the results of their work.
these project reports span eight semesters over four years and include contributions to unique oss projects.
we consider both statistical differences between non sg and oss4sg efforts as well as the impact of a lightweight intervention making students aware of the existence of oss4sg starting in .
in the remainder of this section we detail the contents of our dataset and discuss the qualitative methods we used to prepare our data for statistical analysis.esec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang .
dataset overview our data is collected from students who have enrolled in eecs at university of michigan over the past four years.
this course follows a similar model to offerings at other large us institutions guiding the student developers to become professional software engineers by focusing on collaborating in a team managing complexity testing and quality assurance mitigating risks staying on time and budget requirements elicitation and so on.
during the semester long course students were required to contribute to an open source project.
students had to select an oss project of their choice from github identify an open issue in the project typically a bug report or feature request understand the local development process localize and make the desired change then submit a pull request.
students documented their experiences with two written project reports an initial project plan and a final reflection.
in the initial report students identified a project proposed a schedule discussed the project s build system and described the intended defect to fix or feature to add.
in the final reflection students had to include descriptions of how and why they selected the oss project and task the project context the project governance including processes and tools used to coordinate and communicate among developers the task attempted any submitted artifacts e.g.
code changes new documentation test case reports etc.
a url to any submitted pull requests the student s subjective experience and recommendations and advice for other students.
extra credit points were awarded for contributions merged into the project s codebase i.e.
pull requests accepted on github before the end of the semester.
students could choose to work alone or in pairs.
our dataset consists of textual project reports as well as any associated publicly available pull requests.
in addition course staff provided the authors recalled gender 4associated with each de identified student e.g.
man woman do not recall etc.
.
this was done based on recollections from lectures office hours online meetings pronouns used by students roster information etc.
ultimately the course staff provided gender annotations for .
of students.
other demographic information such as race or ethnicity could not be collected.
.
intervention to assess the degree to which a lightweight intervention could impact student project selection and promote oss4sg starting in the 5th semester fall of the project description was updated to include a short ten sentence description of computing for social good as well as optional links to the dpga and ovio lists and descriptions of oss4sg.
in addition the text clarified that choosing a social good project would have no impact on the assignment grade.
students were also asked to include a sentence in their final reports indicating whether they thought their project contributed to social good but were again reminded that the answer would not affect their grade.
the exact text of the intervention is available in the supplementary materials.
the first half of our dataset i.e.
the first four semesters does not include the intervention while the second half does include it see table .
other than the intervention 4our original irb approved protocol did not explicitly ask for student reported gender.
as a result our irb suggested using recalled gender based on instructor accessible information about students.text course materials were consistent across all eight semesters.
additionally the same two instructors taught the class and students had similar computer science preparation throughout as university enrollment and major declaration policies were not changed.
this stability helps minimize confounding variables and permits comparison between pre intervention and intervention semesters.
.
analysis methodology our study protocol was assessed by our local irb and exempted from further review hum00220536 .
at a high level de identified project reports were provided to the study team by the course staff.
after preprocessing the study team conducted a series of qualitative and quantitative analyses of the reports and associated pull requests.
student report qualitative preprocessing student reports were originally in free form text.
therefore it was necessary to manually read and code the reports to extract the data needed for statistical analysis.
to do so we constructed an initial codebook with seven categories for the reports using the assignment specification as a guideline.
for any given report this coding identified basic information about the oss project and tasks picked why the students selected this project their experiences working on the project and their advice for future students.
the construction of the codebook was thoroughly reviewed to ensure accuracy and completeness with multiple authors including former course staff identifying potential confounding factors and suggesting modifications.
specifically the authors used atlas.ti5 a commonly used platform for qualitative analysis to conduct the thematic analysis.
initially the first author independently analyzed ten transcripts identifying recurring open codes by labeling significant participant statements.
discussions with co authors followed to establish connections resolving category disagreements through extensive discourse transcript review and refinement.
the first author then labeled data based on the refined code book.
collaboratively relationships among codes were identified leading to organized meaningful themes.
furthermore finalizing the codebook was a dynamic process following best practices the codebook was modified whenever the annotator observed a concept that was not yet included.
the first author reached code book saturation i.e.
no new modifications of the codebook after approximately reports.
these first reports were re coded with the finalized codebook by the first author.
to gain confidence in the accuracy of our coding project reports were randomly selected and thoroughly re coded by the second author.
this resulted in re coded high level categories per project or in all .
to quantify agreement we present a contextualized percentage agreement as the labels to categories are not mutually exclusive we can not use the common cohen s kappa to calculate agreement excluding minor typos the first and second authors agreed exactly in cases or .
of the time indicating generally high agreement.
for non mutually exclusive categories the exact agreement indicates that both authors picked the same subset of codes as labels for a project.
the disagreement was generally caused by the second author including one or more additional complimentary labels to a multi label category.
four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention esec fse december san francisco ca usa there were only cases .
where the second author s coding was in direct conflict with the first author s. once the coding process was completed the remaining authors double checked of the coding results and conducted a high level review of the pull request section of the qualitative data to ensure its quality and integrity.
we include our complete codebook in the supplementary materials.
however as a clarifying example we provide our categorization of students contribution motivations.
we identified these five categories of motivations pointed out by the students in their reports useful or helpful the oss project would be useful and benefit human daily lives.
active number of recent issues pull requests contributors etc.
easy to work on the organization of the project the general difficulty level of the project students familiarity with the programming language and the skills required in the project.
interest the interests of the students aligned with the topic of the project.
project influence the popularity or impact of the project.
for many categorizations including this one multiple tags can apply simultaneously resulting in overlap among categories.
student pull request qualitative preprocessing to assess how student contributions were received by oss communities we also investigated how many of the pull requests have been accepted and merged.
to do so the authors manually visited all pull request urls provided in the project reports.
out of reports contained at least one valid pull request link and in total there submitted requests some groups submitted multiple times .
for the remaining reports either the team did not submit a pull request or did not include a valid link .
the authors read all pull requests and labeled them as accepted e.g.
merged or force merged into the project by project owners maintainers or not e.g.
closed and not merged still open .
to do so we used a two phase approach if the pull request was marked as merged in the github interface we coded it as accepted.
if the pull request was marked as open or closed we manually inspected the comments and activity e.g.
moving the changes to a new request referencing the pull request in another commit or other project specific processes .
we did not rely on github s interface alone as it can underestimate acceptance rates .
our process may still not spot all accepted contributions e.g.
those incorporated into later pull requests by non student developers etc .
however we believe we identify most student written accepted pull requests aligning with the educational context of our work.
for each pull request we also recorded the dates of the pull request submission and acceptance if applicable as well as the category of the issue the student was addressing e.g.
bug fix feature request test cases refactoring etc.
.
this pull request annotation data is used in our analysis of how student oss contributions are received by the oss community.
project topic and social good labels beyond coding the student reports and associated pull requests to conduct our analysis we also labeled both the topic of a project and if the project is qualified as oss4sg .
we used the labels provided by ovio as general topics of projects.
we used labels provided by dpga as the criteria to determine whether a project qualifies as supportingsocial good.
ovio is an authority for matching software developers with projects their site includes an explicit list of oss projects associated with social good or technology broadly construed.
however not all projects from ovio are social good projects per se.
notably many computing projects such as microsoft s open source vscode editor would officially fall in the loose ovio categories of industry innovation infrastructure or reduced inequality but do not align with conventional notions of oss4sg e.g.
vscode does create infrastructure for industry and could be used in a social good context and since it is free it could be seen as reducing inequality but it is not inherently or essentially a social good project by more conventional definitions .
informally almost every oss project could be seen reducing inequality since oss is free to download and or as providing innovative infrastructure since it is software so those tags are not informative in this context.
as a result we followed best practices and used dpga criteria to help determine social good scoping more precisely dpga makes use of the united nation s sustainable development goals which have been found to more closely align with what computing practitioners mean by the term social good .
for our study after collecting labeled category data for each project if a project meets any criterion other than industry innovation infrastructure and reduced inequality it is classified as oss4sg.
the final classification of each project was crosschecked by the authors.
our dataset is available and includes all of the original tags so researchers can rerun the analysis with those tags included if desired .
analysis results in this section we discuss the results of our analysis of the lifecycle of student contributions to oss.
we organize our results around three key phases of this lifecycle phase project selection what projects and topics do students choose when electing to contribute to oss?
what factors determine that decision?
examining developers motivation is crucial for understanding oss development and achievements as highlighted in prior research .
in this phase we analyze the preferences and choices of students as well as the impact of our intervention promoting the selection of oss4sg projects.
phase contribution experience how do students describe their experiences working on open source projects?
does this experience differ by project topic?
oss projects play a crucial role in providing individuals with practical software development skills that are often challenging to acquire through formal education .
in this phase we explore students contribution experiences and the lessons they have learned.
phase community reception how are student submissions received by the open source community?
understanding the dynamics of collaboration and participation in open source communities requires recognition of community acceptance as a vital factor .
in this phase we explore the factors that correlate with whether or not a studentsubmitted pull request was ultimately accepted.esec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang table student and report summary.
oss4sg counts reports associated with a social good project while non sg counts reports for non social good projects.
intervention indicates the presence of a light pedagogical awareness intervention.
semester students reports oss4sg non sg intervention total semester coincided with the onset of covid early .
see section .
table breakdown of student self reported motivation categories for selecting projects for all oss projects and oss4sg we find a significant difference of motivation of selection on non sg between sg.
motivation all projects oss4sg oss4sg useful or helpful .
active .
easy to work on .
interest .
project influence .
n a .
students did not state their motivation of selection in reports.
in each phase we directly compare and contrast between oss4sg projects and oss projects that are not explicitly related to social good non sg oss .
table summarizes our dataset over the eight semesters covered by this study broken down by non social good contributions non sg and social good contributions oss4sg .
.
phase project selection for this phase we first give an overview of student motivations and project topic selection.
we also investigate if there are differences related to student gender or if the student worked alone or in a pair.
we then compare oss4sg and non sg projects across topics and evaluate our intervention s effectiveness.
.
.
overview of student motivations and project topics.
table summarizes the project selection motivations described in student reports see section .
for a description of qualitative methods used to identify themes and code reports .
notably while conventional wisdom might suggest that many students are looking for projects that align with their personal interests or that will be easy the dominant motivation mentioned for project selectiontable general topics of projects selected by students.
general topic projects oss oss4sg technology management and productivity creativity and entertainment education society and culture health and well being science civic tech economics humanitarian environment and nature literature and journalism table motivation for project selection as a function of working alone vs. as a pair.
we find a significant difference on students motivation of selection between working alone and working in pairs 2 .
p .
cramer s v .
.
motivation alone in pairs useful or helpful .
.
active .
.
easy to work on .
.
interest .
.
project influence .
.
was that the project was useful or helpful in some way to the student personally or to others .
in fact whether a project was seen as useful or helpful was cited more than twice as often as the next most common motivation for choosing a project.
while this notion of helpful is not strictly the same as social good see section .
our results are consistent with other findings that suggest a broader humanitarian impact can be a strong motivator for students .
in addition a prior investigation revealed gender bias within oss communities especially for women who are underrepresented in oss .
however our results hold for students generally we find no evidence that student gender our dataset s main demographic label influenced the ranking or proportion of these categories p .
.
table summarizes the projects selected by students according to general topics see section .
.
the most common project topics aretechnology e.g.
vscode and management and productivity e.g.
zulip .
as a whole most students prefer technology and entertainment projects to other topics.
in addition we speculate that these results may help to identify suitable projects to which undergraduate students are more likely to express interest.
as shown in table we also investigated whether or not collaboration impacts project selection.
we found a statistically significant difference in project selection motivations for students working alone vs. working in pairs 2 .
p .
cramer s v .
.
students working in pairs are more likely to prioritize useful ora four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention esec fse december san francisco ca usa table motivation for project selection for non sg vs. oss4sg projects.
we find a significant difference on motivation for selection between non sg vs. oss4sg 2 .
p .
cramer s v .
.
motivation non sg oss4sg useful or helpful .
.
active .
.
easy to work on .
.
interest .
.
project influence .
.
helpful oractive projects than are students working alone.
we hypothesize that students working together are more likely to prioritize the project itself e.g.
as a shared choice than to focus on their personal suitability or interest for the project easy to work on interest etc.
.
this is important because students may feel they are not capable of accomplishing as much if working alone influencing the type of project they decide to pursue.
by far the most common motivation cited by students was if the project was useful orhelpful indicating students take personal or societal impact into account when choosing projects.
this trend was even more pronounced for students who worked in a pair.
the most common project topics were technology and entertainment .
.
.
motivations for contributing to oss4sg.
overall .
of projects selected by students were classified as open source for social good following our methodology section .
.
critically we find that project motivations are significantly different between non sg and oss4sg projects 2 .
p .
cramer s v .
.
we conducted a logistic regression analysis on all selection factors.
the results revealed that students motivation significantly contributed to their selecting oss4sg projects or not p .
.
useful or helpful is an even more common motivation for oss4sg andinterest is more significant for oss4sg as well.
we hypothesize that one reason student developers choose to contribute to oss4sg is that they attach importance to the personal or global significance of the contribution useful or helpful interest rather than to the likelihood of success active easy .
table summarizes this result.
.
.
oss4sg project topics.
we investigate topical differences between selected oss4sg and non sg projects.
to analyze this we consider topics that overlap between non sg and oss4sg projects figure shows these results.
management and productivity is the most popular project topic among students selecting non sg projects followed by creativity and entertainment and then science .
by contrast oss4sg contributions focused on topics such aseducation health and well being and society and culture .
in addition to a lesser degree oss4sg project topics touched on civic technology as well as environment and nature .
these differences are strongly significant 2 .
p .
cramer s v .
.
in a linear regression we found that topic also significantly impacts p .
contributing to non sg vs. oss4sg.
these figure topics for student selected oss and oss4sg projects note that all projects labeled technology belong to non sg and all projects labeled health and well being orenvironment and nature belong to oss4sg .
figure the effect of a lightweight pedagogical intervention mentioning social good but not grading on it in any way on student project selection.
results align with conventional wisdom e.g.
students favoring oss4sg focus on topics more likely to benefit society while students favoring non sg focus more on personal development and they provide concrete guidance for educators and trainers selecting topics or examples when providing advice about project selection.
.
.
gender effect and social good.
as discussed in the overview of phase we do not observe a significant difference in topic selection by gender e.g.
men vs. women men vs. not identifyingas men etc.
p .
men women non binary and unknown or unreported .
in addition while a greater fraction of women students contributed to oss4sg projects than did men the effect was not significant p .
.
however we draw attentionesec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang table effect of gender on selecting a non sg vs. oss4sg project in specific men women non binary .
gender non sg oss4sg men .
.
women .
.
non binary .
.
to the potential impact of social good aspects in oss on individuals access to and involvement to oss in general.
gender related factors can influence opportunities and contributions within specific fields emphasizing the need to consider gender as a relevant aspect in the study of oss4sg participation .
by delving into the interplay between gender and project selection we can work towards creating more inclusive and equitable environments that foster diverse contributions to oss community.
moreover we hope future work can be conducted to investigate the potential of oss4sg projects to stimulate participation of underrepresented minorities in oss community.
table summarizes the proportions of project selection by gender.
these results further indicate that our results regarding oss4sg project selection generalize regardless of gender.
.
.
oss4sg intervention effect.
finally we investigate whether our lightweight educational intervention described in section .
impacts student project selection in terms of both direct proportions are more oss4sg projects chosen?
and specific topics.
the four pre intervention semesters include reports of which are oss4sg projects oss4sg vs. non sg .
the four postinterventions semesters have reports of which are oss4sg projects oss4sg vs. non sg .
this increase is statistically significant z .
p .
cohen sh .
.
as shown in figure the intervention resulted in an increase in projects labeled aseducation creativity and entertainment andenvironment and nature with the corresponding reduction coming almost entirely from management and productivity .
these results are important because oss4sg can interest students from a variety of backgrounds and help with longer term interest in computing see section .
.
however educators may be wary of heavyweight approaches that may be falsely perceived as lowering standards or sacrificing rigor cf.
.
the increase in uptake from adding ten sentence of awareness intervention is thus a very promising concrete path forward.
student motivation and project topic differ significantly between oss4sg and non sg projects.
additionally our lightweight intervention was correlated with increased oss4sg project selection.
such an intervention is thus a promising way for instructors to promote oss4sg contribution.
.
phase contribution experience after students select projects they work on those projects which involves both the manipulation of software engineering artifacts e.g.
source code documentation and also interaction with other developers e.g.
via email discord or irc chats pull requests etc.
.table self reported experiences from students of contributing to oss including both non sg and oss4sg .
experience category count proportion learning a lot .
feeling stressed and challenged .
being positive about this experience .
observing friendliness and responsiveness .
being a first time contributor .
experiencing organized project .
finding it easy to participate .
finding similarities with industry work .
finding issue resolved .
feeling nervous or fearful .
recognizing the importance of testing .
observing unfriendliness or apathy .
experiencing disorganized project .
continuing to contribute .
engaging in pair programming .
having a terrible experience .
among the students the most commonly reported experience was one of learning a lot and the finding the activity stressful and challenging but ultimately positive.
an indicate sentence from a report notes our team gained quite a few insights into real world software development practices.
overall i enjoyed this project and was able to learn a lot about contributing to an open source project and was able to apply many of the skills i have learned in class.
around students mentioned the activity to be more stressful and challenging than they originally expected.
as stated by one student i personally found it incredibly difficult being thrown into an already existing project with little guidance background on how it worked.
with every previous school assignment we were given a set of starter files or we started an assignment from scratch.
despite these challenges about of students explicitly stated that their attitude toward the contribution activity was positive and only .
found contributing to oss to be terrible .
these results reflect existing work that suggests incorporating contributions to oss is generally well received by students.
.
.
interactions with oss developers.
from the perspective of collaboration as shown in table far more students perceived oss to be friendly and responsive than unfriendly or not responsive .
vs. .
.
one student contributing to zulip noted communicating with other developers was very straightforward especially with the incredibly active channel.
there were always opportunities to ask questions and get help.
the culture of this open source community is rooted in encouraging input from all no matter your skill level.
we draw particular attention to the comment about skill level which aligns with prior work on the appropriateness of oss for all students including those who might have less incoming preparation e.g.
first generation or transfer students etc.
.
table also summarizes students self reported experiences of contributing to oss.
around .
of students explicitly described pair programming as particularly useful.
alternatively among thea four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention esec fse december san francisco ca usa table categories of advice offered by students to future students including both non sg and oss4sg .
advice count proportion start early .
take the assignment seriously .
choose a good project .
practice for future career .
communication and collaboration .
planning is important .
follow coding conventions .
teams for which we have reports of teams noted a positive pair programming interaction.
a negative pair programming interaction experience was not an identified or present in this dataset.
one team stated we found it was more beneficial for both of us to instead utilize pair programming for all tasks as we could bounce ideas off each other and work more efficiently.
in addition very few students who worked alone suggested that future students also work alone see section .
.
.
together these reported experiences may suggest that students enjoy or benefit from the pair interactions when approaching a new software project despite the communication overhead required in teamwork.
.
.
advice from student contributors.
we also summarize what lessons students reported learning from this experience in table .
most students encouraged others to start early or to take the assignment seriously .
however beyond such general academic advice over one sixth of students specifically gave advice suggesting to choose a good project .
this is particularly relevant to phase of the open source contribution lifecycle section .
.
.
for example advice to choose a good project may be reflected in the motivations students report e.g.
useful or helpful when selecting a project as well as the projects community and organization e.g.
well organized code clear issues quality documentation helpful community .
finally .
of the advice suggests that contributing to oss serves as practice for a future software development career.
.
.
differences in oss4sg projects.
when comparing student experiences between non sg and oss4sg the only statisticallysignificant difference centered around the programming language s used in the projects.
we find that javascript is more common in student selected oss4sg projects than is other languages.
this is in contrast to non sg where languages such as python and c are more common in student selected projects.
javascript is not taught in introductory courses in the school in question.we hypothesize that social good projects to which students contribute provide services through websites or similar front ends with straightforward uis as indicated by our collected data both because their audiences are often more general e.g.
for broad reaching humanitarian benefits and also because many oss4sg projects explicitly focus on democratizing or publicizing information in an accessible way e.g.
making local governance records easier to view .
while decisions about which languages to cover in cs curricula are nuanced and multi faceted our findings do provide an additional angle by which languages may be evaluated given the desire to admitoss4sg interactions to appeal to broader audiences as well as impact the community s accessibility and inclusiveness.
moreover this factor can contribute to the improvement of students practical programming skills and equip them for their future professional paths.
as for self reported experiences there were no statisticallysignificant differences between non sg and oss4sg.
however there were significant differences in pull request acceptance rates i.e.
in outcomes see section .
.
students report learning from the experience e.g.
because they advise others to start early andpractice for future career and that it may have helped to improve skills such as time management.
other than programming language there are no significant differences in the reported experiences of non sg and oss4sg contributors.
these results suggest that regardless of whether students contribute to non sg or oss4sg projects valuable learning outcomes can be realized.
.
phase community reception in this last phase we consider how student contributions are viewed by the oss community.
to do so we primarily investigate the reception of the pull requests submitted by students as part of their projects see section .
for more information on how we annotated and analyzed student pull requests .
we first investigate the percentage of pull requests submitted by students that were ultimately accepted and merged into the project.
we find that .
of pull requests submitted by students are accepted and merged as of august .
while general statistics about contributions accepted on github are not widely published this ratio is significantly lower than the observed in other studies of non student specific pull requests .
we discuss this discrepancy further in section .
.
this overall percentage masks the large variation of acceptance rates on a project to project basis.
while students submitted pull requests to projects only ten projects were submitted to at least times.
however among those projects pull request acceptance rates varied widely from .
for zulip a team collaboration tool to .
for habitica a habit building program which treats your life like a role playing game .
other popular software infrastructure projects such as vscode andpandas fall in the middle with .
and .
respectively.
one possible explanation for this variability is that some projects may be larger and more actively maintained than others.
however at time of writing all ten are large and active projects regular commits in the last week over contributors so other factors such as community culture or project set up and contribution requirements are likely driving this diversity.
.
.
other general findings for pull requests.
we also investigate whether students pull request pr acceptance rates vary by project topic see section .
.
using a 2 test we find the acceptance rate of pull requests varies significantly by project topic p .
cramer sv .
.
furthermore we also collected all the pull requests from all the github projects involved in this study i.e.
github projects pull requests accepted pull requests and found no significant difference on pr acceptance rate by project topics p .
among all the prs from generalesec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang contributors.
to understand which factors drive the significant result among students prs we analyze standardized residuals from the 2 test.
we find that pull requests to management and productivity projects are significantly less likely to be accepted than expected while pull requests to creativity and entertainment and education projects are significantly more so.
specifically .
of creativity and entertainment and .
of education pull requests are accepted and above the average of .
while only .
of management and productivity pull requests are accepted below average .
these results are particularly interesting as they pertain to the creativity and entertainment category a category composed primarily of games.
we hypothesize that online games often support a culture of modification and bug fixing that appreciates contributions from invested participants.
we also investigate factors about the students themselves that could influence the likelihood that their pull requests are accepted.
in particular we investigate correlations with student gender and whether the students worked in a team or alone.
we do not find any evidence of significant differences in pull request acceptance rates by gender .
of pull requests submitted by men are accepted compared to .
of pull requests submitted by women p .
.
we did however observe evidence that choosing to work on the pull request alone or with a partner does correlate with pull request acceptance pull requests submitted by students who work alone are significantly more likely to be accepted than are those from partners p .
cohen sh .
.
.
of pull requests submitted by solo students were accepted compared to only .
of pull request submitted by pairs.
initially this result may appear to run contrary to established wisdom on pair programming .
however due to the context of this being observed in student submissions we hypothesize that this difference is the result of hidden communication costs between the partners for students not trained in pair programming it may be these communication and time management difficulties outweigh the benefit from working with a partner at least in the context of a semester long software engineering course.
we also note that student subjective experiences section .
and advice section .
.
both favor pair programming suggesting that students prefer the experience even if it is less effective for this one outcome.
given the importance placed on student retention and thus a desire to avoid a perceived conflict between what is optimal and what students desire this leads to the direct advice to not structure course grades or student assessments around whether or not pull requests are accepted and instead leave them ungraded or as optional extra credit .
of student pull requests are accepted and merged.
students who work alone are significantly more likely to have their pull requests accepted than are those that work in pairs to p .
cohen sh .
a result that may add nuance to standard considerations of pair programming in an educational setting.
faculty and instructors are encouraged to avoid mandatory grading of whether pull requests are accepted.
.
.
pull requests and social good.
finally we analyze how community reception of student pull requests differs for oss4sg projects compared to non sg projects.
we find a significant difference between the pull request acceptance rates.
in particular we find thatpull requests for oss4sg projects are more likely to be accepted than those of non sg projects or vs. or p .
cohen sh .
.
furthermore we calculated the overall acceptance rate of all prs in all of the github projects involved in this study see section .
.
.
our results show that there is no significant difference between the acceptance rates of non sg and sg projects in general on github .
and .
respectively when using the same methodology.
this is particularly interesting because it might hint that while there is no significant difference in general pr acceptance rate between non sg and sg projects e.g.
we cannot assume it has lower standards in sg projects or sg projects are easier students contribution to sg projects might project a higher quality or effort compared to non sg projects.
this is also relevant in helping students evaluate the impact they may have when contributing to oss projects in this setting that they may feel more included by oss4sg communities.
we find these results to be particularly compelling for two reasons.
first instructors of undergraduate software engineering courses can simultaneously raise awareness about oss4sg projects and communities while indicating the increased likelihood that their contributions will be well received and incorporated into such software projects.
as a result this encourages not only broader participation from students finding oss4sg appealing but also helps students learn more about the complete process in oss projects.
we anticipate that these results will help inform educators about best practices concerning the discussion of oss4sg projects.
student pull requests for social good projects are significantly more likely to be accepted and merged than pull requests to non sg projects to p .
cohen sh .
.
this suggests that educators can truthfully indicate that their contributions are more likely to be well received by oss4sg communities to promote participation in such projects without undermining the educational value of using this intervention.
discussion the findings in the previous section demonstrate that students differ greatly in their motivations when choosing whether to contribute to non sg or oss4sg projects as well as in the project topics they select.
in addition we find that external factors such as interventions can have an impact on student contribution choices.
we also find a nuanced interaction with pair programming as well as a more direct benefit in terms of pull request acceptance for oss4sg contributions.
in this section we will propose approaches for leading more future developers to participate in oss4sg and helping them find the effective projects and topics for their contributions.
.
leveraging external guidance in our four year study we find that a lightweight intervention based on raising awareness without changing grading increased student involvement in oss4sg by over .
although the community is still debating the exact criteria for social good we believe oss projects that address people and society broadly construed would benefit from greater exposure and more participating contributors.
we encourage instructors of similar classes not only to make use of such interventions such as the one proposed herea four year study of student contributions to oss vs. oss4sg with a lightweight intervention esec fse december san francisco ca usa or that discussed by goldweber et al.
but also to use thirdparty agencies e.g.
ovio dpga github .
for example to improve the stability of contributions we suggest discussing and linking resources like ovio and dpga in class alongside lecture materials for ethics and professionalism.
we find that of student developers self identified as firsttime contributors to oss.
thus discussing oss4sg communities in class and discussing resources like ovio and dpga can also have the added effect of awareness for these first time contributors ultimately raising the visibility of oss4sg projects.
.
improving student experiences and community reception student experiences will ultimately influence continued contributions to oss4sg so the community culture and organization is quite important.
while we read and coded student reports many first time developers reported struggling to find the source code file required or they reported that there was no clear set of contribution instructions for beginners.
therefore we recommend organizers of oss4sg projects be particularly vigilant about providing supportive scaffolding and documentation for first time developers.
in addition in our dataset many student developers mentioned that they would be more willing to keep contributing in the future if they were working with a more friendly and responsive culture.
while we noted a significant difference in pull request acceptance between non sg and oss4sg projects less than half of all requests were ultimately accepted.
this rate is lower than that observed in non student specific studies of pull request acceptance .
this difference may be due in part to designing our pull request annotation methodology to align with an educational context rather than to catch all accepted contributions see section .
.
however it is reasonable that pull requests from students for a course would have a lower acceptance rate than those of oss developers at large.
we encourage future investigation both in understanding what would make student pull requests more likely to be accepted and in understanding why pull requests for oss4sg projects are more accepted.
increasing the likelihood of accepted pull requests may contribute to a more positive outcome for student participants.
limitations and threats to validity although we present a number of statistically significant results from a dataset of over students over eight semesters our results may not generalize to all situations.
we discuss a few such threats to validity.
first our four year study was conducted in a classroom setting so the results may not generalize to new developers in industry.
we mitigated this by focusing on senior computer science students i.e.
who will likely enter the workforce shortly engaging in an activity that is seen as more similar to industrial software engineering than are toy examples although single contributions to github may still not be a perfect match .
second similar to previous studies we lack an official principle or automated method to determine whether an oss project is associated with social good or not .
we mitigated this threat by making use of both the ovio and dpga guidelines and follow best practices as described in section .
and by making use of multipleseparate annotators i.e.
separate authors when employing qualitative methods.
finally the partial overlap of our intervention and the outbreak of covid is a complication covid happened one semester before intervention was applied .
to mitigate this we analyzed students project selections before and after covid finding that the pandemic s effect weakened over time for example the percentage of health and well being projects is in the first three semesters but jumps to in the fourth semester when covid occurred then drops back to in the fifth semester when the intervention was delivered and stays low at again after that.
we also calculated our statistics with the presence of covid as another independent variable potentially impacting the outcome and still find that our intervention is statistically significant even when covid is an explicit factor .
these results give confidence that covid effects may be minimal compared to the intervention on students contributions.
finally we want to point it out that biases might exist in retrospective recall when assessing students motivation which can also overlap with an individual s self beliefs .
conclusion we present an analysis of project reports submitted by senior computer science students in a software engineering course.
we investigated how we can train these future developers by exploring contributions to oss and oss4sg projects in contrast to non sg projects .
our aim is to investigate effective strategies for fostering and supporting emerging contributors to oss especially oss4sg through educational contexts.
we find significant differences in project selection p .
effect size .
reported student motivation p .
effect size .
and reception from software communities.
students who work in pairs are more likely to choose projects that are useful and helpful compared to students working alone and students report favorable experiences with pair programming activities.
we also find women are more likely to select oss4sg than men.
our lightweight intervention has a statistically significant improvement in student social good selection p .
effect size .
.
in addition students contributing to oss4sg projects are significantly more likely to have contributions accepted by their communities.
combined with the fact that there are no significant differences in reported experiences between non sg and oss4sg contributors this suggests that we can raise awareness and appreciation for oss4sg projects while retaining valuable educational outcomes.
we believe our results can not only help improve the experience of participating in social good oss but also improve the quality of new developers contributions.
we hope that educators oss project organizers and contributors can form a mutually beneficial framework for developing open source software for social good communities in the future.
data availability we make our intervention text qualitative code books and statistical scripts publicly available on zenodo .
our data with potentially sensitive information e.g.
links to public pull requests that are connected to educational assignments and grades can t be public due to irb restrictions.
interested researchers can contact the first author for data sharing.esec fse december san francisco ca usa zihan fang madeline endres thomas zimmermann denae ford westley weimer kevin leach and yu huang