an empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective linda erlenhov software engineering division chalmers university of gothenburg gothenburg sweden linda.erlenhov chalmers.sefrancisco gomes de oliveira neto software engineering division chalmers university of gothenburg gothenburg sweden francisco.gomes cse.gu.sephilipp leitner software engineering division chalmers university of gothenburg gothenburg sweden philipp.leitner chalmers.se abstract software engineering bots automated tools that handle tedious tasks are increasingly used by industrial and open source projects to improve developer productivity.
current research in this area is held back by a lack of consensus of what software engineering bots devbots actually are what characteristics distinguish them from other tools and what benefits and challenges are associated with devbot usage.
in this paper we report on a mixed method empirical study of devbot usage in industrial practice.
we report on findings from interviewing and surveying a total of developers.
we identify three different personas among devbot users focusing on autonomy chat interfaces and smartness each with different definitions of what a devbot is why developers use them and what they struggle with.
we conclude that future devbot research should situate their work within our framework to clearly identify what type of bot the work targets and what advantages practitioners can expect.
further we find that there currently is a lack of generalpurpose smart bots that go beyond simple automation tools or chat interfaces.
this is problematic as we have seen that such bots if available can have a transformative effect on the projects that use them.
ccs concepts software and its engineering software notations and tools .
keywords software bot empirical study software engineering acm reference format linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner.
.
an empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective.
in proceedings of the 28th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
https permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november virtual event usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
introduction modern software development entails a wide range of tasks that go beyond designing and implementing program code.
among many other tasks developers may be asked to conduct code reviews triage bugs mentor newcomers run integration or performance tests and interpret test result set up and maintain computational infrastructure or stay on call to react to production issues .
unsurprisingly previous work has reported that developers often feel distracted and unproductive especially if they have to change context frequently .
partly as a reaction more and more software projects employ software development bots devbots automated tools that attempt to free developers from particularly tedious tasks or support their work in a more general sense.
devbots are by now wide spread in industry and open source software e.g.
wessel et al.
found no less than different bots being used in open source projects and research on bots in software engineering is gaining traction see for instance the botse workshop at the icse conference1 .
unfortunately research so far has been held back by a lack of consensus of what a bot in software engineering actually is which characteristics define devbots and why developers use them.
early studies have led to a multitude of taxonomies and classification attempts .
while useful these are largely based on a categorisation of existing tools that their authors refer to as bots without explicitly incorporating the view of bot users.
in contrast in this paper we describe results of a study investigating the perception of devbots from the side of the practitioners using them.
we carried out a mixed method exploratory study over a period of months.
the goal of our study was to identify which characteristics distinguish devbots from standard tools subsequently called plain old development tools or podts and to improve the community s understanding of devbot usage and challenges in industrial practice.
we conducted semi structured interviews with software developers who utilise a wide range of different devbots in their work and enhance our data through a web based survey answered by professional developers or other it professionals of which are or have been using devbots in their work.
concretely we address the following research questions rq1 what is a devbot?
what characteristics describe a devbot?
what delineates devbots from plain old development tools podts ?
oct 2020esec fse november virtual event usa linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner our study shows that a single definition of devbots is unachievable as different developers associate widely different characteristics with the term.
however we are able to identify three different personas i.e.
practitioner archetypes with different expectations and motivations .
the chat bot persona charlie sees devbots mostly as information integration tools with a natural language interface while for the autonomous bot persona alex a devbot is a tool that autonomously handles often quite simple tasks for human developers.
finally for the smart bot persona sam the distinguishing characteristic of a bot is a smartness that goes beyond other tools.
by classifying survey response data we are able to estimate the prevalence of these personas in the wild.
we find that of respondents who are actually using devbots in their work are predominantly associated with charlie followed by alex and sam .
the remaining of bot using respondents gave responses that did not allow us to map them to any of these three personas.
rq2 how are devbots used?
what benefits do different types of devbots promise?
all devbot users primarily expect improved productivity from their bots but depending on the persona this surfaces in different ways.
charlie mainly expects easy access to information or being able to trigger simple maintenance tasks through a natural language interface.
conversely alex expects that simple but tedious tasks are automated without explicitly having to trigger the bot.
finally sam also expects improved productivity but in a less straight forward manner for sam improved productivity comes from devbots handling non trivial tasks or generating information that would otherwise not easily be accessible to a human.
rq3 what are the main challenges in devbot usage?
devbots as defined by charlie are widely available in practice but their usage is sometimes subject to usability concerns bots that can parse rich natural language are perceived as unpredictable while simple bots that only understand a small set of defined trigger words or sentences are seen as less useful.
alex and sam need to be able to trust their bots to autonomously trigger and enact correct actions.
this requires mature bot implementations with a very small amount of false positives as well as trustworthy test suites which are able to alert developers quickly in case of malfunctioning bots.
charlie and alex style bots are already widely available as off the shelf systems.
sam style bots on the other hand are bespoke tools for individual projects or companies.
in our study we have only observed their usage in large software intensive corporations which invest considerable effort into building and maintaining tailor made bots for their own environments.
our results provide clear terminology and definitions to better contextualise and situate future research on bots in software engineering.
further our results indicate that there is currently a lack of general purpose sam style devbots.
this is problematic as adopting more sophisticated devbots can have transformative effects that go beyond simply automating tedious work items.
related work in storey and zagalsky laid the foundation for research on bots in software engineering.
they described how bots are increasingly used to support tasks that traditionally required human intelligence .
this early work already established that devbots may come in very different forms support a wide range of use cases and occupy different roles in software teams.
lebeuf and storey later explored this variety further through an extensive faceted taxonomy of bots which illustrated how completely different tools may all be perceived as bots by different developers.
an alternative taxonomy proposed later by erlenhov et al.
similarly indicates that different qualities may be characteristic of bots to different people.
a third taxonomy has been proposed by paikari and van der hoek and specifically investigates chat bots in software engineering and beyond.
in contrast to these taxonomies our study tackles a related yet not identical question what exactly characterises bots and in what aspects they are perceived as different from podts.
further and unlike the taxonomies proposed by lebeuf and storey or paikari and van der hoek we focus solely on bots used for software engineering tasks.
finally we conduct our research from the perspective of bot users rather than bot developers and vendors.
wessel et al.
have shown that devbot usage is indeed widespread at least in the context of open source software development .
through repository mining they found different bots being used in open source projects.
over one fourth of all analyzed projects used at least one bot.
however they were not able to show a clear positive impact of these bots on high level project quality metrics such as the number of commits or pull request merge times.
we speculate that one problem may be that we simply do not yet understand well enough why projects adopt specific bots potentially many of these bots were never intended to improve the metrics that wessel et al.
studied.
our study attempts to shine more light on what benefits developers expect from different types of devbots.
other research has indicated further potential challenges of using devbots.
for instance a well known experiment by murgia et al.
indicated that users are sceptical of bot contributions on the developer q a site stack exchange .
recently this has also been confirmed by brown and parnin through an experiment with bot generated contributions to open source projects from pull requests submitted by a devbot only two were merged in their experiment and these two were later reverted by the project owners .
these experiences have led some bot developers to camouflage their bots as human developers.
for instance the program repair bot repairnator has for a while submitted pull requests using a human profile to improve acceptance.
while understandable this practice may potentially be harmful to software projects.
ferrara et al.
have discussed the threat of malicious non obvious bots damaging online ecosystems .
in other large online ecosystems with longer experience using bots e.g.
wikipedia rigid governance rules have been established .
wikipedia bots need to contain the string bot in their name have a discussion page that clearly describes what they do and can be turned off by any member of the community at any time.
in our research we investigate what problems developers face when using bots.
we explicitly study under which conditions developers trust bot generated contributions.an empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective esec fse november virtual event usa finally various projects have proposed devbots for a wide range of software engineering tasks.
examples include agile team management program repair software visualization source code refactoring or pull request management .
our work is orthogonal to these studies as we are not proposing any concrete new type of devbot.
instead the subject of our work is how developers define and perceive devbots in general.
study methodology to address our research questions we conduct a study based on techniques found in grounded theory gt namely coding memoing sorting constant comparison and theoretical saturation.
we cannot claim to use a complete gt method because we had wide exposure to literature prior to beginning our analysis such that some of our themes align with facets of existing taxonomies for bots in software development .
in order to strengthen our findings we follow the recommendations by bratthall and jorgensen and use a methodology that consists of two isolated steps of data collection and iterative phases of data analysis.
first we defined a set of open ended questions from our research questions and conducted qualitative semi structured interviews with participants.
second to further substantiate our findings we ran a quantitative web based survey and gathered responses from professional software developers and other it professionals.
interview guide survey materials and analysis scripts can be found in the replication package of the study .
the replication package does not contain interview transcripts to preserve participant privacy.
.
interviews we used our research questions to structure our interview guide.
when conducting the interviews we followed the flow of the interview and gave our participants some freedom when describing how they perceive and use devbots.
participants we sampled industry practitioners that at some point worked with tools that they self identified as devbots.
we began by inviting practitioners from our personal industry network who then referred us further to other potential participants.
then we used a saturation approach where we kept inviting new participants in parallel to data analysis while the data offered new information.
an overview of the participants is found in table .
most of our participants reported working in corporations of employees or more but even within this group there is a spectrum of companies spanning organisations between to employees.
further our interviewees span various domains and professional roles and reported on average years of professional experience.
protocol we conducted interviews over a period of three months.
each interview took between and minutes and was done either face to face or via video conference.
prior to each interview participants were asked for consent to record the interview and use their data in our study.
participants were offered the opportunity to opt out of the study at any point.
however none of the participants dropped from the study.table interview study participants id role company size experience years i1 software tester corporation .
i2 senior software developer corporation i3 data scientist corporation i4 senior developer corporation i5 senior developer corporation i6 security architect corporation i7 software engineer corporation i8 devops engineer corporation i9 lead data engineer corporation i10 product owner corporation i11 ceo founder startup i12 software developer single person i13 software engineer sme .
i14 software quality consultant sme i15 vp of engineering sme i16 software developer corporation i17 data science consultant corporation i18 devops engineer corporation i19 software engineer corporation i20 test automation engineer corporation i21 software engineering manager corporation analysis in parallel to data collection we performed open and axial coding based on the straussian variant of gt .
in open coding we fracture the data to find relevant excerpts.
in axial coding we aggregate and connect those excerpts into categories and themes until achieving saturation.
this also allows us to identify limitations of the interview guide such as missing relevant aspects that were not clear upon definition of the research question.
for instance during our first coding round we identified that many participants discussed the issue of trust in devbots even though we did not include an explicit question on the topic.
consequently we were able to update the interview guide to include one additional question about challenges with trust in devbots.
in order to triangulate results different pairs of authors performed open coding on the first interviews to check for consistency and agreement in our coding process.
a total of interviews were openly coded independently by two authors whereas the remaining interviews were open coded by only one author.
the second part the axial coding in which we identified themes memoed and performed card sorting was done by all authors together in different sessions lasting between hours each.
the resulting categories and findings are supported by statements from multiple participants.
.
survey in the second step of our study we designed a web based survey using typeform2 with questions in total.
after five questions collecting basic demographic information the main part of our survey consisted of two top level sections covering respectively the definition and usage of bots in software development.
we used the results from our interview study to devise the questions in each survey section.
participants we distributed the survey through our industry network as well as social media.
further we invited all interviewees to participate and distribute the survey further.
we received complete responses from which respondents indicated that they work as software developers as managers and november virtual event usa linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner table survey questions for the first block bot definitions .
id statement q1 a tool that reacts to code being pushed to a repository and triggers a build.
q2 same tool but also sends you a small report of the process as an email.
q3 same tool but now it also sends you a small report of the process via chat.
q4 a tool that fetches build results from elsewhere and posts a report via chat.
q5 a tool triggered by a new build and runs tests on it before deployment.
q6 same tool but now it also sends you a small report via chat.
e.g.
slack .
q7 same tool but instead of starting the tests directly it prompts you via chat what actions you want to trigger.
q8 a tool triggered by a new build and runs automated tests the tool decides which tests to run depending on e.g.
files changed or historic information.
q9 a tool that creates merge requests to bugs detected in the ci pipeline the content is based on a fixed set of known solutions and the history of accepted rejected requests it has previously created for that specific project.
q10 a tool that creates merge requests for bugs detected in the ci pipeline.
the bugfix is based on a machine learning algorithm which trains a model using data mined from different repositories.
q11 a tool that in itself is a deployed entity and runs tests on another deployed entity when triggered by an engineer.
q12 same tool but now it runs periodically without explicitly being triggered .
q13 a tool that performs static code analysis e.g.
code coverage analysis and posts results to a separate web page.
q14 same tool but now it comments the results directly to the merge request.
q15 a tool that fetches the result of the analysis executed by another tool and it comments the results directly to the merge request.
q16 a tool that fetches the result of the analysis done by another tool and send you a small report via chat.
a tool that helps to set up a computing environment e.g.
docker containers .
.
.
q17 .
.
.
by reading a specification file committed to your repository containing information regarding environment size of machines etc q18 .
.
.
via a chat you have to write the request in a specific syntax q19 .
.. via a chat where you can write your request in free form and the tool will merely ask for clarifications or additional information q20 .
.
.
via a cli q21 .
.
.
via voice commands q22 a tool that reacts to merge requests to a repository looks at the code and based on a number of parameters assigns suitable reviewers of that code.
q23 a tool that runs a test request load on your system initiated from a cli by an engineer q24 same tool but now it is initiated by the launch of a new version of one of the parts of your system a tool that iterates over the repositories of your version control system to find outdated dependencies .
.
.
q25 .
.
.
and sends you an email report when it finds one.
q26 .
.
.
and reports back via chat.
q27 .
.
.
and sends a merge request that updates this dependency.
q28 .
.
.
and creates a ticket for the issue in your ticket task bug reporting system.
q29 a tool that suggests improvements to code you are writing integrated into your ide.
q30 same tool but now it is integrated into your code review system.
q31 same tool but now it iterates over repositories in your version control system and adds suggestions as merge requests.
q32 a tool that while you re writing questions in a chat with someone else autonomously suggests links to other sites which it thinks contains useful information to your problem.
selected other roles e.g.
devops engineers product owners test engineers company executives or data scientists .
our respondents reported on average years of professional experience.
regarding their employing company respondents work in cooperations employees or more in small or medium sized enterprises smes only in startup companies and in a single person company.
the second section of the survey was only shown if the respondent indicated that they have experience using devbots which respondents confirmed.
our survey took a median of minutes to complete and we experienced a good completion rate of .protocol in the first section we briefly described variations of different systems through in a total of statements see table and asked the respondent to rate on a level likert scale whether they would consider a system with these properties a bot.
choices ranged from definitely not a bot over it s unclear from the description to definitely a bot .
the systems were designed based on the personas and characteristics we identified in the qualitative data collection round.
for the second section of the survey we provided statements related to potential advantages of using devbots and asked the respondents to again rate these advantages on a likert scale that ranged from disagree over unsure to agree .
analysis to analyse the first block of questions we mapped each described system to the three personas that emerged from interviews.
during analysis for each respondent we assigned points based on each answer.
for example we defined that q4 see table would constitute a bot for charlie but not for alex and sam.
if a respondent strongly agreed with this statement selected on the likert scale we would add two points to the charlie persona but subtract points for alex and sam.
we accumulated those scores for each respondent and normalised the resulting value to the interval by dividing it by the number of questions answered in total related to that persona.
answering it s unclear from the description or skipping a question entirely was not counted towards the total number of questions answered for this respondent.
we refer to the normalized values as persona association scores where a score 0would indicate no association with this persona while higher positive values represent an association of increasing strength.
further we analyse both survey sections using descriptive statistics and visually using diverging plots.
for a more detailed description of the scoring procedure please refer to the replication package.
results we now elaborate on the main outcomes of our study.
firstly we introduce alex sam and charlie in section .
followed by a discussion of devbot characteristics section .
benefits and use cases section .
and challenges associated with devbots section .
.
.
overview a key goal of our study was to systematically identify and categorise what qualities characteristics or properties turn a plain old development tool podt into a bot in the eyes of practitioners.
we find that there are fundamentally three different groups among our interviewees depending on how they define devbots for themselves.
we name and identify three personas i.e.
practitioner archetypes with different expectations and motivations .
first the chat bot persona charlie primarily equates bots to tools that communicate with the developer through a naturallanguage interface typically voice or chat while caring little about what tasks the bot is used for or how it actually implements these tasks.
virtually any podt can become a devbot for charlie if it exposes a natural language interface.
unlike the other personas for charlie the bot is normally only the interface to an existing system not the system itself.
a typical example of devbots for charlie are bots for chatops i.e.
bots that execute team or environment management tasks based on commands written in a platform suchan empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective esec fse november virtual event usa as slack.
one interviewee strongly associated with the charlie persona is i5 the fact that i chat with it makes me think more of it as a bot.
i5 second the autonomous bot persona alex defines bots primarily as tools that work on their own without requiring much input from a developer on a task that would normally be done by a human.
hence not every scheduled script execution is a devbot for alex but a script executing a development task such as closing bugs or welcoming newcomers to a project may be.
alex places particular emphasis on the highly independent nature of a bot once configured for a project a devbot can sense autonomously when its service is needed e.g.
by monitoring open bugs in an issue tracker .
many widely used github bots such as dependabot3 can be seen as illustrative examples for how alex thinks about devbots.
an example from our interviewee population is i4 the trigger shouldn t be a human taking initiative.
it should trigger on something something else than someone telling it to do so.
i4 third the smart bot persona sam distinguishes devbots from podts primarily through how smart technically sophisticated a tool is.
sam cares less about how the tool communicates but more about whether it is unusually good or adaptive at executing a task.
sam s view of devbots is in some ways similar to alex .
however while a relatively simple autonomous tool may be a devbot for alex sam expects more from a bot.
for sam a podt may for instance simply do predefined text replacements in a code base while a devbot understands the code syntax and is able to execute higher level tasks such as fixing bugs even on code that does not exactly follow a rigid predefined pattern.
for this persona bots are often strongly associated with machine learning and or advanced program analysis techniques.
i21 is an example interviewee they re sort of these agents that have triggered on some events that you may not even be aware of and they perform an interpretation of the world that you don t know the rules of and then they perform an action that you may notice.
i21 our survey data allows us to estimate how many respondents are associated with each persona see also section .
figure depicts the frequency of each persona in our survey data as defined through the highest persona association score obtained for each respondent.
two respondents had tied values for highest persona scores.
we then randomly assigned the corresponding respondent to one of their tied personas.
we classify respondents as belonging to no persona none if their score is negative for all personas.
moreover we distinguish between respondents that reported experience with using devbots and respondents that do not.
in total we classified respondents as predominantly alex as sam as charlie and respondents are not associated to any persona.
however there are evident differences between respondents that are or were in the past actively using devbots and those that do not.
among actual bot users charlies are a clear majority of or followed by alex or and sam or .
it is also interesting to observe that among actual bot users we found substantially more respondents not clearly associated to any persona.
one possible reason for this bot experience no bots used 30nonesamcharliealex nonesamcharliealex frequencymainpersonafigure frequency of survey respondents predominantly associated to alex charlie and sam.
phenomenon may be that most existing industrial strength devbots are chat bots or simple automation tools.
there are few if any off the shelf systems available that a sam could easily use our interviewees associated with sam exclusively work for larger corporations which have invested considerable resources to develop smart bots custom for their own development environments.
however this high level result masks that personas are not rigid either or categories and many respondents as well as many interviewees combine characteristics of multiple personas.
indeed we find that many respondents have association values .5for two separate personas.
in figure we show a density diagram of the persona association scores again split by whether respondents reported to actually use any devbots.
alex charlie sambot experience no bots used .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
scoresdensity figure density diagram of persona association scores for alex charlie and sam.
we observe that few respondents map rigidly into a specific persona.
instead most combine traits of multiple personas with association scores largely distributed between and with a slight trend towards positive values which may be due to self selectionesec fse november virtual event usa linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner bias of our study population .
scores in the alex persona are more neutral than for the other personas the majority of respondents has scores between .
and .
indicating no particularly strong opinion .
this may be because characteristics associated with alex are by and large rather uncontroversial.
we again observe noticeable differences between respondents that are actually using bots and those that do not bot users have higher charlie and lower sam scores and counter intuitively more negative scores indicating no strong association to any persona.
.
characteristics of devbots figure shows an overview of characteristics emerging from our interviews.
for all three personas a devbot is a tool that exhibits some human like traits and which automatically executes a task.
characteristics human like traits automation language intelligence adaptability autonomy identity figure characteristics of devbots.
what kind of tasks devbots are used for varies between fairly complex and technically involved operations e.g.
setting up test environments version updates and simply fetching information from one tool and displaying it in another.
however ultimately all interviewees and all personas agree that fundamentally a devbot carries out tasks that would otherwise be done by a human.
as i2 puts it it s sprung from something that we did manually previously and we have a bot do something that we could do ourselves.
i2 identity .
charlie alex and sam all see different human like traits as the main characteristics of devbots.
however they all agree that a quasi human identity e.g.
a human sounding name or cute profile picture are a common characteristic that distinguishes devbots from podts.
research has shown experimentally that bots with a human identity can evoke emotions in human users even if they are aware that they are interacting with a bot .
some interviewees have expressed that the bot identity is sometimes designed explicitly to evoke specific emotions or steer how the bot is perceived by developers .. you put an icon on it and some googly eyes .. that actually changes the dynamic of how people react to it.
i21 autonomy intelligence and adaptability .
for alex the central human like trait of a devbot is its autonomy.
in practice this autonomy can range from very simple e.g.
a bot that runs at predefined intervals to a complex system of triggers based onmonitoring data or external state.
for instance i4 indicates that an automation focused tool in addition needs to also exhibit some autonomy in its decision making to become a devbot if i have like a python script that checks my service and i run it once i wouldn t say that s a bot.
i4 for sam a combination of three different characteristics intelligence adaptability and autonomy appears to be crucial for a tool to be perceived as a devbot.
in terms of adaptability some interviewees have stated that what really distinguishes a devbot from a podt is the ability to learn and improve without explicit reconfiguration or retraining by a human they can also learn something from the interaction and then kind of improve themselves in a way.
i17 different devbots may adapt in different ways they may improve in their task better customise their service to specifics of the project or learn the preferences of different human developers.
however this characteristic appears to be underexplored at the time of study.
most bots currently in use do not actually implement any explicit feedback loops that would allow them to improve on their own.
in terms of intelligence our interviewees often struggled to express their views clearly as all participants were acutely aware that human level intelligence is out of reach of any current bot.
however responses indicated that interviewees thinking like sam expect a degree of smartness context awareness or fitness for a task from a devbot that goes beyond normal tools or typical alexstyle bots .
this focus on intelligence naturally links the idea of devbots to advances in artificial intelligence.
as i3 puts it i realise that there is no intelligence there s rules.
it s just that some systems have more rules than others.
i3 language .
for charlie an ability to produce or mimic understanding of spoken or typed natural language is key.
virtually any system can be perceived as a bot as long as it interfaces with human developers via a natural language interface .. if there is some kind of automated response in natural language .. regardless of if it s bidirectional i think that qualifies as a bot for me.
i13 such bots normally integrate with existing communication tools e.g.
slack and much of their perceived value lies in this tight integration with communication systems that human developers also use for status updates and synchronisation on work tasks.
however how exactly a tool surfaces information is not important for charlie as long as it does so via natural language.
survey results.
we now revisit which systems our respondents predominantly considered bots see also table .
figure shows a diverging plot of all questions ordered by agreeance across all respondents.
eight of the systems were specifically designed notto describe bots as they lack all of the characteristics that emerged from the interviews.
indeed these were the lowest ranked all ending up with of the participants selecting one of the negative options or in our likert scale .
next comes a group of systems where of respondents selected one of the negative options but selected one of the positive options.
these systems includean empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective esec fse november virtual event usa q1q2q3q4 q5q6q7 q8q9q10 q11q12 q13q14q15q16 q17q18q19 q20q21 q22 q23q24q25q26q27 q28 q29q30q31q32 percentage response 5is the following tool a bot?
figure diverging plot for all questions related to bot definitions.
refer to table for the mapping of identifiers to actual questions.
several alex and sam style devbots which can be interpreted either as a devbot or as a part of existing standard tools e.g.
code review ci cd pipeline or ide .
finally in the top section we find the group of tools where more than selected one of the positive values or .
here we find all the tools communicating via chat no matter how one directional the conversation is.
we also find the sam and alex style devbots that produce non trivial code snippets or analysis.
interestingly we observe that the same tool may be perceived more bot like if it is standalone than if it is integrated into an existing system e.g.
compare q29 and q31 .
another interesting takeaway is that a tool that merely integrates result from other tools in a chat or as comments on merge requests is considered more botlike than if the producing tool itself communicates.
see for instance q3 versus q4 or q14 versus q15 .
however in general it is important to keep in mind that the personas of our respondents influences this analysis and of total respondents were classified as predominantly associated to charlie.
hence it is unsurprising that systems that mention communication via chat are ranked high in figure e.g.
q19 q7 q32 .
.
potential benefits and bot use cases as discussed in section .
devbots generally work on tasks that would otherwise have to be done by humans.
this can be for one of two reasons either to improve productivity all personas or because using the bot in some way improves the quality of the work or enables use cases for which humans are not realistically suitable alex and sam .
an overview of types of potential devbot benefits is given in figure .
benefitproductivity information gathering improvements beyond human handling tasks at scaleimprove quality24 7automation of tedious tasks integrate existing informationfind new information figure potential benefits of devbots productivity .
in terms of productivity devbot usage is frequently motivated by a need for developers to spend less time on activities that could be automated.
while all personas agree that improving productivity in an abstract sense is a main driver to adopt devbots how a bot helps with productivity is seen differently.
in our interviews this emerged as two main branches automation of tedious tasks and information gathering.
for alex the productivity gains lie mostly in the automation of simple but time consuming annoying or otherwise tedious tasks.
however even for alex devbots may sometimes help to integrate existing information hence alleviating a developer from having to collect the data themselves so before that .. we could see manually if the coverage is dropped.
.. this cool bot is able to integrate well into the process.
so i like that i don t have to go to a different websites i13 for charlie information gathering both integrating existing information or generating information that would otherwise be hard to acquire is the main productivity gain associated with devbots.
they collect information from heterogeneous systems under a common umbrella often a team chat where it can be acted upon instead of having to log to the original systems.
for example in chatops an on call engineer can be more productive when all required troubleshooting information is available directly through a bot.
notably for i18 this has the advantage of circumventing company firewalls allowing them to act quicker when out of office if something happened if i am for example in the cinema or on the road i don t have my vpn ready so i can t do the query myself or see the dashboard.
everything is locked behind the firewalls let s say.
and i can use such a bot to get a screen shot get some data out of there so i can triage the incident faster.
i18 similar to alex charlie may also use devbots for the automation of tedious tasks such as setting up build environments and other scaffolding.
for example i8 has a devbot for managing their production infrastructure.esec fse november virtual event usa linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner developers thinking like sam also care about productivity.
however for them devbots are less about automating tedious tasks or simple information integration this is the realm of podts for sam .
instead they improve productivity by looking into the vast amount of data modern systems generates and gaining new insights or finding patterns that humans might overlook.
as i21 puts it .. discovery of information that is there but humans may not notice or may have a harder time getting to it.
i21 improvements beyond human .
for sam and alex there are often other benefits orthogonal to productivity.
for them devbots may actually do some tasks better than humans.
three classes of such advantages emerged from our interviews.
for alex this includes handling tasks i.e.
at any time and without requiring lead time as well as handling tasks at scale i.e.
acting upon a high volume of tasks quickly .
for both sam and alex a third class of benefits is improving quality.
using devbots may increase consistency and eliminate human error as bots can reliably solve the same tasks in the same manner without being subject to differences in coding style taste or developer qualification.
in our study this surfaced in various ways from relieving developers from having to care about code formatting i19 to skipping training on company conventions i21 you know at some point not everybody would be exactly familiar with all the ways to do work.
so you want to introduce some level of consistency so that people don t have to think about it and get through training every three months.
i21 more broadly we have observed that for alex and charlie devbots are often supporting tools they are useful but not necessarily crucial for the development process.
for sam on the other hand the gains from using devbots can be dramatic with bot adoption transforming how software is being built i think our ecosystem has evolved to the point where they are pretty integral.
i7 survey results.
in the survey we explicitly asked how important the respondents rated ten reasons for devbot usage that emerged from our interviews.
figure depicts the answers as a diverging plot.
the icon indicates what type of benefit see figure the specific statement corresponds to.
note that this question was only presented to respondents who indicated that they are or have been actively using devbots in the past.
of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that a reason to use devbots is to be quickly aware of problems problem notifications followed by a desire to automate tedious tasks reduce boring tasks .
in turn agree to use devbots to monitor the up status of services health monitoring and to have all information in one place information integration whereas are interested in monitoring specifically code integrations integration quality .
for the remaining five reasons less than half the survey population has agreed that they are a reason to use devbots.
these are using devbots as a common gateway for all system information common information gateway to collect and analyse large chunks of data analyse big data chatops to maintain their software dependencies and to automatically clean up system resources such as unused cloud instances automatic resource cleanup .
reduce bo ring t asks information integr ation health monito ring integration quality common inf ormation gate way chatops automatic resource clea nupanalyse big dataprob lem notifications maintain dependencies percentage response 5reasons to use a botfigure diverging plot of the perceived importance of different devbot use cases.
.
challenges given that sam alex and charlie have fairly different views on what a devbot is their challenges in devbot usage also differ.
we group the challenges that emerged from our interviews in four groups interruption and noise trust usability and others.
interruption and noise .
a potential problem pertaining devbots for all personas is the trade off between timely notifications or requests for feedback on the one hand and frequent interruptions or simply producing too much information on the other.
for charlie who often uses bots as means of information integration this often manifests as devbots creating noise in human communication channels e.g.
overloading slack channels with information or just posting so frequently that human developers stop paying attention.
this can be alleviated through a bot design or configuration that is mindful of whom to notify of which events because the slack bot for example is just posting messages into a general group where many of us are subscribers.
so everyone gets all the notifications and probably most of us are only interested in a few.
i14 for alex noise manifests similarly for instance through github bots posting too many messages in code review systems.
oftentimes the problem is not one particular bot that is too verbose but rather that too many bots are simultaneously active and posting status updates.
however for sam devbots often interact more proactively and directly with the developer.
such systems need to carefully evaluate how often and when they should interrupt the developer with suggestions or requests for further input.
a good bot waits until a developer is ready for feedback.
i7 has indicated that for this reason a bot that interfaces with the code review system is preferrable to one that integrates into the ide once i get to a point where i m code review .. at that point i m much more happy to have a proactive tool come and edit my code for me.
i7an empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective esec fse november virtual event usa trust .
for both alex and sam trusting the devbot to act appropriately can be an issue.
most interviewees are not troubled trusting a bot to correctly execute very simple and well defined tasks such as restarting a server or re running a test.
however alex typically is sceptical regarding devbots that actively modify code or execute other operations that require significant understanding of the system or environment.
for sam trust is a complex issue with multiple trade offs.
on the one hand the very definition of what a devbot is for sam requires bots to come up with unanticipated solutions to non trivial problems and implement them with wide ranging autonomy.
on the other hand sam is also aware that even small problems can cause developers to lose trust in their devbots.
a key solution to these issues is the existence of a reliable test infrastructure.
as i6 puts it if you have good tests there is no reason not to allow a devbot to for instance modify source code i think if you start using bots to automate tasks in your project it s very dependent that you have a lot of tests.
so if the projects are fully tested .. i would trust them to do most things i6 however even if problems can be detected timely devbots producing too many broken builds failed deployments or irrelevant warnings will fall out of use quickly.
i7 emphasises the need for devbots to be aware of their own limitations and only act if they are sure that the proposed action is correct.
otherwise it is ultimately better to alert the developers of the problem than to enact a solution that may turn out to be broken .. we don t have false positives but we can put up with some false negatives because we can identify those cases and fix them by hand.
i7 this is true even for our interviewees using devbots for infrastructure monitoring.
bots producing an excessive amount of false positives i.e.
monitoring alerts that do not relate to actual problems are perceived as less useful than more conservative ones even at the cost of occassional false negatives missed alerts .
another approach that emerged from our interviews is to conduct a risk assessment and to set a threshold for how high risk tasks an automated tool is allowed to handle .. model some kind of impact severity or risk of operation that the software can evaluate itself .. if i can set some thresholds on some critical conditions then i m fine with it without interaction.
i12 interestingly a side effect of environments with mature and trustworthy devbots appears to be that bots can become an implicit authority in the tasks that they handle.
i7 has reported that one challenge for their team is that human developers are not sufficiently questioning the actions of devbots anymore but simply assume that the bot s way of solving an issue is what s best.
this is often unwanted if an automated process is reliable enough that it requires no human oversight it would be implemented directly in the infrastructure or toolchain.
if automation is implemented as a devbot the assumption is that there are corner cases where the devbot solution will break or be suboptimal and which require the oversight of a human developer the reason we put them in bots because you want people to think about the result and decide whether they should apply or not.
it s been interesting to me to observe how often people don t actually do that.
they just assume what the bot says must be correct and move on.
i7usability .
charlie wants to interact with bots through a natural language interface.
however the more sophisticated the language parsing of the bot becomes the more conversations are perceived as natural but the less obvious it is to see what actions will be the outcome of any particular conversation leading to usability problems it was very difficult for you from the outside to understand why it showed one particular matching instead of another.
i5 one simple fix for this problem that is already widely adopted by bot makers is to have the devbot ask for confirmation before starting to work on a task i would often want the bot to repeat back to me what it has understood in terms of instructions given that there is risk for misunderstanding.
i5 some bots alleviate this problem by relying on a simplistic natural language syntax and require typing or voicing exact sentences rather than parsing intents.
however in this case the developer has to remember what exactly to say or type to trigger which functionality not unlike remembering shell commands.
such bots are perceived as less powerful less useful or are sometimes not considered bots at all.
other challenges.
other challenges when using devbots are more specific to individual types of bots or usage scenarios.
i10 sees a challenge in explaining to non technical stakeholders what a bot actually does.
some interviewees which operate a large number of devbots see the problem that bots start interfering with each other s goals.
for instance i21 reported an example where the team used a bot that opened work items for upcoming tasks and another bot that quickly closed the same work items because it was seeing too little activity on them.
so there is a problem of having many bots they interact with each other.
i21 finally it is interesting to observe that none of our interviewees has expressed fear to be replaced or made redundant because of current or future devbots.
so far developers struggle to imagine a world where software development is not predominantly a human activity in which bots even smart charlie style bots only play a supporting role.
discussion we now elaborate on the broader implications and lessons learned of our research for practitioners and software engineering researchers.
what is a devbot really?
the core question our research attempts to answer is what a devbot actually is.
this question is crucial for the budding field of bot based software engineering as a meaningful scientific discussion relies on a shared definition of the subject of study.
figure depicts in slightly simplified fashion a flow diagram that has emerged from our interviews.
this model can be used to decide on a high level whether a given tool is likely to be considered a bot and for which persona.
implications for researchers.
future empirical work on botbased software engineering can use our results to contextualise what types of devbots their work actually targets.
this would improve clarity and manage expectations.
for example within ouresec fse november virtual event usa linda erlenhov francisco gomes de oliveira neto and philipp leitner charlie sam alexnot a bot text output in team communication channels?produces nontrivial code snippets or analyses?integrated into existing systems?action is initiated by a human?chat or voice?
yesyes yesyes no no nono yesno figure simplified model to classify devbots.
framework the study of wessel et al.
reports on the prevalence of alex style bots in open source systems making clear that their main focus is on relatively simple autonomous tools rather than chat bots or machine learning based tools .
although not the core of this work our results can also be used to provide more objective inclusion criteria for future empirical studies i.e.
our results make it easier to objectively answer the question whether a given tool should be considered a bot in the context of a given study.
our results related to perceived benefits and challenges can also be used to direct future research that aims at the development of new types of devbots e.g.
future work similar to matthies et al.
to the areas that will actually benefit developers most as well as help with the evaluation of new devbots.
for example our results show that a very small amount of false positives is crucial to the practical adoption of sam style devbots indicating that this is an area that future studies should be focusing on.
implications for practitioners and bot builders.
when conducting interviews we have observed that confusion related to what really defines devbots is not unique to the academic community.
we have seen the same questions raised by practitioners and multiple participants have expressed that our interviews have challenged their own understanding of the domain.
hence our framework can also be useful to practitioners.
further we have observed that both charlie and alex style devbots are already widely available as off the shelf systems allowing developers to quickly adopt e.g.
mature chatops or ci bots.
however there appear to be very few or none general purpose sam style bots available to choose from.
our interviewees associated with sam exclusively worked for large software intensive corporations which invested substantial development effort into building and maintaining bespoke bot infrastructures.
this is also consistent with the results presented in figure which showed that most survey respondents associated with the sam persona are not currently using any bots.
however we have also seen that the gains from adopting samstyle devbots can be dramatic our interviewees have reported that adopting these bots has transformative effects that go beyond simply automating tedious tasks.
hence we see an opportunity for smart bots that are not custom built for a specific project or corporation to bring at least some of these benefits to the wider developer community.
however our results also show that thesetools need to be carefully designed to see practical adoption e.g.
related to trust usability or at which point in the development process they surface their work .
threats to validity designing our research as a mixed method study allowed us to triangulate the results obtained through interviews with quantitative survey data.
however a number of limitations remain.
in terms of external validity we cannot claim that our study population for both methods is representative of software engineers in general as both populations have been sampled through our personal network convenience sampling .
to mitigate this threat we selected interview participants to cover companies of different sizes and in different domains.
however given our sampling method a majority of interviewees are working in the same broad geographical region.
for the survey we did not collect detailed company or geographical information to prevent de anonymising some participants.
however we have to again assume that the respondent population is relatively homogeneous in terms of geographical distribution.
further a voluntary survey design is always susceptible to self selection bias respondents uninterested in using bots for software development are unlikely to participate in our study.
this may also explain why we have received relatively few responses not strongly associated to any of our personas see section .
.
in terms of internal validity a threat is that we were through our previous interest in the field pre exposed to existing research e.g.
existing bot taxonomies which may have biased our interview design.
hence as contruction validity threat we may have missed potential characteristics or worse entire personas because they have not been featured prominently in previous research.
however given that most of our survey respondents mapped well into the three personas identified in this work we judge this threat to be low.
nonetheless given our study design we cannot claim that the identified list of personas characteristics benefits and challenges is necessarily complete.
finally we have observed that participants tended to become more conservative in their ratings while progressing through the questionnaire.
this threat could have been mitigated by randomising the order of question blocks.
unfortunately our survey tool did not support this feature.
conclusions this paper investigates the characteristics benefits and challenges that define a bot in software development devbots .
our analysis shows that no single definition fits all practitioners.
instead we identify three different personas each associating distinct characteristics with the term bot .
the chat bot persona charlie mostly sees devbots as information integration tools with a natural language interface while for the autonomous bot persona alex a devbot is a tool that autonomously handles repetitive tasks.
lastly for the smart bot persona sam the defining feature of bots is its degree of smartness .
the personas also associate different benefits and challenges with devbot usage.
notably charlie uses bots primarily to have access to all information in one place but struggles with usability.
for alex and sam devbots are used to improve productivity by automating tasks simple in the case of alex more sophisticated for sam but trusting those bots to trigger correctan empirical study of bots in software development characteristics and challenges from a practitioner s perspective esec fse november virtual event usa actions can be a challenge.
in turn all personas to some extent struggle with interruptions or noise produced by bots.
finally we have observed that there are currently few if any general purpose sam style devbots available.
we consider this problematic as these more sophisticated devbots also promise higher gains than the currently prevalent alex or charlie style bots.
our contributions include a framework to define and describe existing and future devbots.
this framework supports future research and applications in the field by allowing researchers or practitioners to target specific types of bots or meet the persona s corresponding expectation.
as future research we aim to further investigate the boundaries and relationships between personas in order to identify delineating factors that can refine our framework and reveal insights about creating and adopting bots in software engineering.