exploring the evolution of software practices yvonne dittrich it university of copenhagen copenhagen denmark ydi itu.dkchristian bo michelsen it university of copenhagen copenhagen denmark chmi itu.dkpaolo tell it university of copenhagen copenhagen denmark pate itu.dk pernille lous it university of copenhagen copenhagen denmark pelo itu.dkallan ebdrup copenhagen denmark allan .dk abstract when software products and services are developed and maintained over longer time software engineering practices tend to drift away from both structured and agile methods.
nonetheless in many cases the evolving practices are far from ad hoc or chaotic.
how are the teams involved able to coordinate their joint development?
this article reports on an ethnographic study of a small team at a successful provider of software as a service.
what struck us was the very explicit way in which the team adopted and adapted their practices to fit the needs of the evolving development.
the discussion relates the findings to the concepts of social practices and methods in software engineering and explores the differences between degraded behavior and the coordinated evolution of development practices.
the analysis helps to better understand how software engineering practices evolve and thus provides a starting point for rethinking software engineering methods and their relation to software engineering practice.
ccs concepts software and its engineering agile software development programming teams human centered computing computer supported cooperative work .
keywords software processes agile software development cooperative and human aspects of software engineering empirical software engineering acm reference format yvonne dittrich christian bo michelsen paolo tell pernille lous and allan ebdrup.
.
exploring the evolution of software practices.
in proceedings of the 28th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november virtual event usa association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
introduction when software products and services are developed and maintained over longer time software engineering practices tend to drift away from both structured and agile methods.
lous et al.
analyzed software development practices that have evolved over time to address the challenges of continuous software engineering and distributed development .
a survey based investigation into industrial software development reveals the widespread use of hybrid develoipment methods .
in many cases the reported software development practices are far from ad hoc or chaotic.
though there have been a number of empirical studies that document that companies use or do not use particular methods see as examples so far there has been no research into how these situated development practices come about or whether an observed practice is the result of careful development or an accidental deterioration.
the research questions the article addresses thus are how can the evolution of software development practices be investigated?
what distinguishes a software process that has degenerated from one that has evolved as the result of conscious deliberation?
we had the possibility to study a distributed software engineering team developing business software as a service.
the development practices did not resemble any method but both successfully delivered software and was satisfying for the team members.
we decided on an ethnographic study as our research method as we were interested in understanding the team s continuous software development practices from a members point of view.
as the method section below details the early part of the fieldwork indicated that one important aspect of the success and high satisfaction was that the team continuously developed and groomed the way they developed software.
in the field work we were able to follow the evolution of the teams way to implement stand up meetings as a concrete example.
in the thematic analysis section .
we refer to a number of practices that were evolved by the team prior to our study.
the focus on the evolution of the stand up meetings allowed us to follow the evolution of a specific practice life and to unfold a related set of practices of changing practices .
the analysis identifies the implementation of bottom up situated software process improvement as established practices that is based on joint reflection and experimentation as core ingredients.
this in turn requires the team to demonstrate responsibility and self organization.
esec fse november virtual event usa dittrich michelsen tell lous ebdrup the concept of software development practices is at the center of our empirical research.
to clarify this core concept we reference social theory to develop the concepts of social practices meta work and articulation work as theoretical underpinnings.
section .
develops the conceptual framework we apply.
the article s contribution is a theoretical one based on empirical research see also .
we show how concepts derived from social theory allow an understanding of specific observations.
the observations illustrate the theoretical concepts and thereby demonstrate their value.
further the theoretical concepts allow us to identify aspects of our observations that might be transferable to other contexts.
with this contribution we address herbsleb s request for theoretical foundations for research of cooperative aspects of software engineering .
to motivate the related work and the theoretical underpinnings the next section introduces the company we studied and highlight some of the observations that determined this article s focus.
it introduces the company s daily stand up meetings and their evolution over time as the main example.
section introduces the related work on the relationship between methods and practice in software engineering and develops the theoretical underpinning.
then we present the research method.
section presents the analysis which is then discussed in section .
in the conclusion we summarize our findings and argue for the further development of a practice theory for software engineering to better understand how methods and practice relate.
software development at db db is a danish sme that develops invoicing software for web applications and native mobile applications.
db s journey started in with a reorganization of the mother company.
in the current company was founded to focus solely on the current software product provided as a service.
by the time we ended the study db had employees of which were software developers.
the team is internationally distributed with two main offices in denmark and ukraine and two additional developers working from home.
at the time of our research db had developed a company specific practice of continuous software engineering based on a stable deployment pipeline.
the team was tightly integrated by means of a set of shared practices and a tailored set of communication channels.
this article focuses on how the developers evolve their practices and uses the stand up meeting as its example.
as the team continuously experiments with and improves its practices any description of a practice is only a snapshot.
this becomes evident when looking at the history of the stand up meeting.
for the stand up meeting the entire development team joins a slack conference call at .
mondays through thursdays each week and opens a shared slide set on google drive.
the slide set includes standard information pulled by a robot information about tasks and availability from the calendar information about merge issues from the continuous integration server bug reports that the product owner po highlights as urgent and information about production site errors.
this standard set of slides is followed one slide for each team member to share information about current tasks.
under the heading anything to add team members may add slides to raise topics they deem important to discuss with the team.when we began our research the stand up meeting format had mid 2014experimentation autogenerated slide deckmid 2015error logs and ci statusend backlog items prioritized by pomid 2016calendar databeg.
sub team slidesmid sub team weekly standups figure timeline over changes to stand up meeting format.
evolved from a series of experiments in when the previous format was considered boring and ineffective.
see figure for a rough overview.
the developers then paired up and each pair experimented with the stand up format for one week.
the task was to find out how you would like to hold the stand up meeting.
it just must not be longer than min everybody must participate and it must be fun.
these experiments went on for six or seven weeks.
the decision was made to keep the simplest format and to move the meeting to an audio channel with google slides instead of using a screen sharing functionality that was considered time consuming to set up.
the empty slide deck was created through a customwritten scheduled service called stand up as a service .
slowly other bits and pieces were added mid the cto extended the slide deck and the script to present the error log and the build status from the continuous integration system to address a recurring frustration.
someone gets the crummy job to tell people now you shall take this bug.
and that is a lousy thing to be left with.
for a long time it was me and one of the others who was concerned that the built should not be red who pinged people.
and that is really annoying.
over time the team adjusted the script so that only errors that appeared with a certain frequency were included.
by the end of the presentation of urgent back up items was introduced based on the po s initiative.
the last major change before our field work started was the introduction of a slide that presented data from pulled individual calendars regarding absences and team meetings to provide orientation for the team members.
when we were our research db s team had started to work as several sub teams for example one group focused on developing a mobile client.
the teams developed additional coordination practices.
one of the sub teams decided for example to have additional sub team stand up meetings.
this did not go unrecognized and resulted in a discussion of the stand up meeting in the retrospective that provides the core of our analysis.
related work the related work relevant to this article brings together two separate scientific discourses.
subsection .
presents the literature on the relationship of methods to software development practice.
subsection .
provides the theoretical underpinning necessary for a deeper understanding of our observations.
it introduces a set of concepts from social theory and relates it to empirical research on software engineering.
494exploring the evolution of software practices esec fse november virtual event usa .
methods in software engineering though methods are at the core of software engineering the role of methods in relation to what actually goes on in day to day development practices has been contested from the very beginning.
whereas osterweil s well known article software processes are software too already argued for the expression of software development methods as programs in order to automate the software development as much as possible in programming as theory building naur argues that methods understood as sets of work rules for programmers telling what kind of things the programmers should do in what order which notations and languages to use and what kinds of documents to produce in various stages are incompatible with the theory building view of programming which emphasises the development of an understanding of the problem and a piece of software to address it.
though osterweil s view has influenced software engineering research and practices for example as the widely applied cmm i and similar frameworks it is continuously contested for example the agile manifesto proposes valuing individuals and interaction over processes and tools .
similarly naur s article resonates well with software engineers however the same developers welcome and happily explore new methods.
though quite a few articles show how for good reasons methods are adapted to a specific context rather than going by the book see as examples the relationship between methods as descriptions and the practices that they are meant to inform and improve is by and large unresearched.
mathiassen et al.
observe that experienced practitioners do not refer to the method descriptions on a daily basis they do not follow the methods very closely but competently select and implement relevant elements.
fitzgerald argues for distinguishing formalized methods andmethods in action where the method in action describes the structured way in which development that takes place in practice.
t is suggested that methodologies are never applied exactly as originally intended.
different developers will not interpret and apply the same methodology in the same way nor will the same developer apply the same methodology in the same way in different development situations.
therefore on any development project the methodology in action is uniquely enacted orinstantiated by the developers .
methods are adapted and tailored to address a specific development challenge .
as floyd states we do not apply predefined methods but construct them to suit the situation at hand.
what we are ultimately in the course of design is developing our own methods .
such method adaptation and design practices have also been observed.
for example sigfridsson reports on how the pypy community adjusts its sprints to take care of new developers joining the community .
giuffrida and dittrich show how successful distributed student teams deploy an unstructured social software channel to adjust their processes .
this is also supported by the results of a recently published survey that indicates a loose correlation between the methods or development models that are officially used and what is implemented in software development practices .
both traditional and agile development include elements of reflection and learning including project postmortems and retrospectives.
principle of the agile manifesto explicitly stipulates that at regular intervals the team reflects on how to become more effective then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly .
however there is surprisingly little research on what takes place during such meetings and why and how the teams practices are adapted as a result.
in a grounded theory study andriyani et al.
present a categorisation of what is discussed in retrospectives .
others propose the use of these reflective meetings for software process improvement or propose formats to improve their effectiveness .
in our study we not only report what is discussed in retrospectives but we show how retrospectives and related practices are used by db s team to continuously improve their practices.
.
practice theory for software engineering whereas the notion of methods is well established in software engineering in most cases the term practice used in its colloquial sense.
however practice is a core concept of social theory.
to discuss the relationship between methods and software practices we draw on the theoretical framework based on social theory developed in what does it mean to use a method?
towards a practice theory for software engineering .
in this article dittrich argues that the problematic relationship between methods and practices might be due to our lack of understanding of software engineering practices as social practices.
she suggests adopting concepts from the philosophy of sociology that have proven successful helping to understand computer supported cooperative work and that are based on wittgenstein s philosophical investigations .
here we summarize the parts of her argumentation that we use in our analysis and discussion of the data.
in the pragmatic tradition social practices are seen as constitutive for understanding the development tradition and evolution of language societal norms and technology .
on the one hand these social structures are established and re produced through the way in which they are referenced in the everyday activity of the community of practice in which they are rooted on the other hand they provide affordances for the constitutive practices as they render certain ways of expressing oneself and certain ways of acting meaningful and understandable to the others.
wittgenstein uses chess pieces as an example.
the meaning of the king or the queen in a chess game depends on the way we play chess .
though the rules may be explicated the meaning of rules and especially what it means to follow them is again rooted in a practice.
schatzki further explores the concept of social practices and defines them as a nexus of and sayings linked by a common goals b explicit rules and instructions and c a shared understanding of how different means are employed for a common end .
similarly common practices render tools props and environments that support the practices meaningful.
using the foregoing definition db s stand up meetings may be described as a practice a the purpose of the stand up meeting is to coordinate the joint work and to share knowledge about current tasks to this end b an explicit rule is that the first slides to be discussed address issues from the continuous integration ci the production site and urgent bugs and thereafter each team member shares what is deemed necessary c the team members 495esec fse november virtual event usa dittrich michelsen tell lous ebdrup share an understanding for example of what is important and why or when in a meeting to raise what kinds of concerns.
as one of the developers states we have never done it where you have to say something.
you say something if you have something to say.
people are capable of figuring that out themselves.
some of the explicit rules such as discussing ci live site issues and urgent bugs first are enforced by the software robot that collects data from various systems to create the first slides for the meeting.
knorr cetina argues that schatzki s framework needs to be further developed for it to explain the dynamics of the design practices she observed when researching the development of a particle accelerator the goal of such objectual practices is not fully stated when the project starts but unfolds throughout the design and construction processes.
with the common object of design the design and development practices must also evolve and unfold.
we suggest that software development needs to be understood as such a set of design and development practices which need to evolve along with the software being developed.
how does this unfolding and evolution of the shared practices occur?
to describe processes such evolution and unfolding of practices sociology developed the concepts of articulation work and meta work .
based on empirical work in a hospital strauss uses the term articulation work to describe how different actors at a hospital coordinate a tight mesh of heterogeneous activities and the standardization of cooperative procedures they built on.
gerson distinguishes between situated articulation that is the coordination of tasks as part of their implementation and metawork which he uses to describe the planning and standardization of cooperative procedures.
in the analysis below we show how db maintained and evolved their common practices.
we especially show that the team developed a practice of changing practices a practice of changing practices .
research approach and methods our research focuses on the evolution of the continuous software engineering practices at db and the rationale behind both the evolution and the current state of the development practices from the members points of view.
therefore this study uses an ethnographic approach .
as the development team continuously deployed its software participation in its development was not an option.
the contact with db started when the senior researchers met the cto at a meet up and a practitioner conference on configuration management.
two of the authors spent a substantial amount of time on the premises in order to observe the everyday detail of the development practices.
the rich description in section the observation used as an illustration in section .
and the description in the analysis are parts of the detailed and rich descriptions necessary for the trustworthiness of ethnographic research.
below we further detail the data collection and the analysis of the field material and we discuss the trustworthiness of the research.
.
fieldwork and data collection the empirical research that is the basis for this article took place over three months.
during the initial interviews and observations it became very evident that the way software is developed at db isnot static.
instead part of its specificity and capacity to sustain distributed high quality software development with high developer satisfaction is due to the continuous care for and adaptation of their practices.
the cto and the developers at db emphasized the company s pragmatic culture and the continuous grooming of their practice.
this prompted an interest in understanding how db s very specific way of developing software is continuously evolved by the team and the cto.
the initial field work suggested that the retrospectives and the three weekly one on one meetings between developers and the cto were at the core of this continuous situated improvement.
the focus on improving the stand up meeting emerged as criticism of the current state of the daily stand up and its adaptation was the subject of the first retrospective we observed.
these two foci evolving the development practices and stand up meetings as an example then helped to establish the scope for the later fieldwork.
the theoretical underpinning section .
was selected after the study s focus was chosen and once selected informed the scoping and the further fieldwork.
table presents the context according to .
table characterization of the empirical context.
attribute value year empirical focus empirically based empirical background industry industry sector accounting subject of investigation situated software process improvement study results theoretical conceptualisation empirical research method ethnography interaction analysis source of empirical evidence observ.
interview location distributed team size developers po cto the field work was part of a m. sc.
thesis .
the researcher the fieldwork collaborated closely with the main author of .
the fieldwork took place in the danish office.
the field workers took part in the virtual meetings with all developer present and interviewed developers situated in the two main sites.
the developer initiating the change in the stand up meeting format was working from kiev whereas the cto and a second developer who was interviewed worked from denmark.
table presents a list of the empirical data collected.
the observations were partly full day observations partly they focused on stand ups and retrospectives.
during observation detailed notes were taken using a computer based observation scheme that made it possible to quickly note who and what was being observed where when how and why .
pictures and screen dumps were taken which illustrated the special context and interactions and samples of relevant documents were collected.
the meetings were recorded.
we triangulated non participatory observation with semi structured and informal interviews.
semi structured interviews of the cto took place before the fieldwork started after month of field work and in the end.
interview guides were developed for the semi structured interviews prior to undertaking them.
the first interview focused on getting an overview over the company the development organisation and the coordination and 496exploring the evolution of software practices esec fse november virtual event usa communication between the different sites.
the second interview focused on the distributed development and on the tooling.
the 3rd interview focused on the history of the continuous development practices and was designed to fill the gaps in the understanding of the continuous development process.
informal interviews were used to develop an understanding of the context of the observations after the observation of the adaptation of stand up meeting format the developer initiating the discussion at the retrospective and the cto were interviewed regarding their perspective adaptation of the stand up meetings.
an interview with a developer who was part of the retrospectives but did not initiate the change developed into a more broad discussion of the evolution of the development at db and his prior experiences with a more rigor implementation of scrum.
table fieldwork method date s documentation open non particip.
observation 30th jan 15th feb 1st mar 3rd mar 22nd mar 23rd mar 28th mar 31st mar 4th apr 2017systematic field notes semi struct.
interview cto 16th nov 1st mar 21st apr 2017transcript non particip.
observation of retrospective3rd mar 31st mar 2017field notes transcript unstruct.
interview developer formalized methods22nd mar transcript unstruct.
interview cto improvement of stand up23rd mar transcript unstruct.
interview developer improvement of stand up31st mar transcript discussion of prel.
results cto 21st apr transcript .
data analysis the reflection connected with the beginning of the analysis influenced the subsequent field work.
for example we planned an interview with one of the developers participating in the first retrospective which in turn informed an interview with the cto.
owing to these characteristics of qualitative research robson also refers to qualitative research designs as flexible research designs .
as the first step of our analysis the observation schemata were developed into field notes that presented the observations in a textual form that was supplemented by personal reflections emerging questions and plans for future actions.
audio recordings of recorded meetings semi structured and informal interviews were transcribed.
the interview transcripts and the field notes were coded in order to identify themes that categorized the content of the material parallel to or shortly after its collection.
in the second round of analysis a set of codes was developed mirroring thestudy s evolving focus the improvement of software development practices and the focus on stand up meetings.
these codes were further influenced by the theoretical underpinning chosen at that time and their purpose was to help to understand the rationales of the practices and their evolution.
the first set of thematic codes comprised ten themes experimentation as a driver for progress continuous reflection practicing what makes sense trust drives the capabilities to be playful and creative working distributed colocated using one on ones as a proactive tool to make developers more pragmatic showing interest and supporting rather than controlling and regulating decision making is a shared responsibility rejecting formalized methods and methodologies and fighting status quo.
these themes were used in the discussion of preliminary results with the cto.
in this discussion e.g.
the importance of the oneon one meetings between cto and the developers was put into perspective and finally collapsed with continuous reflection into facilitating for reflection .
likewise working distributed co located was dropped it was a condition to make a continuous evolution of distributed software practices work but did not contribute to how the evolution came about.
the result of the thematic analysis is presented in section .
section .
uses an interaction analysis approach to relevant parts of two retrospectives.
in this approach a very detailed transcription of a conversation or discussion is analysed turn by turn to understand not only what the participants talk about but also how they through their interaction e.g.
come to decisions and what other resources they refer to when so.
for the article the first author revisited the analysis and checked and refined the transcription of the retrospective.
for the timeline in figure an additional interview was performed.
.
trustworthiness threats to the validity of qualitative research are mainly addressed through the research design.
to ensure the trustworthiness of our research we triangulated our observations with interviews and document analysis the fieldwork took place over an extended period which allowed us to check both intermediary findings and the final results with the members of the team we observed the collaboration among the field workers and the discussions in the research team acted as debriefing.
the use of theory further supported the evolving analysis and field work.
finally detailed descriptions are provided allowing the reader to criticize the analysis.
below these measures are further detailed.
.
.
triangulation.
data triangulation.
observations were triangulated with both semi structured and informal interviews.
where suitable photos and screen dumps were taken and documents were collected.
researcher triangulation.
as described above two fieldworkers closely collaborated.
interviews in several cases also included other members of the research team.
the two main field workers shared their analyses and when using the same material reviewed each other s open coding.
to increase the trustworthiness of the analysis for this article the first author re analyzed the field material.
deviations were discussed and addressed.
497esec fse november virtual event usa dittrich michelsen tell lous ebdrup .
.
member checking.
the flexible research approach allowed for adaptation of the fieldwork which was also used to check our evolving understanding with the developers and db s cto.
in particular the interviews listed under and in table were explicitly used to also check the evolving understanding of the rationale behind the continuous improvement and the change in the way stand up meetings are held.
.
.
debriefing.
the research team regularly met and discussed the evolving analysis of the field material.
this debriefing was used to check for possibly evolving researcher bias due to becoming too familiar with db s way of developing software.
.
.
audit trail and detailed descriptions.
the fieldwork was meticulously documented where possible interviews were recorded and transcribed.
the detailed descriptions that underpin the findings in the next section further assist the reader to follow the line of argument in the field material and criticize the findings and insights.
.
limitations as our research focuses on a specific constellation of practices in a specific company the concrete practices cannot be abstracted and transferred to a new context with a similar result.
however relating the observations to social theory helps to understand the maintenance adaptation and evolution of software development practices in teams.
in our discussion we relate the analysis to the theoretical understanding developed in section .
which allows the identification of aspects of the observations that are candidates for transferability.
analysis evolving the stand up meeting our analysis has three parts.
first we provide an overview of the activities and meetings that were involved in the evolution of the stand up meetings.
second we present a detailed interaction analysis of the discussion during the retrospectives which shows how the team renegotiated its practices here we show how the various elements of practices presented in section .
come into play.
third we present a thematic analysis based on the interviews preceding and following the evolution of the stand up meeting concerning what enables a team to take care of the continuous evolution of their practices.
.
how the new stand up meeting developed the change in the stand up format was prompted by one of the developers initiating developer below shortened to i dev because he was dissatisfied with the knowledge sharing in the stand up meetings.
he found he lacked information and people contacted him to ask for information about his tasks.
after first trying to change the situation by providing more information about his own work during the stand up meetings he took up the matter in a one on one with the cto.
the cto holds a one on one with each developer every three weeks.
this is more a place where i listen to frustrations and maybe try to guide them.
this led to the decision to raise the question in the next retrospective.at db retrospectives are conducted every fourth week.
all developers the cto and the product owner participate.
the retrospective during which the stand up meetings were discussed was moderated by one of the developers.
a retrospective is conducted according to four agenda points results of the last retrospective sharing good and bad things and generating ideas about what to do about them and agreeing on what to change.
the online slack meeting is supported by a shared google spreadsheet that the participants edit collaboratively during the discussion.
for example the collection of good and bad things is conducted as an individual task and then the points are elaborated on by the authors.
here the i dev raised his concerns about the stand ups.
when agenda point was concluded the team members were asked which point they would like to discuss further.
here both the i dev and another team member again raised the stand up meeting question.
at the end of the foregoing discussion the team decided to try out a format for the stand up meetings that emphasized knowledgesharing among sub teams one member of each sub team reported what he she deemed relevant during the entire team s daily standup.
slides that share information about individual team members tasks were still welcome.
the solution was tested during the subsequent weeks.
the stand up meetings that we observed following the retrospective discussed above became longer they now lasted an average of minutes instead of the previous average of minutes.
.
negotiating the change of the stand up meeting practices as discussed above the retrospectives take place online via slack and are supported by a google spreadsheet.
the meeting is moderated by a developer rm dev .
here i dev raised the question of the stand ups during the second step sharing good and bad things .
after presenting his positive points he raised the question and pointed out how the lack of knowledge sharing shows in everyday work and proposed returning to an earlier good practice.
by teams he refers to the sub team division.
i dev our main stand up is getting shorter and shorter.
we are not sharing a lot from different teams.
i am not sure if it is a problem for everyone but at least for me.
yes and guys needed to ask me in person what we are in mobile and i did the same asking the web site guys what is the progress on their side and so on.
so i would like to... whether we can do one stand up like we did before.
and that s it.
the sharing continues.
in the wrap up following this initial part of the retrospective both i dev and another developer start the discussion by taking up the question again.
this launches the whole team s joint root cause analysis solution finding and reflection which also explains the sometimes very tentative language.
the first two developers who react agree that the knowledge sharing in the sub teams may be responsible for the lack of knowledge sharing in the common stand up meetings and discuss possible solutions.
i dev maybe could we could talk about stand up?
me and dev1 we have the feeling that we can improve something there?
so guys it would be nice to hear from you do you feel some problems with stand ups as well as me and .
are they too short too long too separated it s ok leave it alone?
and so on.
498exploring the evolution of software practices esec fse november virtual event usa dev2 i think that we can do it a bit better absolutely.
and the way we could do it is take more mobile into account present it at the common stand up and then if we have something special we should be ready to maybe have a small meeting after.
because i think sometimes we will go into details that more related for the team who is it rather than all people.
and i guess we have exactly the same case for payments and onboarding or other projects.
so the stand up of cause should be for all people but i still think we need somehow have something for the specific team.
dev3 thanks as for me i think that we need to have like maybe discard our mobile stand ups and maybe some other stand ups how it works now and to move like mobile status maybe some other statuses like most important stuff in slides.
and if we need something discuss only if we need we can agree in main stand ups that we can make a call between the guys who need to discuss this concrete thing.
or maybe just to discuss it like personally in calls.
i think it would be better.
the cto proposes considering whether it is the unclear responsibility for sharing the relevant information from the sub teams rather than that the sub team s additional meetings that is responsible for the lack of knowledge sharing.
he proposes a different way of addressing the problem a change of rules which is then considered by the developers.
cto do you guys think that maybe the reason it is not being shared now... right now ... is because when you have a team of four people everybody might sometimes think that the others will probably do that?
it is just a suggestion and we do not have to do it but i was thinking that maybe each team could have like a person who is the stand up person who is like responsible for adding one slide once in a while.
that s an idea.
dev1 yeah we and we can change so one week it is this person the next week it is another person.
this person will know that he is responsible for this week and he will add the new slide.
i think it will work.
the moderator starts to discuss the guidelines of what should be shared with the whole team.
rm dev i think the reason why we are not sharing that at the general stand up is that we do not know if internal team stuff would be interesting for the whole team so... dev1 maybe we can share just not some very specific stuff internal but something that well we are working on this feature.
we released this feature.
i think it can be interesting for a lot of people .
the cto then offers to implement the change in the template for the stand up meeting slide deck.
dev1 s remark about the evaluation of the change indicates that this implementation is done as an experiment.
cto you know there is the stand up slides template.
i could be responsible for you know the teams we have at the moment i ll just add a slide for each team and then you can fill it out.
so it is there and it s ready to fill out.
dev1 yeah that would be nice i think.
so we can assess this idea and... maybe implement it.
rm dev we can have a slide in the stand up template for each team.
just to have a status for that team.
dev1 yeah.dev3 who has been quiet throughout this exchange agrees but raises a more general concern does the new format for the standup meeting actually support the purpose of helping the team to develop and maintain a coherent understanding of the product?
his concern is taken up in the following discussion which leads to a further elaboration of what to use the stand up for and what to coordinate within the sub teams.
the matter is finally settled with the cto stating that coordination and sharing within the sub teams is up to the sub teams.
dev3 i think it is okay to add more but it is more like to mention people to mention teams that they have to.
.
.
just give a short status on what we are and i think it is really important if we are going later to have to work together to have an idea about the product.
in general i think we also miss it we miss to know what is going on.
dev4 so maybe we are changing the stand up from being what people did to what is happening on the individual project.
so we do not have personal slides we only have project slides.
and then we put all the other miscellaneous stuff at the end.
or something like that.
i think that it is a good idea in the sense i mean that when i am working with and on payments we don t all three of us do add slides what we did on payments that s redundant because we coordinated already between us.
so we as a team just need to tell everyone else what we did.
so yes that makes sense project slides rather than people slides.
dev1 ...or maybe teams?
dev3 we should remember that stand ups have several... we should think about what is the purpose of stand up.
what we are talking about right now and in fact also what i am really missing is about sharing knowledge about what we are at the same time i think we should also remember that stand up is also for coordinating the day as i see it.
dev4 but i think we would do that in the individual teams on an ad hoc basis right?
i mean rm dev and i wouldn t coordinate in the daily stand up.
dev3 exactly that is my point and that is the reason.
for me it is difficult to see how we can avoid a morning meeting in the team.
dev4 but i don t think it necessarily is a meeting i mean.
we just talk on slack.
dev1 yeah we cannot make a call we can just... so if some task some stuff needs to be coordinated we just talk on slack.
just chatting or calling if we want if we need to coordinate.
cto so... dev1 sorry!
maybe i work on some stuff and they work on different stuff and they are not connected with each other and we do not need to coordinate and we just want to work on it maybe we do not share and coordinate it.
cto i think as a basis each team has you know individual needs and i think if someone on the team really feels that stand up is really necessary it s important that the team listens to that.
but i agree completely that each team can decide how to coordinate on the team what feels comfortable to them.
it also depends on how many you are on the team.
if you are two people maybe you do not need to scheduled stand up but on mobile team where you are four it might be more necessary.
so.
.
.
but you can decide on the teams i guess.
dev4 and it makes total sense and that is also how we did it on website team where we decided to have stand up twice a week.
so i think it is a good point yeah.
towards the end of the meeting the team summarizes the discussions and decisions.
499esec fse november virtual event usa dittrich michelsen tell lous ebdrup cto and the next one is also mine so it s what we talked about that each team you know should have somebody responsible for filling out that one slide and then you can decide who is it this week as you like on the team.
but i think things run a bit smoother if everybody knows who is responsible for things instead of it is just the team s responsible.
dev4 but shouldn t it be the team s responsibility to figure out how they want to manage their slide?
cto hm... you can call it a suggestion.
rm dev ok. what else do we have?
in the end the moderator sums up the action points rm dev for the second one for each team to have slides in stand up.
will you do it?
cto yes!
rm dev yes.
awesome.
the new stand up format was then implemented.
we observed an increase on time the stand up took.
also the content changed.
during the next retrospective it became evident that everybody understood the implementation of the new stand up format as an experiment.
it was evaluated at the beginning of the retrospective.
rm dev so in general how do you guys feel about those team slides?
dev5 i think it is okay.
i dev yeah i also think it was okay.
dev4 i liked it.
dev3 yeah it was good.
dev2 i think it is okay as long as you are not always supposed to fill something out.
dev4 and you are still allowed to do your own slide if you want to.
with this evaluation the change in the stand up meeting was made permanent.
a few weeks later the team decided to change their stand up meetings more drastically they decided to have daily stand ups in the evolving sub teams and meet only once a week for a stand up of the whole team.
.
what enables a team to evolve their practices as described in the methods section we triangulated our observations with interviews both to better understand the members points of view and to gain additional insight into how db developed their very specific approach to developing software.
this section presents a thematic analysis of observations and interviews.
the focus is still on the stand up meeting as an example additionally we use examples of the evolution of other practices to show that the evolution of the stand up meeting is not an exception.
one of the most prevalent themes in connection with db is its strong pragmatic stance an emphasis on reducing waste.
this is supported by experimentation with changes to development processes such as the stand up meetings that are the focus of this article the tools the development environment and the implementation technology the experimentation and the evolution of practices based on it are supported by trust and a sense of responsibility .
this alsorequires the developers ongoing reflection on and awareness of their own practices.
in the analysis a layer of supportive individual factors became evident underpinning the concepts presented below communication skills courage and a very reflective leadership style.
as we did not focus on this more psychological level and do not have enough such material we decided to leave this to future research.
.
.
a pragmatic stance.
at db both the developers and the cto support a thoroughly pragmatic stance an emphasis on reducing waste.
the development processes rules and ceremonies are cut down to what is deemed really necessary.
as one developer puts it i m actually a certified scrum master and i have worked as scrum master on several occasions.
there have been places where they introduced scrum and when they introduced it they would often like to implement it as it is prescribed.
it s a very forced way to work where to some extent you feel embarrassed.
you just sit there and build these walls of limits and do role play come on we are adults we know how to communicate.
translation by the authors .
the cto confirms.
i have been to lectures with some incredibly intelligent people who told me well you have to do as it is in the book otherwise you will not be able to say that you re scrum or you cannot say you re kanban because the book says this and that and i have little regard for people who bend the rules .
and i totally oppose that.
i am pragmatic.
we just do what works and makes sense so that is what i would call what we do.
translation by the authors.
the development of the stand up meeting slides populated by the software robot is an example for a simplification as just described.
the robot reduced the effort and frustration of assigning crucial bugs and live site errors individually.
another example is the communication and collaboration infrastructure.
the cto stated i have been to places where many people still have a whiteboard with paper notes on it.
then there is a webcam and then you have some screens they then try to see what s happening on the whiteboard through that webcam it was completely ridiculous.
it does not work in any way.
there is no reason to over complicate things.
that s why slides are so cool it s the perfect online version of paper and pen.
you can do whatever suits you.
the ultimate criterion for introducing new tools methods or new ways of collaborating is whether something helps the team to develop better software in a better way.
this is where experimentation comes in to establish whether something is better it has to be tried out for some time.
.
.
experimentation.
the change in the stand up meeting is our prime example for experimentation.
the old format had already been developed through a series of experiments where for several weeks the whole team tried out different formats.
ultimately the team voted on different formats and elements and decided on the format used until the retrospective analyzed above.
the in depth analysis of the stand up meeting discussion during the retrospective reveals further aspects.
the results of the discussion of the stand up first prompt an experiment which is then evaluated in the subsequent retrospective.
the interaction analysis above shows that the developers are used to running experiments the decision in the first retrospective was clearly understood as an experimental change in the stand up format and nobody was 500exploring the evolution of software practices esec fse november virtual event usa surprised to be asked to evaluate it in the next retrospective.
only then did the new format become permanent.
stand up meeting formats were not the only aspect of the development method with which db has experimented.
other examples that we learned about through the interviews were the change from a mandatory peer review before deploying code to a voluntary one changes in who is responsible for live site errors and integrating testing and quality assurance into the developers duties.
as the cto explained in an interview it is normal that we evaluate what we are all the time so in general experimenting instead of just saying no because it sounds like a bad idea.
often we will just try things and then we will see if it is actually a bad idea.
both the cto and the developers emphasize that the experiments are based on the developers situated assessment of where are the problems of what works and what does not.
in return this requires the development team to assume responsibility for their own development processes.
.
.
trust and responsibility.
the initiative to change the standup meeting format came from one of the developers who recognized that information apparently relevant to his colleagues was not being shared in a relevant forum.
in the retrospective the developers conscientiously discussed whether they shared the perception of the problem possible solutions the implication of the proposed change and how this would impact the knowledge sharing mechanisms that they had developed in the various sub teams.
this is not a unique example of developers taking responsibility for both their own work and for their team s development process.
the cto reported that after the mandatory code review was replaced by the rule that developers decide whether to ask a colleague for a code review efficiency increased and production site errors dropped.
in the foregoing discussion of the change to the standup meeting the cto was one of the last persons to contribute to and support the solution that emerged from this discussion.
in the follow up interview it became clear that he still had some concerns regarding the lack of sharing in the stand up meetings but consciously held back to leave the responsibility with the team.
having a team take responsibility requires trust on the part of management.
this was confirmed during the interviews with the cto.
much of the reported experimentation with changes in the development process confirm that the cto walks his talk and does leave decisions regarding both changes in the development process and regarding implementation technology with the team.
.
.
developer reflection and awareness.
at db both trust and responsibility and experimentation depend on the cto and the developers awareness of what is going on and where problems might develop and on continuous reflection on how to address the problems identified.
when the developer became aware of the lack of knowledge sharing in the stand up meetings he first took up the matter in a one on one meeting with the cto.
the one onone meetings play an important role regarding awareness of and reflection on common practices.
in an interview the cto described how during the one on ones he supports the developers in their reflection on the problems they encounter to analyze them and to identify possible ways to address them.
the retrospectives serve a similar purpose to the one on one meetings on a team level the retrospective analyzed above is anexample of a group s reflection on their practice of stand ups the purpose of the stand ups and the explicit rules of the stand ups.
this resulted in a change that was again discussed in the subsequent retrospective.
at db the retrospective is promoted as the venue in which problems are taken up analyzed and where if necessary experiments and changes are decided on.
in particular the continuous experimentation with their processes requires a team to be aware of both current practices and what is subject to experiment right now.
in a later interview the cto told of a hiccup where an experiment was not decided on in this collective forum part of the team was unaware of the experiment and felt frustrated because they were left out of collective decisions.
discussion the previous section presented a qualitative analysis of our empirical case.
this section presents the insights we gained from comparing the analysis to the related work we first relate our findings to the social theory introduced above.
we then discuss team responsibility and self organization as core reflective practices.
in the last subsection we discuss what other companies could learn from db.
.
establishing improvement as a practice our analysis shows that the observed adaptations of db s development practices are not part of an unwitting deterioration of a specific method but a conscious adaptation of a practice.
in this case the stand up meeting needed to change to address the implications of the introduction of sub teams.
this must be regarded as a fine tuning of the supportive structures of a high performing team.
in this subsection we will recur to the theoretical underpinning developed in section .
to deepen our understanding of the observations.
the theoretical underpinning developed in section .
allows us to analyse the observations in a way that relates purpose rules and shared understandings underpinning the observed actions.
we used the field material already in section to provide an example of how the stand up meeting may be described as a practice consistent with the social theory underpinning.
below we further elaborate the use of schatzki s concept of social practices.
schatzki s concepts can also be used to describe the retrospectives as practices of changing practices ormeta practices .
the interaction analysis in section .
shows that the theoretical elements of a practice may be found in the way the developers discussed the stand up meeting format.
to recap practices are defined as nexus of and sayings linked by a common goals b explicit rules and instructions and c a shared understanding of how different means are employed for a common end .
in the retrospective two developers shared the concerning observation that the amount of knowledge sharing during the stand up meetings had decreased.
they stated a problem with the and sayings that constituted a stand up meeting.
a the team referred to the purpose of the stand up meeting to share knowledge and coordinate the day s work in their discussion.
instead of abandoning the stand up meeting the team engaged in the discussion of what could be the cause.
the diagnosis was that a change in team 501esec fse november virtual event usa dittrich michelsen tell lous ebdrup structure led to that the shared understanding c of what to communicate did not fit the new situation.
the team decided to change the rules b each sub team should share what they deem relevant for the whole group though sharing of relevant issues by individual developers was still possible.
to implement that the tooling that supported the stand up meetings was adapted.
the team shared the understanding that the change in the stand up meeting to be an experiment and would be assessed in the following retrospective.
the retrospective itself may be described as a social practice along the definition above as well a everybody is aware of the purpose of the retrospectives that also becomes visible in the agenda points their purpose is to reflect on the current development process discuss how to address issues raised and agree on what to change.
further to evaluate previous changes that were implemented as experiments.
b there is a set of explicit rules that guides the retrospective the retrospective has a specific structure and process.
it takes place every fourth week at a specific time.
all developers who are not on vacation and the cto are present.
one of the developers leads the team through the process.
all participants were familiar with the structure of the meeting which is supported by a shared google spreadsheet.
c there is a shared implicit understanding of what points should be raised during which part of the retrospective and how.
also normally the discussion would result in some kind of decision.
in the case of the specific retrospective analyzed above the decision was to experiment with a different format for the stand up meetings.
to this end necessary preparatory tasks here the development of the template for the stand up meeting slide deck were distributed.
also everybody understood the decision as an experiment to be evaluated at the next retrospective.
further our analysis shows that the retrospectives in our case were supported by other practices in order to achieve their purpose.
along with the retrospective one on one meetings with the cto and experiments are practices that db developed to assess reflect on and change their development practices.
the purpose of this set of practices may be understood as the implementation of the team s meta work .
in other words improving and changing practices have themselves become established practices.
in the triangulating interviews it became clear that these meta practices were carefully established and promoted by management.
the theoretical concepts introduced in section .
help to distinguish between a deteriorating uncoordinated development and a conscious situated improvement of the shared practices if a specific practice is the result of its consideration and adjustment in the context of a set of meta practices it is a conscious situated improvement.
thus our analysis shows that the concept of social practices that we developed in section .
may be used to analyse both software development practices and meta practices as they are established insitu by a software team.
it also shows that the concept may be used to describe the meta practices established by the team.
and finally the elements of the definition may be found in the analysis of the team s discussion of their own practices in their retrospective.
one could as part of future work further explore how the elements that according to schatzky define a practice may be translated into a set of questions that guide the situated analysis and improve development practices what are the purposes and goalsof a practice?
how do the tacit understandings and explicit rules contribute to these purposes?
how are these practices supported by tools?
regarding the change the questions might be what is the reason existing practices do not work satisfactorily?
which of the elements do we need to adapt?
.
reflection experimentation and agile improvement lous et al.
argue that inspect and adapt is one of the core ingredients that allows the case company to implement radical agile and continuous development practices.
in this article s in depth analysis we show how this is implemented as an established set of meta practices.
the one on one meetings with the cto give the team members a space to reflect on the current practices.
at the retrospectives the team members can raise issues for the team to discuss and the experimentation allows the team to consciously evolve the way the team collaborates and coordinates.
practices that are determined to have become inadequate are not just abandoned but discussed by the team.
in the example above the purpose of stand up meetings and the possibly changing circumstances are brought forward.
new rules and guidelines are decided together and then implemented by the whole team.
formulating such a change as an experiment allows the team to postpone possibly controversial decisions until after they have experienced the effects of a proposed change.
it is very evident in the field material that the developers are the ones who deliberate changes in rules and tools that support collaboration and coordination in development.
the case we chose for this article may not strike one as a huge change.
however it is an example of a change that we observed during the period allocated to the fieldwork.
as highlighted in the section .
we have learned about a number of other cases where individual practices were changed by the team.
our findings resonate with the existing literature on retrospective.
the discussion of the stand up meeting may also be described according to the categorizations developed in initially raising the matter may be described as reporting and responding the root cause analysis and development of changes as relating and reasoning and the decision about the action plan may be seen as reconstructing .
the analysis of the revision of the stand up meeting provides an example of how agile development consistent with the last of the principles underpinning the agile manifesto at regular intervals the team reflects on how to become more effective then tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.
may take place.
our analysis demonstrates how situated software process improvement may take place bottom up as part of normal software development practices.
this differs from a top down implementation of software process improvement which makes use of the retrospective as an instrument of researchers and management .
nonetheless our research makes it evident that db s development is not a deterioration but a consciously and carefully evolved practice.
studies such as the one presented here complement survey oriented studies e.g.
.
they allow us to explore the mechanisms behind the development of the hybrid methods detailed in the article and thus 502exploring the evolution of software practices esec fse november virtual event usa allow us to understand whether software development practices developed based on deterioration or careful evolution.
.
what can other companies learn from db db presents a very specific instance of agile development practices that have been adapted by a specific team to fit the circumstances at hand software provided as a service by a small and distributed team with strong technical leadership a cto who protects the team s mandate to determine how they decide to work.
neither their development practices nor their tooling may be copied as is by another development team they would not be able to transfer db s success to a different context.
the insights provided by this study that may be transferred to other contexts are related to the theoretical underpinnings the success of the application of a method is not based on developers following the rules that are part of a method but on the methods being adapted into the practices of the development team.
that means the team relates their purpose that is the problem the method is designed to solve to their own needs and adapts the implicit understandings and the explicit guidelines and rules to fit their specific circumstances.
if the team the needs or the circumstances changes this adaptation must evolve.
to this end the often neglected meta practices the practices of changing practices are crucial.
the analysis provides an example how such a set of related meta practices can look like.
in the article what does it mean to use a method?
the author suggest understanding methods as practice patterns and formulating methods to explicate their purpose the explicit rules and the normally not explicated taken for granted understandings.
this scheme could be one way to inform the meta practices that way software teams would be supported in their application and tailoring of the methods.
following the rules of a formalized method may be justified for example when a new team is established or when development needs to be coordinated across a large organization.
when a new team is established an off the shelf method may provide a framework for the most necessary practices which may then be adapted to the situation at hand.
with respect to large and distributed development organizations the r nkk et al.
showed that in an international company a company wide process model was central to facilitating cross site collaboration and coordination.
however even there the project members used their common sense to adapt that model to the situation at hand.
db is still a small company though the number of developers and tasks allows it to split into sub teams.
it is unclear how the observed meta practices scale.
in larger development projects different teams may be able to evolve their local practices as they see fit.
the evolution practices for coordinate process evolution across local teams will be subject to future research.
conclusion we started by asking how the evolution of software development practices can be investigated and what distinguishes a software process that has degenerated from one that has evolved as the result of conscious deliberation.
to address the questions we studied how a team continuously developed their software development practices in a coordinated manner.regarding the first questions the theoretical underpinning we developed in section .
proofed useful to identify and describe both the practices that were evolved and the set of related meta practices the team had established to this end.
by combining one on one meetings between the cto and the developers to foster reflection retrospectives to address concerns about current development and experimentation as a way to explore new ways of working the team maintained and evolved a set of common practices meet to their evolving needs.
we analyzed an example of such a controlled change the evolution of the stand up meeting format so it could continue to fulfill its purpose even when the team started to split into sub teams.
the observation of such meta practices provides the answer to the second question if a team implements meta practices like the ones described above their software development practices are result of conscious deliberation rather than of degeneration.
in the discussion we argued that social practice theory may help to explain the observed retrospective and experimentation as practices to change practices and how the practices that formalize the meta work that this team developed support each other.
this conclusion provides a building block for a practice theory for software engineering.
we suggest that companies consider implementing software engineering methods as a creative process and establish practices of changing practices or meta practices as part of their everyday development.
we indicated several lines of future research can we apply practice theory to support teams evaluation of their practices in their retrospectives?
is it possible to scale such bottom up improvement through meta practices to large teams and if so how?
such research would also improve the understanding of how various practices interact with each other and with their organizational contexts when implemented by different organizations.