an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering he zhang hezhang nju.edu.cn state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university chinaxin zhou job wetist.com state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university chinaxin huang njuhx16 qq.com state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university china huang huang njufrankhuang gmail.com state key laboratory of novel software technology software institute nanjing university chinamuhammad ali babar ali.babar adelaide.edu.au school of computer science university of adelaide australia abstract context following on other scientific disciplines such as health sciences the use of grey literature gl has become widespread in software engineering se research.
whilst the number of papers incorporating gl in se is increasing there is little empirically known about different aspects of the use of gl in se research.
method we used a mixed methods approach for this research.
we carried out a systematic literature review slr of the use of gl in se and surveyed the authors of the selected papers included in the slr as gl users and the invited experts in se community on the use of gl in se research.
results we systematically selected and reviewed se secondary studies that incorporate gl in se research from which we identified two groups based on their reporting reviews only claim their use of gl reviews report the results by including gl.
we also obtained replies from the gl users and replies from the invited se experts.
conclusion there is no common understanding of the meaning of gl in se.
researchers define the scopes and the definitions of gl in a variety of ways.
we found five main reasons of using gl in se research.
the findings have enabled us to propose a conceptual model for how gl works in se research lifecycle.
there is an apparent need for research to develop guidelines for using gl in se and for assessing quality of gl.
the current work can provide a panorama of the state of the art of using gl in se for the follow up research as to determine the important position of gl in se research.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may seoul republic of korea association for computing machinery.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
grey literature systematic literature review survey evidencebased software engineering empirical software engineering.
acm reference format he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar.
.
an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering.
in 42nd international conference on software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea.
acm seoul korea 13pages.
introduction grey literature gl is considered an important source of information in several scientific fields such as health sciences .
different from white literature or academic publications gl covers a wide range of non conventional documents for instance technical reports theses and official documents that report recent research or practice results .
gl reports can be much more detailed and comprehensive as there is no publisher enforced limitation on length.
researchers and practitioners can report negative or no effect of particular treatments in gl some of the aspects that may not be acceptable in the peer reviewed literature .
in a growing area like software engineering se a huge amount of gl is being produced everyday that become instantly available on the internet .
compared with academic literature gl reports are usually quite broad in their coverage and analytics but perhaps relatively low in their quality .
hence traditionally the inclusion of gl in se research has not been a widely accepted practice.
however it is being recognized that gl can provide timely and broad perspective on different emerging topics that may be relevant and important to se research and practice.
this increasing realization of the importance of gl in se has encouraged many researchers to consider gl as evidence in their research .
whilst the number of se research efforts incorporating gl is increasing there is little effort invested in developing methodological support for conducting research with gl.
it is important to systematically review the state of the art of the use of gl in se and empirically explore the views of the se researchers for developing an evidence based body of knowledge and call for guidelines on ieee acm 42nd international conference on software engineering icse icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar the use of gl in se research and practice.
towards this goal we decided to carry out a study using a mixed methods approach.
we conducted a systematic literature review slr to investigate how se researchers are using gl.
based on the results of the slr we designed two survey questionnaires for gathering more relevant data from both the gl users and se experts in this community.
we invited community experts i.e.
members of program committees of important se conferences for participating in the survey of this study.
this work aimed at systematically reviewing the use of gl in se and empirically exploring se researchers views on gl.
given the aim of this study is to help improve the use of gl in se research by empirically obtaining and synthesizing the relevant information from secondary i.e.
review as well as primary i.e.
survey sources we avoid to criticize the reviewed studies or their authors by all means.
our contributions are four fold obtaining an overview on the community s understanding of the possible definitions of gl in se investigating the motivations for the use of gl from the perspectives of both literature users and community experts proposing a conceptual model for how se researchers work with gl in research lifecycle and identifying the major challenges of the use of gl in se with some possible solutions.
our study s findings are expected to raise the awareness about the current use of grey literature gl in software engineering se and advocate the importance of guidelines for supporting its use in se.
our effort would also contribute to the methodological improvements in se.
background and related work this section introduces the background of gl and briefs the research related to gl in se and other disciplines.
.
grey literature the most widely used definition of gl aka.
luxembourg definition of gl was proposed at the third international conference on grey literature icgl .
as per this definition gl is the information produced on all levels of government academia business and industry in electronic and print formats not controlled by commercial publishing.
this definition has been extended to the literature which is not formally published in sources such as books or journal articles or not formally part of traditional publishing cycles in some reviews e.g.
.
to promote gl an organization called grey literature network service greynet 1is dedicated to research publication open access education and public awareness to gl.
as of august the database2of this organization contains a total of one million grey studies including the proceedings of icgl3and international journal on grey literature ijgl .
figure 1shows the top subjects of the studies gl in these databases.
.
grey literature in research in addition to icgl and ijgl gl is also used as a supplement to white literature in many academic research works .
richard et subjectssocial sciencebiological and medical sciencephysics mechanical and industrialcomputer scienceothers401260 k figure top subjects of grey literature in greynet al.
state that gl comes from a complex landscape of information artifacts generated in the course of real life practices .
assessing this material requires time and complicated trade offs whose appropriateness varies according to a study s context.
however gl can help bring a practical point of view to academic conversation.
many studies in the medical field use gl.
mallett et al.
found of cochrane systematic reviews included gl.
the main source of gl in these reviews is unpublished information supplementing the published journal articles reporting trials.
gl is also widely used in educational studies and social sciences.
petrosino et al.
reviewed the randomized experiments in crime reduction around one third of which came from gl such as governmental documents dissertations and technical reports.
table 1captures some of the concerns of gl reported in the reviewed studies.
table concerns of grey literature in research concerns a brief description studies scope this kind of researches discusses the definition of grey literature its specific content and some characteristics of grey literature.
search efficient searching of grey literature has always been a hot topic in this field.
analysis this part contains how to solve the structural difference between grey literature and traditional literature.
evaluation the focus of this section is how to solve the quality problem of grey literature.
effects the effects mainly refers to the effects of grey literature on research results or conclusions quenby et al.
discuss the challenges and benefits of searching gl for systematic literature reviews.
they thought it is important to include the details of the used gl in a review for advancing the research methodology.
sally et al.
norsaremah et al.
and mchugh et al.
point out that using gl in slrs can help overcome some of the problems of publication bias.
it has been reported that researchers face challenges in deciding how to search gl .
rainer and williams proposed a heuristic keyword based guide for searching the relevant gl.
their guide covers several points such as keywords of the topic advanced search settings types of keywords quality criteria as additional keywords keyword based sampling and measurements.
conn et al.
propose that meta analysis should include gl to fully reflect the existing evidence base.
their proposal was based on their observations that for the results of the published studies with peer review whether the findings were statistically significant or not or biased against the null hypothesis is the difference between published and unpublished literature.
1423an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea it is difficult for researchers to evaluate gl.
rosa and roberta applied citation analysis of gl to calculate its influence.
they conclude that a careful consideration of the parameters is required to assess the impact of gl on the traditional literature in different disciplines.
most research efforts included gl together with traditional literature whilst some research works consider gl only e.g.
.
rothstein et al.
thought gl are only in an auxiliary position.
the effects of gl on results and conclusions are limited to supplement the traditional literature.
.
grey literature and software engineering internet provides researchers and individuals with platforms and tools to produce publish and evaluate scientific information .
most se researchers and professionals are actively producing and sharing their experiences on the internet e.g.
free online books blogs and qa forums .
as a result the amount of gl in se is rapidly growing despite the findings shown in figure 1do not reflect this trend.
this may imply that the use of gl in se is far less than that in social sciences and medicine.
white literature1st tier books magazines government report white papers2nd tier annual reports news articles videos qa sites wiki articles3rd tier blogs presentations emails tweets figure grey scales of literature recently se researchers have started paying more attention to gl.
according to grey material classification shpilko et al.
proposed a model about gl.
they thought that the literature can be divided into four categories grey scales according to the difference in scope shown in figure .
the innermost layer is white literature which makes up only a very small part of the literature out of which gl can be divided into three layers scales .
the higher outer the level the more the quantity of literature and the more difficult to control.
the first scale which contains books magazines government reports and white papers is the most official category in gl.
annual reports news articles videos qa sites and wiki articles are located in the second scale which has some limitations such as requiring users to have at least reputation to comment.
the third outmost scale is completely out of control because everyone has access to blogs presentations tweets and emails.se is a practical practitioner oriented field in which synthesizing and combing research and practice turn to be very important.
garousi et al.
discussed multivocal literature reviews mlr and pointed out that gl is essential and useful in se research.
in they also combined the existing slr guidelines in se some mlr guidelines from other disciplines and their own experience in conducting mlr to provide an initial proposal of the guidelines for incorporating gl in secondary studies in se which contains planning conducting and reporting three phases with specific recommendations.
research method in this section we elaborate the mixed methods research design employed in this study with its processes as depicted in figure .
.
research questions as the objective of this work is to empirically explore the views of the se researchers about gl we setup our research questions rqs to investigate the use of gl in research only.
this study aims at addressing the following research questions rq1.
what is grey literature in the view of se researchers?
rq2.
why do se researchers consider grey literature in research?
rq3.
how does grey literature work in se research?
rq1aims to present the researchers understanding of the definition of gl in se.
rq2steers our investigation of the purpose of using gl in se research.
the answer to rq3may help understand how se researchers work with gl in their research.
in order to develop the detailed instructions of the study protocols a pilot study was first conducted on literature reviews including gl in the beginning of .
from the pilot we found that many reviews fail to provide the reasons and the processes of using gl in their studies nor did many authors mention the potential influences of including gl on the results and conclusions of their studies.
given the findings from the pilot and other anecdotal evidence we decided to empirically investigate the use of gl by applying a mixed methods approach i.e.
surveying literature reviews and se researchers.
an slr is expected to enable us to extract and synthesize the data from secondary studies to report the current use of gl.
an opinion survey involving both the gl users and se experts is expected to explore the community s attitudes towards gl in se.
the data gathered from the two methods would supplement to each other and help form a holistic understanding of the state trend and challenges of using gl in se.
the differences between gl and academic literature arouse our interest.
in the process of synthesizing gl the secondary studies systematically collects and displays evidence which can reflect the major concerns scope search analysis evaluation and effects cf.
table of gl.
they may secure the extraction of important data relevant to gl for analysis and synthesis to answer the rqs.
this study was undertaken from the beginning of and carried out in two stages a literature review slr and an opinion survey.
the review stage followed the slr guidelines in se and the survey stage followed the survey guidelines .
the research team consists of three student researchers two phd candidates and one master by research student and their supervisors.
all the 1424icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar research students have gained extensive knowledge and experience in empirical software engineering ese in general and in slrs with gl in particular from their previous research projects.
.
literature review in the review stage we searched literature reviews secondary studies with gl published in se for analysis and synthesis.
.
.
search strategy.
as there is no dedicated venue publishing research including gl in se only the automated search was applied in the review stage.
by using the search string as follows the secondary studies including gl were thoroughly searched at the four major publishers digital libraries in se i.e.
acm digital library ieee xplore sciencedirect and springerlink.
since it is difficult to determine the exact year when se researchers started to incorporate gl in research the starting year of the automatic search is not set open .
the search was redone at the end of june to capture more relevant studies published by the middle of .
multi review or multi literature or gray literature or grey literature and software engineering table search libraries and results digital library to search retrieved results selected studies acm dl ieee xplorer springerlink science direct table 2lists the retrieved search results per digital library and the numbers of the selected studies after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria shown in table .
we merely include the white literature incorporating gl as the review scope at this stage which may help avoid introducing much noise.
we observed that gl as one type of literature is reviewed in some secondary studies i.e.
a wide range of gl can be included in single literature review while one primary study may prefer to include specific but limited types of gl.
the scope of gl included in the secondary studies in se would be able to illustrate the current state of the use of gl in their studied topics and the understanding of these review authors on the roles of gl in research.
for these considerations we decided to only include literature reviews especially mlrs a type of literature review that contains gl for research at this stage.
table inclusion and exclusion criteria inclusion criteria in the paper is a secondary study in the paper includes grey literature or claims it is a multivocal literature review in the full text of the paper can be accessible exclusion criteria ex the paper is not written in english ex the paper is explicitly short reviews position reviews and editorials ex the paper is grey literature .
.
study selection.
each of the three student researchers reviewers read all the papers retrieved from the automated search.
the initial selection of the studies reviews including gl was performed by checking thefields of title keywords abstract and excluding those irrelevant to gl from our study.
the remaining reviews were further independently checked against the inclusion exclusion criteria by carefully reading the full text of each paper.
the individual s selection results were later cross checked with others outputs collectively.
any disagreement was discussed in the daily meetings scheduled during this study.
if a disagreement could not be solved in the daily meetings it was escalated to the research supervisors and domain experts for advice and final decision.
the study search and selection took approximately one month.
.
.
data extraction.
to record and collect the data for answering our research questions we designed some data items as shown in table which were extracted from the included reviews.
the column rq indicates the research questions that are expected to be answered with the extracted data items.
three student researchers were involved in the data extraction.
thedi2shows the definition of the gl declared by the gl users in the reviews which can help further analyze the state of the definition of gl in se.
the di3can help understand the distribution of the type of gl in se.
these two extraction items provide evidence for rq1.
the purpose of designing di4is to obtain the reason why the gl users including gl to provide evidence for rq2.
di5 di8 can provide evidence for rq3 from four aspects the research stage source collection and analysis method of the gl.
the researchers read the full text of all the identified reviews and extracted the data stored in spreadsheets first independently by following the review protocol.
the extracted data was later cross checked together after the independent extractions.
any disagreements were resolved in the consensus meetings or by consulting their supervisors.
table data extraction items code rq question word data item di1 year di2 what the definition of grey literature di3 what the type of grey literature di4 why why to choose to use grey literature?
di5 how what are the roles of grey literature?
di6 how the search source of grey literature di7 how how is data collected and analyzed?
di8 how what specific techniques and practices are used?
di9 the sample size of grey literature .
opinion survey in the survey stage we seek more detailed information specific to the understanding and the use of gl in research by a means of questionnaires to both the gl users and se experts in this community.
.
.
target invitees and sampling frame.
the survey instrument was designed from the respondent s perspective which requires a clear identification of the population and target invitees .
we hence chose the purposive sampling frame in this case.
our target invitees are composed by the gl users of all the included reviews and the se experts respected in the community.
because some of the reviews provide no detail on the use of gl we decided to survey the gl users of all the identified reviews via email 1425an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea pilot study on grey literature systematic reviewreview protocol review team survey protocol survey for grey literature users survey for experts reviews considering grey literature survey questions for grey literature users survey questions for expertsgrey literature users experts102 included reviews rrd rld reviews with rich detail about grey literaturereviews with little detail about grey literature included reviews sru snu survey no reply from grey literature users sre software engineering research expertssurvey reply from expertssurvey no reply from expertsbased on included reviews based on software engineering researcherssrur srul survey reply from grey literature userssru from rich detailed reviewssru from littledetailed reviewsauthors of the reivews research questionsabout grey literature grey literatureusers declinedud ed experts declined sne ena experts not available figure research process of this study to further gather the details for analysis.
we also invited in total of community experts to respond to the other questionnaire these experts were selected from the program committees of the high quality relevant se conferences in the past three years international conference on software engineering icse international symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement esem and international conference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering ease .
because gl could be used in any topics of se research we considered the candidates to invite from the members of general high quality conferences in se to maintain the representatives diversity instead from the conferences on a subfield of se.
among these venues we further decided to invite members of icse esem ease who also pay significant emphasis on methodological aspects of conducting and reporting se research.
note that although two authors of this paper have served the above committees for years they were excluded from the invitees to avoid introducing possible researcher s bias.
.
.
questionnaire design.
combining the results of the pilot study with the question words of gl whom where when what why andhow we designed two questionnaires respectively for the gl users and the se experts shown in table .
both two questionnaires contain the six question words.
for the gl users and the se experts we have already known whom they are and for the gl users we also know the context they used gl from the reviewed studies which could be considered as when and where .
the design of the questionnaire for experts does not need to consider the context of using grey literature .
we designed seven questions to inquire about their attitudes towards grey literature.
two of the questions inquire about attitudes toward grey literature sqe sqe are also applicable to gl users squ squ .
the design of gl users questionnaire does need to consider the context of using grey literature .
therefore the eight questions squ squ squ we designed about the reasons for using grey literature or how to use grey literature are different from thequestions for expert s attitude sqe sqe sqe .
they all need to be answered by the gl users in combination with the context.
the se experts responses to these questions purported not only to enable us to understand the respondents views on the use of gl but also to provide useful suggestions for using gl in se.
the gl users responses to these questions could enhance our understanding of how they used gl in research.
.
.
questionnaire administration.
we distributed the invitations to participate in the survey via emails which gave the reply period of two weeks for each sector of invitees.
the invitees with no reply received were gently reminded of the survey one week after the first round invitations.
in the process of issuing the questionnaire for the gl users we first tried to communicate with the first author of each paper.
if no response in the survey period two weeks we tried to further contact the other co authors.
in distributing the invitations to se experts to their survey once any reply from an expert was received either a decline to reply or an automatic reply for unavailability we immediately stop sending the next round of email reminder to the particular expert.
.
data synthesis and analysis we applied quantitative as well as qualitative data analysis and synthesis methods for answering all the three research questions.
the questionnaire for the gl users were raised for detailed information of their experiences with using gl in the included reviews which is different from the questionnaire for the se experts opinions about gl in research.
hence we combined the data extracted from the included reviews and the replies from the gl users to their questionnaire rrd rldandsru together for synthesis.
while the replies to the questionnaire for the se experts sre were analyzed separately.
the two data sets were analyzed and synthesized independently except sq1 which are general common questions for both the gl users and the se experts.
further details of the specific 1426icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar table questions in survey identical questions sq1 w hat what is your definition of grey literature in se?
sq2 how how can grey literature contribute to planning future research?
squ3 w hywhy did you consider adding grey literature to the data set of your research?sqe3 w hy should grey literature be included as a source of evidence in se?
and why?
sqe3 w hy are you willing to include grey literature as an evidence source in your research?
and in what condition you may include grey literature?
questions only for the grey literature users of the reviews questions only for the community experts squ4 how what are your concerns and guidelines of using grey literature in research?
why?sqe4 w hen at what stage you may introduce grey literature in your research?
e.g.
to realize the background to design research or use as a data source in research squ5 how what sources e.g.
databases or libraries did do you use to search grey literature?
why?w here squ6 how what specific search strategies for grey literature were applied in your research?
how to obtain reliable grey literature?
sqe5 how how to obtain reliable grey literature for research?
squ7 how did you conduct data analysis and synthesis of grey literature separate from academic literature?
and why?
squ8 how did you have a separate quality assessment of grey literature in your research?
if so how is it different from the quality assessment of academic literature?
if not why no separate assessment of grey literature?
sqe6 howwhat do you think are the challenges or barriers of using grey literature for se research?squ9 how was grey literature used to evaluate conclusions?
squ10 how how does the grey literature affect the conclusions?
u is the shorthand for grey literature user .
e is the shorthand for expert .
uses of qualitative synthesis and analysis methods is provided in the online study protocols.
forrq1 the data extracted from the included reviews and the replies from sq1were combined for synthesis.
the qualitative description of the definitions of gl were coded and grouped and descriptive statistics was applied for analysis.
we presented the numeric results in the form of charts as well as the dimensions of gl s definitions emerging from the coding.
forrq2 the data from the included reviews and the replies to sq3 squ3 sqe3 1andsqe3 were used.
grounded theory was adopted to identify the reasons for why se researchers use gl in research.
the data was labeled such as following guidelines no enough data through multiple iterations of coding.
after constant comparison the themes reasons progressively emerged.
for example we first identified the sentences containing reasons for including grey literature then we labeled those sentences such as for emerging technologies e.g.
graphql grey literature tends to provide a better coverage of relevant documents than traditional literature could be labelled it as emerging technologies can obtain more relevant documents from gl grey literature provide a high level of coverage of the slr topic could be labelled it as gl can highly cover slr topic there is need to consider this grey literature as number of peer reviewed studies is limited could be labelled it as gl contains more non peer reviewed reseach .
we encoded the label that we just set up such as obtain more documents highly cover contain more research .
after constant comparison on higher abstraction level we found that these three labels could be aggregated into one label the extend more related research reasons progressively emerged.
forrq3 the extracted data from the included reviews and the replies to squ4 squ10provide the information about how se researchers used gl as a source of evidence in their research.
the replies to sqe4provide the community experts choices of including gl in se research.
techniques like aggregative coding from grounded theory was adopted to synthesize the data for rq3.
since the replies to sqe5andsqe6convey the domain experts subjective and diverse opinions we keep them in comparison with the guidelines from other disciplines for discussion section in which we summarize the current state of the art of the use of gl in se and propose some major challenges in front of the community.
results this section describes the overall results from the literature review and opinion survey.
we identified secondary studies reviews including gl in se that were published by june .
figure shows the distribution of these included reviews over years and the shadow areas indicate the reviews reporting rich detail of the use of gl rrd .
in recent years the growing trend of the reviews in se incorporating gl turns to be significant.
in particular there are reviews published after which is more than twice before .
this indicates that se researchers have been increasingly realizing and leveraging the potential value of gl.
figure distribution of reviews with gl over years among them we observed that not all the reviews report their process of using gl in detail.
specifically most of the included reviews only claim the coverage of gl in their papers without information on the sample size of the included gl how the gl was used and so on.
to effectively analyze the data from these reviews two groups were identified reviews that merely claim the coverage gl in their search and reviews that report the detailed results of the included gl e.g.
sample size.
on surveying the gl users we received the replies from the authors of included reviews resulting in a response rate at .
two of which were finally removed from the analysis 5the study protocols review survey and the complete list of the included studies are available at 1427an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea number technical track255075100 62number 23number industry trackicse esem ease figure distribution of the invitees due to the data quality issues.
on surveying the se experts in response to invitations to the questionnaire the distribution shown in figure undelivered emails were bounced back and automatic replies were received for the unavailability during the survey period.
after two rounds of emails invitations and reminders we received valid replies reaching a response rate at .
among which replies with kind decline or incomplete data were further excluded from the analysis.
in the end the replies from the authors of included reviews and se experts were used as inputs to the analysis.
analysis and synthesis based on the extracted data from the included reviews rrd rld as well as the replies from the gl users sru and se experts sre the findings are generated from the analysis and synthesis to answer the research questions.
.
definitions of grey literature rq1 a definition of gl is the starting point of any research that is willing to use gl.
it reflects how se researchers understand gl.
rq1aims to present what gl is from se researchers perspectives.
to answer rq1 we used descriptive statistics to combine and synthesize the data about the possible definitions from rrdandrld and the replies tosq1 sru andsre .
typetechnical reportwhite paperblog book book chapterthesis27 figure major types of grey literature we identified five major types of gl as shown in figure from reviews all reviews in rrdand relevant reviews in rld that specifically described the types of gl they used technical report .
of the reviews considered technical report as gl.
usually they use google scholar and sei to search the relevant technical reports.
white paper .
of the reviews regarded white paper as gl.
most of them were considered in combination with technical reports.
in addition to these reviewsthat consider the white papers more reviews mentioned government reports as gl as well.
blog of the reviews took blogs into account when considering gl.
in reviews considering blogs as gl websites and work in progress are also common options.
book book chapter also .
of the reviews included book as gl.
like white paper book book chapter mostly appears with technical report.
thesis .
of the reviews included phd or master theses as gl.
most .
of the reviews mentioned at least one of the five types of gl.
these types of gl are often used in combination in the included reviews.
we found .
of the reviews included two types of gl e.g.
technical report and thesis technical report and white paper .
one review included relevant white papers technical reports thesis work in progress and books to investigate state of the art of testing practices.
for some emerging topics e.g.
devsecops in se blogs are used as gl as well.
for example h vard et al.
reported they used google search to find white papers blogs and articles in their research on devsecops.
it is observed that although there exist so many types of gl a preliminary consensus on gl in se emerge from the data i.e.
grey literature is produced in some way but has not yet been peer reviewed in academic venue which is supported by of the gl users insru and of the se experts in sre .
however there is no commonly accepted definition of gl yet in se.
an expert addresses his understanding of gl in his reply to our inquiry there are many shades of grey literature it is not easy to draw any clear lines.
based on the replies to sq1 sruandsre the different perspectives of se researchers on gl can be reflected to three major dimensions accessibility quality control and expertise.
accessibility refers to whether the content is widely available.
in sruandsre we found that seven replies mentioned about the public documents but no reply specifically stated that gl includes private documents.
quality control depends on who provides the content.
nine replies in sruandsrementioned about organization and individuals and .
of them only considered organizational documents as gl.
expertise focuses on the authority of the content producers.
nine replies in sruandsrethought scientific background should be considered when identifying gl.
only one reply indicated non scientific source of evidence as gl.
based on our findings three abstract definitions of gl in se can be compiled in this three dimensional perspective def1.
grey literature could be any publicly available material that can be directly obtained and not published in peer reviewed venues.
def2.
grey literature could be any information provided by organizations without peer review.
def3.
grey literature could be from a scientific background author and with a scientific purpose but not a peer reviewed document.
.
reasons for including grey literature rq2 rq2aims at reporting why se researchers consider gl.
to answer rq2 we synthesized the extracted data from the included reviews 1428icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar and the replies to sq3 squ3 sqe3 1andsqe3 using grounded theory.
table 6shows that .
of the se experts in sre agreed that gl should be included in se as evidence source and .
of these experts in sre indicated that they were willing to include gl as an evidence source in their research.
there are .
of the the reviews in rrdand relevant reviews in rld explained why they chose gl and gl users in sru replied to sq3.
after removing seven duplicate data cf.
section a total of data points provide the reasons for including gl in their research.
table replies to some survey questions survey question ofyes ofno as a source of evidence sqe3 willing to include grey literature sqe3 separate data analysis and synthesis squ7 separate quality assessment squ8 to evaluate the conclusions squ9 we synthesized five main factors from the data points which are to seek more related research to avoid publication bias to compare different perspectives between researchers and practitioners to understand the views of the practitioner s community and to explore uncharted research areas as shown in figure .
views of the practitioner community different perspectivesuncharted areas publication bias related researches grey literautre figure reasons for including grey literature to seek extend more related research .six reviews three in rrdand three in rld and six replies in sru expressed the need to improve the level of assurance regarding the coverage of the relevant literature by including gl.
when migrating api clients to graphql in practical study brito et al.
mentioned for emerging technologies e.g.
graphql grey literature tends to provide a better coverage of relevant documents than traditional literature .
three experts noted that the mainstream publications often lack replication studies which are often hidden in gl.
yet being able to replicate or not an outcome is valuable in itself.
another expert expressed original but failed research may also be interesting.
for researchers who want to try a new method they should want to know what other people have already tried which is seldom published.
to avoid publication bias .an expert expounded his views in his reply to us some reproducible work are published on arxiv.org mainly for timely reasons can help avoid publication bias.
he pointed out that such work should be included as evidence sources even though they might not have been verified by the community.
but taken the essence of their reproducibility into account such evidence sources could be objectively examined as correct or incorrect afterwards.
salleh et al.
proposed need to include searching of gray literature such as theses dissertations and technical reports in their pair programming for cs se teaching in higher education .
to compare different perspectives between researchers and practitioners .one review in rrd reports that grey literature is a major input especially in se where practitioners may face problems that scholars don t know .
the practitioner s experience should be targeted and contextualized to detect potential researcher s bias or too narrow questions .
therefore gl can be a good representative of the state of the practice.
meanwhile four replies in sru indicate that grey literature can also be used to verify the results of academic literature to know if there exist any gap between the information coming from academic literature and industry .
the proper use of gl can help bridge the gap between the scientific studies and the practices and views from industry.
gl tends to be realistic and report real practice but may not be largely reliable or clearly presented.
academic research is expected to be methodologically sound and well presented but may be less relevant and of limited value in guiding industrial activity.
to understand the views of the practitioner s community .
the views of the practitioner s community would be at the forefront and of the hot topics of se practices.
two gl users mentioned multi vocal literature is sometimes ahead of academic literature.
practitioners provide very useful reports and share experiences with research e.g.
in the areas of cloud computing big data and iot .
for instance matalongaa et al.
undertook a search of the gray literature to understand how the industry is testing context aware software .
three replies considered that individual gl items may be biased or not trustworthy but the aggregated results can help them accurately understand the views of the practitioner s community to learn the forefront and the hot topics of se.
hence they are willing to choose gl as another source of qualitative information for their own research.
to explore uncharted research areas .two respondents presented their views that gl can be valuable to shed light on yet uncharted areas of se research and practice especially when such areas are seeing massive industrial adoption .
in general gl evolves faster than the peer reviewed literature.
while discussing the pains and gains of their research on microservices soldani et al indicate grey literature is proved to help determining the state of practice on emerging topics in software engineering and in many other fields .
.
grey literature in research lifecycle rq3 rq3aims to understand how se researchers work with gl in their research.
to answer rq3 we used grounded theory to analyze and synthesize the replies to squ4 squ10insru and the replies to sqe4insre.
the data about the operations on gl in rrdandrld is presented by descriptive statistics with illustrative examples.
1429an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea a research lifecycle adapted from figure can cover the use of gl in the five research phases i.e.
proposing idea searching gl evaluating gl using gl and reporting findings.
search evaluate use ideas findingsoperations on grey literature new things from grey literature grey literature figure gl in research lifecycle generating new ideas from gl .as a gl user mentioned they grey literature are useful and can inspire research for further exploration .
gl can help bridge the gap between academic state of theart and industrial state of practice hence allowing to identify novel research directions and or to establish which research directions should be prioritized to drive the follow up research phases which is also mentioned in three replies in sruand in sre .
ten replies in sruand in sre suggest another effect of gl in this stage that gl may catch the trends the actual problems and interests of science and society.
searching gl on website and electronic database .in figure apart from google and google scholar sei website is another common source for gl.
the dblp database routinely indexes arxiv publications however which appears to be a constitute the biggest chunk of today s gl in se except theses .
web search engine e.g.
google google scholarsei websitearxiv safe website2421 hacker newsspringer book11 figure distribution of databases for searching gl keywords based search and snowballing are the main search strategies for gl.
in general one can use keywords in searching industry websites analyze the returns and apply snowballing for the results again.
the common use of snowballing can attribute to the cited gl in the published studies that prefers to have higher quality.
however in sru of the gl users are not conscious of using any particularly strategy.
they just rely on their own intuition to choose suitable search string for the target which may lead to continuous trials and be error prone.
search tools and strategies are often used together to achieve a relatively more complete search result of gl.
one gl user used forward snowballing to find articles about software maintainability prediction and metrics and searched them through google scholar .
for instance google scholar in combination with snowballing areused to search the gl about text classification in and the gl about mutation testing in .
evaluating gl in research .table 6shows that in sru of the gl users did not apply separate quality assessment for gl but .
of the se experts in sre thought this process should be included.
similarly most gl users in sru neither applied separate data analysis and synthesis for gl.
the difficulties of evaluating gl e.g.
lack of guidelines on gl leads to the rare evaluation of gl in se.
one gl user indicated that during their study on pair programming they were willing to evaluate gl but had no specific quality assessment frameworks .
al baik et al.
report that they had no clear criteria to assess the quality of the gl in their study about the kanban approach.
forming and evaluating conclusions with gl .from our survey in sru of the gl users used gl to evaluate their conclusions in their studies whereas in sru of them formed their conclusions from traditional literature together with gl.
the gl users who agreed to use gl in evaluating conclusions claimed that they put the gl in the equal position to the traditional literature.
however one gl user offered a different view after a proper quality assessment it grey literature should not make any difference except that the most recent grey literature might contribute to an assessment of latest trends .
table replies to squ10 effect on conclusions observations providing similar evidence with academic literature providing different evidence from academic literature identifying gap between academia and industry .gl may not provide any new findings regarding research questions but it can be used to find whether there exist any gap between the information coming from academia and industry.
in particular with the exception of one review that is solely based on gl .
of gl users in sru thought gl is able to offer the perspective different from academic literature .
as examples one gl user claimed we used grey literature to identify the gap between state of the art and state of the practice of maturity models .
putta et al.
also reported that the business benefits derived from using frameworks would be mentioned only in the gl.
discussion our study has provided evidence that there exist different understanding of the use of gl in se research.
we presented the current state of the art of gl in se.
taking the invited experts opinions from the replies to sqe5andsqe6and the findings in our research cf.
section into consideration we further propose the major challenges of using gl in se research and discuss the possible solutions.
.
state of the art of grey literature in se we observe that the use of gl in formal research has started gaining acceptance albeit slowly but it would need more time before gl can widely be recognized as an important source of potential 1430icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar evidence in se research.
the absence of a commonly accepted definition of gl in se as mentioned in section .
indicates a sign of not mature .
without a commonly accepted definition misunderstanding may influence the use of gl in se.
focusing on the quality different definitions can be identified in the replies from the users and the experts.
it is claimed that gl should be included as a source of evidence when there is a reasonable amount of literature with good quality.
in order to cover gl in their research researchers tried to define a limited scope which can ensure the good quality of their included gl to some extent.
some researchers advocate to include good quality in the definition of gl like grey literature in computer science including software engineering are internally not externally quality checked research reports or technical reports which are published either by universities or by leading industrial players such as ibm microsoft and which can be clearly identified by author report number year of publication.
such definitions overlook the timeliness of gl i.e.
grey data relevant to very recent research may be missed.
to emphasize the timeliness of gl some researchers have tried to extend the scope of gl to web content like blogs.
for instance tripathi et al.
included web pages for more information on the startup ecosystem .
discussion on the frontier of gl exists in some other disciplines like public health as well.
whether the definition of gl should be extended to include more grey data from web content such as blogs and tweets was argued .
when it comes to se web content can cover much more grey data because of the open communities like github.
this may imply that web content could be the next frontier of gl in se.
we have identified five main reasons for using gl in se when answering rq2.
five reviews one in rrdand four in rpd claim that they decided to consider adding gl in their respective reviews based on the guidelines for conducting slr in se.
four replies in sru mentioned that they followed the guidelines to cover gl in their studies.
whereas it should be noted that the slr guidelines do not provide instructive advice on how to use gl.
nurdiani et al.
included both web materials and peer reviewed literature to identify agile maturity models but without reporting any detailed reasoning for including gl in their review rather they suffice to state that they followed the slr guidelines.
we also observed that the most common way of getting gl in the reviewed papers is snowballing which includes authors snowballing and backward snowballing.
this can ensure the quality of gl to some extent one assumption can be that authors known for high quality research can find and produce gl with good quality.
whilst there is a risk that researchers only adopting snowballing may miss some gl which is not associated with highly reputed authors the improvement to this approach may provide a systematic support for including gl in se research.
although the use of gl is not commonly accepted as a source of evidence many researchers used gl during different stages of research that is an important indication of the potential value of gl in formal research efforts.
an expert expounded his views in his reply to us gl can be as important as academic literature at any stage of research.
however gl is not evenly used in all the research stages in se.
we generally identified several stages of research that may include gl to realize the background to design research and to use as a data source.
using gl to realize the background is commonly recognized by the invited se experts.
most of the valid replies fromthe invited experts claim that the gl can help them understand their studied area and identify the potential problems.
on the other hand the gl can only be included as a source of evidence conditionally while a few invited experts never use gl as a source of evidence.
.
challenges of using grey literature in se whilst researchers in se adopted many trials on how to use gl in se we identified some major challenges.
different understanding on the definition of gl.
definition of gl is the beginning of the use of gl.
the strictest scope of gl from the replies is limited to the documents coming from a scientific background or authors and with a scientific purpose but that have not undergone peer review.
in the contrast we got definitions which include any material unpublished e.g.
proprietary technical documents personal communications or proper archiving e.g.
blogs forum discussions news reports gartner reports as well.
se researchers can draw some guidelines from other disciplines.
for example abanda et al.
included content from youtube and blogs for investigating the use of building information modeling systems.
without a common definition which is recognized by most se researchers the gl cannot be used systematically.
paucity of ways of obtaining reliable gl.
four ways of obtaining gl can be identified gl databases customized google search engines targeted websites and snowballing.
we observed many sources that list gl producing organizations in the health sciences e.g.
hsric6 medline plus organizations7and public health topic pages8.
there is a paucity of reliable sources for gl in se.
one of the most important source of gl in se is arxiv publications that are enlisted by dblp.
as shown in figure9 google search engine google scholar reputable institutes like cmu sei are commonly used for searching gl in se.
many of the participants of our survey indicated that good reputation is the most useful maybe the only criteria of choosing a source of gl.
despite being widely used for sourcing gl snowballing is known to be a relatively passive way that may miss some recent research.
difficulty in quality assessment.
different types of gl and the lack of standardization make it hard to evaluate the quality of gl .
this can make the use of gl costly which may prevent researchers from using gl in their research.
without a standardized way of quality assessment of gl its use may be a threat to the validity.
noise in gl.
given gl may not be written for academic purposes it is difficult to identify the useful and trustworthy context for the included gl.
without easy reproduction and verification from gl it would be challenging to build common trust on using gl.
uncertain availability of gl.
different from white literature gl may vanish quickly.
this means it may be impossible to doublecheck or repeat the results if the cited gl are not properly longterm archived.
unless there is a iron cast guarantee that the gl like technical reports will remain available in well curated archives the citation of gl can be in a risk.
these challenges highlight the need and potential value of the availability suitable guidelines for supporting the use of gl in se.
to those who need gl with good quality they can include gl which 1431an evidence based inquiry into the use of grey literature in software engineering icse may seoul republic of korea is close to white literature e.g.
dissertations and theses.
to those who need enough information on the topics becoming popular more levels of gl can be consulted e.g.
blogs and presentations.
moreover the availability of guidelines can be useful in assessing the quality of gl for inclusion in research.
different criteria of quality assessment can be designed for different levels of gl.
there are many databases of gl in some other disciplines like medicine.
considering the current state that there are not many databases of gl in se a list of potential and available sources of gl may be necessary and beneficial to the community.
natural language processing nlp may be useful to reduce the noise in gl.
.
limitations we have identified some limitations of this study.
we strove to mitigate the potential impacts of the identified limitations.
because secondary studies can better reflect the five concerns scope search analysis evaluation effects of gl we selected secondary studies for this research that were expected to help synthesize the current status of the use of gl in se.
after trials we found it is difficult to formulate a reasonable search string to effectively cover as many primary studies including gl in se as possible.
hence we did not consider primary studies with gl at this stage.
as the objective of this work is to empirically explore se researchers views about gl we setup our research questions rqs to investigate the use of gl in research only.
accordingly we merely include the white literature with gl as the review scope at this stage which also helps avoid introducing much noise.
in determining the scope of the invited se experts we selected the program committee members of the three important conferences icse esem ease in se.
because gl could be used in any topics of se research we considered the candidates to invite from the members of general high quality conferences in se to maintain the representatives diversity instead from the conferences on a subfield of se.
among these venues we further decided to invite members of icse esem ease who also pay significant emphasis on methodological aspects of conducting and reporting se research.
we believe that our selected population was sufficiently representative of the se researchers who can be considered experts on the research topics.
the findings based on their responses can contribute to an evidence based understanding of the use of gl in se as well as to raise community wide awareness about the needs for methodological support to the use of gl in se research.
for the questionnaire of gl users we not only contacted the first authors of the reviews the response rate at .
but also continued to contact other co authors if without the first author s reply.
the response rate was raised to .
.
we invited se experts from the program committees of the important se conferences excluding two authors of this study for participating in our survey.
the response rates are .
for icse .
for esem and .
for ease.
the response rates of the community of empirical software engineering esem ease are higher than that of icse which implies that the empiricists in se are more likely to use grey literature so that they have a stronger interest to answer the questionnaires.
the findings from the survey can benefit the se research community in general as well as the application of gl in empirical research in particular.
conclusions gl has shown the potential to become an important component in se research.
whilst it has become important source of information in industry settings gl can also be an effective supplement to white literature for research.
however the lack of systematic guidance for conducting gl research leads to the hazy state of its use in se.
to provide a framework for assessing gl in se and a clear set of recommendations guidelines for using gl in se is the next task we need to focus on.
garousi et al.
proposed guidelines for including gl in secondary studies in se based on some mlr guidelines in other fields and slr guidelines in se.
their work provides se researchers with a preliminary understanding of the use of gl at the methodological level.
compared to their work this study aims to establish a systematic and evidence based understanding of the state of the art of the use of gl in se research.
this work also contribute to the efforts aimed at providing methodological support for the systematic use of gl in se research by analyzing and synthesizing the data extracted from reviews which claimed that they considered gl and the data from the survey of the gl users the authors of the reviews and the invited se research experts.
based on the findings from the data analysis and synthesis we have identified abstract definitions in terms of accessibility quality control andexpertise and major types of gl technical report white paper blog book book chapter and thesis.
it is noticed that se researchers considered including gl mainly because they are intended to avoid publication bias seek extend more related research explore uncharted area in se compare different perspectives between researchers and practitioners and understand views of the practitioner s community.
combining expert opinions with our reviews we propose a conceptual model for how gl works in the se research lifecycle.
the conceptual model includes five phases generating idea searching gl evaluating gl using gl and reporting findings.
in general gl can help researchers develop new ideas identify new research questions and discover new findings.
we have also identified some characteristics of the three operations on gl in se.
whilst our findings may raise the awareness about the current state of the use of gl in se our effort also contributes to the methodological improvement in empirical software engineering.
we also discuss some major challenges associated with using gl in se research.
thinking about these challenges may also help se researchers to make decision on the use gl in their research.
as our study focuses on the secondary studies including gl in se at this stage one potential way of furthering this research is to extend its scope to more primary studies that use gl as one of their evidence sources for research.
we also plan to conduct further research based on the data from gl for gaining deeper insights into as well as improvements for the use of gl in se research.
acknowledgment this work is supported by the national natural science foundation of china grant no.
.
1432icse may seoul republic of korea he zhang xin zhou xin huang huang huang and muhammad ali babar