a case study of onboarding in software teams tasks and strategies an ju university of california berkeley berkeley ca usa anju berkeley.eduhitesh sajnani microsoft redmond wa usa hitsaj microsoft.comscot kelly microsoft redmond wa usa scot.kelly microsoft.comkim herzig microsoft redmond wa usa kim.herzig microsoft.com abstract developers frequently move into new teams or environments across software companies.
their onboarding experience is correlated with productivity job satisfaction and other short term and long term outcomes.
the majority of the onboarding process comprises engineering tasks such as fixing bugs or implementing small features.
nevertheless we do not have a systematic view of how tasks influence onboarding.
in this paper we present a case study of microsoft where we interviewed developers moving into a new team and engineering managers onboarding a new developer into their team to understand and characterize developers onboarding experience and expectations in relation to the tasks performed by them while onboarding.
we present how tasks interact with new developers through three representative themes learning confidence building and socialization.
we also discuss three onboarding strategies as inferred from the interviews that managers commonly use unknowingly and discuss their pros and cons and offer situational recommendations.
furthermore we triangulate our interview findings with a developer survey n and a manager survey n and find that survey results suggest that our findings are representative and our recommendations are actionable.
practitioners could use our findings to improve their onboarding processes while researchers could find new research directions from this study to advance the understanding of developer onboarding.
our research instruments and anonymous data are available at index terms onboarding software development teams learning confidence social connections i. i ntroduction onboarding is a process where new members adjust to their new surroundings and acquire the behaviors attitudes and skills necessary to fulfill their new roles and function effectively as a member of a team .
a large number of developers change teams or start new positions every year but are not productive for months because onboarding can be overwhelming .
a developer often undergoes a high amount of cognitive overload of working on a new system faces social challenges of belonging to a new team and company and deals with the pressure of proving oneself in a new environment.
such stress influences a developer s happiness retention and productivity but could be managed by good onboarding strategies and automated support meanwhile ill designed onboarding processes could cause a vast waste of company resources and talents.
therefore improving developer onboarding crucial .developers onboard a new team with tasks such as software development and maintenance.
through tasks new developers learn about the new system socialize with the team build confidence and gain the team s recognition.
however we lack an understanding of how tasks influence onboarding in software development teams.
hence we propose the following research question rq1.
how do tasks influence a new developer s onboarding experience in software development teams?
we answer this research question with an exploratory case study which allows us to examine tasks and onboarding without any existing theory.
besides there are two observations that justify this method.
first onboarding is multidimensional.
there are conventional measurements such as productivity and socialization .
however mental states such as a developer s confidence motivation and stress level are important indicators as well.
therefore we view the choice of onboarding tasks as a design decision that balances various consequences and objectives in a specific situation.
second onboarding is a long process with many stakeholders.
onboarding could take over six months even for developers from within the company .
and situations are fast changing in this process.
for example the task of documenting a method call may help a new developer to understand the team s workflow and tools as the developer learns such simple tasks quickly become inappropriate and the developer needs more challenging tasks to keep motivated.
therefore we believe the onboarding process is continuously evolving.
we also aim to uncover some commonly used strategies in practice to assign tasks when onboarding new developers.
our understanding of tasks and onboarding will help us analyze these strategies and we can further provide practical suggestions for researchers and practitioners to understand and improve onboarding processes.
formally we propose the following research question rq2.
what task assignment strategies should be used in order to facilitate a positive onboarding experience in software engineering teams?
we use interviews and surveys to answer the two research questions where we get exploratory findings from interviews and test these findings with surveys.
we interviewed developers who had recently joined a new team and managers who had recently had a new developer allowing us to collect inputs from both sides of onboarding processes.
our interviews ieee acm 43rd international conference on software engineering icse .
ieee revealed how software development tasks influence some important aspects of onboarding processes such as learning socialization and the new developer s confidence.
besides we uncovered three onboarding strategies that managers commonly use to onboarding new developers.
we use surveys to get feedback from a broader audience regarding interview findings.
we collected survey responses from developers and managers.
survey results suggest that our interview findings are representative of onboarding experiences and that the three strategies can represent a majority of onboarding strategies in practice.
our case study leads to several recommendations that managers or organizations may use to improve onboarding processes.
these recommendations are validated by our surveys as actionable and useful.
managers can also benefit from our discussions about the three onboarding strategies.
we compare the pros and cons of the three strategies so that practitioners can choose their strategy that best fits their scenarios.
this paper is organized in the following way.
section ii describes our method.
section iii presents our interview findings.
section iv shows survey results that validate our interview findings in section iii.
section v discusses our work s connections with previous studies.
section vi addresses some threats of validity and section vii concludes this paper with some future research directions.
ii.
m ethods fig.
is an overview of our two step research method.
supplementary materia available at .ycoqcs 0lfd has interview guides and survey questions.
a. subjects and research site this study was conducted at the us division of microsoft a major tech company with more than employees.
microsoft has thousands of new hires and internal transfers every month making it a good research site to study onboarding.
besides microsoft has multiple divisions each with relatively distinct businesses cultures and onboarding practices.
we conducted our study from two divisions division a and division b to improve the generalizability of our findings.
division a focuses on service and software development while division b has both software and hardware businesses.
both divisions have a large number of software engineering teams.
we focus on software development teams a team has one engineering manager manager and several software developers developers with a goal of delivering products and services.
all teams are atomic there is no sub team within a team.
a manager s goal is two fold i help team members grow in their roles ii provide technical leadership to the team keeping the developers on track to deliver priorities and maintaining good team health and productivity.
accordingly a manager s job includes planning and negotiating assigning tasks evaluating and resolving inter and intra team conflicts.
managers decide how tasks are assigned to developers withina team and microsoft has no standard strategy for task assignment.
for example some managers choose to follow agile methods and developers get their tasks following the order of priority but some managers may choose to assign tasks directly to developers.
in our interviews all developers clearly understand the meaning of managers.
our analysis is grounded on tasks.
a typical task is an item from the team s task board defined and scoped to weeks some exploratory tasks are time boxed to weeks.
in our interviews some developers mentioned tasks customized for onboarding such as fixing and updating documentation these tasks are also defined and time boxed.
we found that both developers and managers understand the meaning of tasks well.
company microsoft maintains a person database that contains historical details about each employee s personal e.g.
date of joining title job description seniority level and years in the company the team e.g.
product group team members manager and leadership chain and geographic city building details.
to find subjects researchers queried theperson database to identify developers who had recently joined a new team and developer managers who had had a new developer joined recently.
for interviews we sampled developers who joined a new team between april 1st to july 1st in the past three months of this study and developer managers who had a new developer between january 1st to july 1st in the past six months of this study .
for surveys we set months as the threshold for both developers and developer managers.
we filtered results to keep only software developers or software developer managers who work at the same location us headquarter as researchers.
this process yielded developers and developer managers for interviews and developers and developer managers for surveys.
some demographics of interview and survey subjects are presented in table i and table ii.
b. interviews we conducted a pilot study comprising of six developer interviews prior to the formal study.
pilot interviews were unstructured focusing on the developer s onboarding experience and tasks.
from the pilot study we found constructs1that were closely related to onboarding these findings are used to design interview guides.
design to understand how tasks influence onboarding we focus on the context of onboarding such as the developer s prior experience tasks such as a task s complexity and expected results and constructs influenced by tasks such as learning and confidence.
for developers we ask participants to describe a task and ask follow up questions about how the task influence the other constructs.
for managers we ask participants to describe how they assign tasks such as their expectations and evaluations.
interview questions can be found in the supplementary material.
1we use constructs to refer to artifacts such as documentations processes such as meetings mental feelings such as confidence and metrics as learning.
614fig.
an illustrative overview of our research process.
we get exploratory findigns from interviews and test these findings with surveys.
interview questions are designed to measure tasks and each task s role in onboarding.
interview transcripts are coded into themes findings table iii gives a complete view of our interview findings and section ii b3 has more details about the coding process.
surveys triangulate our findings with a broader audience.
survey questions are derived directly from our interview findings.
table i interview subjects.
transfer means new developers from another team within microsoft.
division a and division b are two divisions under microsoft that have different businesses cultures and onboarding practices.
gender division background sum male female division a division b new hire transfer developers managers administration we randomly sampled subjects from the pool described in section ii a and contacted each subject through emails to schedule the interview.
each interview took minutes administrated by at least two researchers and audio video recorded.
one researcher read informed consent to the participant and collected the participant s verbal consent before the interview.
interviews were led mostly by one researcher and transcribed by the other.
researchers consolidated interview notes right after the interview.
analysis we followed the coding process from constructivist grounded theory to code interviews.
one researcher finished the coding process through a spreadsheet of transcript lines.
researchers consolidated findings after each coding step and decided focuses for the next step together.
after focused coding researchers discussed the emerged themes to be used for theoretical coding with other domain experts including other researchers developer team leaders and senior managers from microsoft that specifically work in the domain of improving developer productivity.
while this exercise did not result any significant changes in the emerged themes but helped induce more confidence in the themes and avoid bias.
initial coding.
we coded interview transcripts line by line into topics tasks constructs.
we used three topics pre task for contexts of tasks task related for specific tasks task sequences for the ordering of tasks for developer interviews and two additional topics goals and measurements for developer interviews.
furthermore we assigned each task related line a descriptor such as priority and complexity.
an initial list of descriptors was obtained from previous reports expert suggestions and our pilot interviews and continuously revised in the coding process.
focused coding we coded at task level in focused coding 615table ii we sent surveys to these developers and managers and received replies for the developer survey and replies for the manager survey.
seniority is inferred from employee titles.
seniority division background sum junior senior division a division b new hire transfer developers managers fig.
an illustrative overview of the coding process.
characterizing each task with a reduced set of codes such as the quality of support and social interactions as presented in fig.
.
the list of codes used in focused coding was identified as the most relevant and frequent by researchers in initial coding a complete list of codes and their meanings could be found in the supplementary material.
theoretical coding we focus on three themes in theoretical coding learning confidence and social interactions.
the three themes frequently appear in interviews and are representative of onboarding experiences.
therefore presenting tasks and their interactions with onboarding under the three themes covers artifacts learning mental status confidence and interpersonal dynamics social interactions .
we believe other interactions such as how tasks motivate new members are similar to one of the three themes.
besides the three themes we analyzed each developer s onboarding experience and each manager s onboarding design to understand onboarding strategies.
we have summarized three onboarding strategies from analyzing tasks coded in focused coding.
we further analyze the pros and cons of each onboarding strategy in theoretical coding.
c. surveys design after we coded interviews we created surveys to collect broad feedback to some specific interview findings and onboarding practice recommendations and thethree onboarding strategies.
as fig.
suggests the developer survey contains questions derived from our interview findings in table iii and section iii b. it has two sections.
the first section asks developers to choose a strategy from the three strategies listed in section iii b that best describes their recent onboarding experience or none of the above developers can explain their choice with an open response questions.
the second section has four question groups corresponding to three themes and a theme of mentors we add mentors because mentors are critical for learning building up confidence and creating social connections.
each question group contains likert scale questions that ask developers to rate their level of agreement to some statements ending with two open response questions for developers to explain their choices and provide recommendations.
for example participants are asked based on you recent on boarding experience to what degree do you agree or disagree with the following statements about learning?
maintaining a documentation that is complete clear updated and well organized is would be an effective way of facilitating my learning.
which validates the interview finding e1.
in table iii directly.
in addition to the two sections we collect some background information prior to the first section.
the developer survey used in this study can be found in the supplementary material.
the manager survey validates our practice recommendations 616and the three strategies.
it contains two sections.
in the first section managers are asked to choose one strategy that best describes how they onboard a junior or senior developer respectively they are presented with the three strategies as well as a choice of none of the above and are encouraged to explain their choice with an open ended question.
the second section asks managers to rate how likely they would use recommendations from table iii to improve onboarding they may choose already in practice if the recommended practice is being used.
for example participants are asked do you believe that the following practices that could facilitate learning would improve a new member s on boarding experience in your team?
create and or maintain a new member friendly documentation.
which validates the recommendation a1.
in table iii directly.
in addition to the two sections we collect some background information prior to the fist section.
the manager survey used in this study can be found in the supplementary material.
we take the following steps to ensure our survey is valid and not biased.
first we conduct two rounds of in person pilot studies with recently onboarded developers and managers who recently onboarded a new developer in their team and used their feedback to remove ambiguity and biases in our initial design.
the pilot studies participants do not participate in the actual survey.
second to ensure the participant s understanding we define important terms in the context of our survey before the questions.
all questions and definitions are included in the supplementary material.
administration we sent surveys to developers and developer managers identified from the pool as described in section ii a via emails interview subjects were excluded from surveys.
we received replies for the developer survey and replies for the manager survey.
iii.
i nterview findings this section presents the interview findings.
to answer rq1 our interviews have revealed fifteen constructs that are relevant to onboarding including context factors such as the developer s prior experience onboarding metrics such as learning and social interactions mental status such as confidence and motivation and processes such as stand up meetings.
three constructs are particularly critical to onboarding experience learning which measures how the new developer gains knowledge about the new team confidence which is closely related to how the new developer feels about the onboarding process and social interactions which is a critical indicator that managers use to measure onboarding .
section iii a will elaborate on how learning confidence and socialization are influenced by tasks and our key findings are presented in table iii.
furthermore to answer rq2 section iii b shows three onboarding strategies that have emerged from interviews.
across this section we refer to interviewed developers with p and interviewed developer managers with m.a.
learning confidence and social connections ten managers considered independence as a final checkpoint for onboarding.
independence is indicated by answering customer questions driving complex features contributing new ideas and more.
we focus on three aspects learning confidence and social connection because they are necessary for independence and are frequently mentioned in manager interviews.
table iii summarizes our findings and our recommendations for practitioners to facilitate the new member s learning confidence and social connections.
we omit most direct quotes in this section due to the page limit.
readers can find more quotes and details in the supplementary material.
learning new developers need to learn everything about the team code repositories business values and customers development tools and processes and responsibilities of each individual member and some other close teams.
developers frequently learn from their tasks.
out of task items led to learning.
as p14 put it there is so much to learn so any task assigned to me would have created a learning experience .
task related documentations and team support are major knowledge channels for new members.
besides team meetings also provide learning opportunities.
task related documentation.
task related documentations including documents presentations tutorials and demos are primary sources of information.
twelve developers mentioned that they learned from documentations.
developers seek answers from documentations before asking for the team s help and they feel frustrated when documentation cannot provide answers.
some developers mentioned the importance of indexing documents in particular suggesting that making information organized and easy to find can improve onboarding experiences.
therefore the team should assign new developers tasks that are supported by clear complete updated and wellorganized documentations so that new members can quickly locate relevant information and avoid inaccurate or incomplete information.
team support.
team support is critical for learning.
not all information is available as documentations so new developers have to seek the team for help.
in particular mentorship is a typical and effective form of team support.
mentors help new developers solve problems master development tools and processes and find useful resources they also work as a bridge so that new developers can seek help from others in the team.
compared to other team members new developers find it easier to seek help from a dedicated person like mentors.
therefore assigning task support mentors is an efficient method to promote learning.
technical meetings.
developers benefit from attending technical meetings although these meetings are not designed for learning.
these meetings provide new information about the team s work its connections to other teams its workflow and its division of responsibilities.
some meetings are conversational where new developers get their questions answered.
for example standups are opportunities for new developers to ask task related questions.
team meetings are particularly 617table iii interview findings and recommendations derived from the findings.
the numbers for experiences are calculated from the developer survey as the percentage of developers who have answered agree or strongly agree .
the numbers for practices are calculated from the manager survey as the percent of managers who have answered very likely somewhat likely or already in practice .
creating a psychologically safe environment is a broad topic that is beyond the scope of this paper.
readers can refer to other studies such as google s project aristotle .
topic experiences practiceslearninge1.
maintaining a documentation that is complete clear updated and well organized is an effective way of facilitating learning for new members.
a1.
create and or maintain a new memberfriendly documentation.
e1.
creating a safe and supportive environment where new members can ask questions freely is an effective way of facilitating learning for new members.
create a psychologically safe environment.
e1.
team meetings such as daily stand ups and sprint planning meetings are useful opportunities for new members to learn the team s big picture.
a1.
include new members in the relevant business and technical meetings.
e1.
explaining the team s big picture such as visions missions and plan is an effective way of facilitating learning for new members.
a1.
run onboarding sessions in the first few days to explain the big picture to the new member.
confidencee2.
enabling new members to deliver tasks frequently is an effective way of building up a new member s confidence.
a2.
use a sequence of quick proper to the new member s seniority tasks for new members to onboard.
e2.
providing frequent positive confirmation and trust from the team is an effective way of building up a new member s confidence.
a2.
set frequent checkpoints to give continuous positive confirmation to the new member.
e2.
new members build up their confidence as they learn more about the team s landscape.
a2.
set up dedicated learning time sessions for new members.
e2.
explaining a task s big picture and clarifying the specifications is an effective way of building up confidence for new members.
a2.
make sure the new member clearly understand the specifications of the task.
e2.
creating an environment where new members feel safe and supported is an effective way of building up confidence for new members.
create a psychologically safe environment.socializatione3.
new members build up social connections with the team faster and easier when they can interact frequently with the manager and mentor.
a3.
set up frequent one on one meetings with a new member in the first few weeks.
e3.
having a low cost channel for new members to seek help from the team is an effective way of facilitating a new member to build up social connections with the team.
a3.
use social events to create a safe environment for the new member.
e3.
assigning tasks that require the new member to collaborate with various team members is a effective technique to help new members to build social connections.
a3.
assign tasks that require the new member to work with different people from the team.
useful when teams have many new developers.
in those cases participants spend more time on learning and understanding while in some other cases new developers may find information from these meetings overwhelming.
learn the task s big picture first.
learning a task s contexts facilitate a new developer s learning.
developers found it helpful that their managers presented big pictures before assigning tasks and some developers struggled because they did not see the big picture first.
for example p21 had problems seeking help from the team not knowing the big picture.
focusing on the big picture and avoiding details prevents information overload because new developers can filter unnecessary information.
therefore we recommend managers to explain the task s context and its connections to the rest of the team before assigning a task.
confidence new developers become more confident in their team roles as they onboard.
confidence is necessary for independence but low confidence is common for new members.
five developers mentioned that they had low confidence due to unfamiliar technologies and processes.
four sources of confidence have emerged from interviews finishing a task confirmation and trust learning and team support.
finishing a task.
finishing a task boosts confidence.
new developers prove that they can deliver values for the team and they get more confidence about the team s development process.
on the other hand having no progress hurt confidence.
slow progress causes new developers to feel pressure and low confidence even when new developers know that the team does not expect them to finish the task soon.
therefore assigning tasks that could be quickly solved could boost confidence of new developers.
receiving positive feedback on performance.
new developers gain confidence when they feel the team s confirmation and trust.
there are many indicators of trust and confirmation some developers feel confident when other team members start to ask him her for help others feel confirmation when they are nominated to handle customer requests.
meanwhile negative judgments about a new developer s abilities could hurt confidence.
p17 felt less confident when her co worker made jokes about her being too slow even when she knew the co worked did not mean it.
getting early positive feedback usually leads to good onboarding experiences for example 618senior developers can receive confirmation and trust from the team faster than junior developers because they have advantages in the team on their tasks and senior developers also have better onboarding experiences than junior developers in our interviews.
clear learning outcomes.
new developers become more confident as they become more familiar about the team and their work.
p19 and p20 mentioned that systematic learning on task related topics boosted their confidence.
clarifying task specifications is also a form of learning that improves confidence.
p8 said that understanding the requirements clearly is related to gaining confidence because his task felt more normal knowing the requirements.
therefore we recommend managers to emphasize on what the new developer could learn from assigned tasks and set clear expectations of learning gains when assigning tasks.
peer support.
new developers are confident when they have the team support working on a task.
as p25 put it i m aware that there are plenty of things that i don t know but i know there are others who know .
.
.
and i m confident that there are people where i can get help .
support may come from the manager and mentor specifically.
new developers have more confident when they know there is a specific person from whom they can seek help.
if new developers are paired with a senior developer to work on a task they typically have a very strong confidence.
therefore assigning tasks that are supported by the team and making the support accessible to new developers could improve onboarding.
socialisation successful onboarding means positioning oneself in the team and owning a part of the team s work.
we have found three types of social interactions interactions with mentors interactions with teammates and interactions due to collaboration and dependency of tasks.
mentors.
mentors are the first person that new developers contact when they have questions.
out of participants who had a mentor or onboarding buddy found mentors helpful.
besides people who did not have a mentor believed that having a mentor would improve their onboarding experiences.
for example p9 reported that i wish i had someone that i could have sat together with mentors have a wide range of responsibilities from setting up environments and introduce the team to answering questions and assigning tasks.
one important responsibility is to reduce barriers for help seeking.
mentors are accessible and new members can ask mentors dumb questions freely.
accordingly some managers mentioned that communications skills are important for mentors.
seeking help from teammates.
new developers frequently seek help from teammates while working on their tasks.
through help seeking new developers build social connections with the team.
out of task items where social interactions were discussed led to a strengthened connection between the developer and the team.
however new developers might feel hesitant to ask questions because they feel unsafe or they do not want to bother others.
as rollag et al.
pointed out managers should not expect new members to fend for themselves .
if help seeking is minimal social interactionsalso decrease.
therefore having a low cost or dedicated channel for help seeking could promote social interactions.
for example p4 had a good onboarding experience because he could ask questions in a dedicated online channel and got help from experienced developers fast.
this dedicated channel was a low cost approach for p4 to seek help so that he did not have to figure out whom to ask and there were no social barriers for him to ask related questions.
collaboration and dependency of tasks.
tasks that involve interactions and collaborations with multiple stakeholders force new developers to establish new social connections.
some tasks require collaborations with another team member but some tasks require cross team and cross domain collaborations.
new developers who are sensitive to other people s working styles generally feel happy to work with others.
however some new developers may prefer tasks that are less socially complex.
in particular waiting is common when collaborating with others and waiting has a negative impact on the motivation and confidence of new developers.
for example p23 worked with other teams on a new feature but could not get timely feedback because the other teams would not review pull requests.
in general tasks that require cross team or crossdomain collaborations are challenging for new developers and should be used with caution.
answering rq1.
our interviews suggest that onboarding is a long term process shaped by tasks and that a task s influence on onboarding is compounded with the its contexts.
for example tasks with high uncertainties could facilitate learning and social interactions with team support but could hinder onboarding when no support is available.
we present how tasks influence learning confidence and socialization and we provide some recommendations for practitioners to improve their onboarding processes.
our findings and recommendations are presented in table iii.
b. onboarding strategies this section presents three onboarding strategies that we have summarized from interviews simple complex is an approach where managers gradually increase the task s complexity.
priority first is an approach where managers follow the order of priority.
exploration based is an approach where managers assign tasks that are under defined and uncertain.
simple complex simple complex is widely used.
managers used this strategy while developers were onboarded with this strategy.
in simple complex managers increase the task s complexity over time.
m8 described a typical simple complex first week use simple tasks bugs or configuration settings to get familiar with the development process.
the next or weeks get oriented in the codebase with small bugs or simple features.
the next to months become an expert in one domain with more bugs and features.
eventually become an expert who can handle the design of a new feature.
this progressive approach is consistent with expectations that managers have when onboarding new members.
as a comparison m14 who also used simple complex described his expectations first week learn tools and source code.
second week learn the customer s perspectives.
months they can design something or add a new capability in a thoughtful way.
six months they should be able to work independently.
with simplex complex managers choose tasks for the developer to achieve expected learning goals.
it creates a smooth learning experience for new members.
besides as finishing tasks builds up confidence the developer could maintain high confidence or build up confidence fast.
tasks in this stage are simple and well defined.
some managers would look for high priority tasks because it gives visibility to the person m11 .
but others did not care about priority or wanted to avoid high priority tasks.
there are two variants based on how the manager assign tasks after to months.
depth first lets the developer become expert in one domain and expand knowledge gradually to other domains.
breadth first exposes the developer to multiple parts first before assigning more in depth tasks.
depth first is more common in our interviews.
owning a domain improves confidence and promotes social interactions which could justify depth first.
on the other hand breadthfirst emphasizes the developer s interest and motivates developers with the freedom to explore.
it also helps the developer to build a broad social network with the team.
m9 mentioned those tasks usually make it so that people will meet more team members to work with and p7 mentioned that he liked breadth first because whenever they talk about something i know some part of it .
further studies could measure and compare the two approaches.
priority first two managers assign tasks following the backlog s order which we call priority first.
m1 described the approach as all features are broken down into tasks and then all people pick up tasks organically m2 explained that no tasks projects are new guy projects .
in both cases developers get the task with the highest priority.
twelve developers were onboarded with this strategy.
priority first allows the developer to generate values immediately for the team and thus is commonly used by teams under pressure.
out of six developers who were in a team under pressure four were onboarded with priority first.
in cases such as p14 the developer worked closely with the team on urgent tasks although p14 had to learn piece bypiece as he worked through tasks he felt positive about his onboarding experience.
for p14 the team s high pressure and highly focused situation created a safe and energetic learning space.
he reported that he was highly motivated because his coworkers were highly focused besides he felt safe to makemistakes and asked for help because the team was things too quickly to worry about petty things like people being insulted or worrying about how they took something .
although p14 mentioned some benefits eight developers onboarded with priority first mentioned that their tasks were challenging.
challenging tasks early in the onboarding process could spur fears and low confidence.
p30 said that she had zero confidence for an urgent task and she was wondering why her manager did that.
meanwhile good team support can counter some negative influences.
m1 s team practiced pair programming that allowed the developer to interact heavily with an experienced developer m2 also paired the developer with an experienced developer on the first few tasks.
exploration based exploration based is a strategy where managers assign loosely defined tasks to the developer.
one manager mentioned that he would assign a task with high uncertainties for senior developers and six developers were onboarded with exploration based.
managers use exploration based to onboard senior developers.
p24 was aware that some specifications were up to him because he was an experienced engineer.
however this strategy was also used to onboard junior developers.
for example p5 was assigned to a technical spike and p29 was assigned to prototyping a new tool.
both tasks were outside the team s core product so that new developers could explore without time pressure or worrying about breaking the production code.
their managers made clear that the task was meant for them to learn.
we found such a strategy might have negative influences on new developers.
at the time we had the interviews neither p5 and p24 had delivered the assigned task.
p5 in particular expressed that he felt pressure because he could not deliver as frequently as others.
new teams are more likely to use exploration based to onboard developers.
out of developers who were reportedly from a new team were onboarded with exploration based.
new teams have more unspecified tasks so they are more likely to use this strategy.
besides new members feel more comfortable with exploration based in new teams.
p19 mentioned that he felt good because everyone in the team was learning together.
p31 said that people in a new team were aware that new members could be lost so they would provide the necessary help.
both p19 and p31 were able to build broad social connections with the team through the task.
answering rq2.
our interviews have surfaced three onboarding strategies simple complex priority first and exploration based.
simple complex is a good strategy for onboarding junior developers it gradually prepares new developers keeping them confident and motivated.
meanwhile exploration based works better for experienced developers it provides freedom to learn about the team and build an ownership.
priority first is used by teams with special organization or special needs agile teams new teams and teams with a tight schedule may use this strategy.
620iv.
s urvey results we sent the developer survey to developers and collected responses .
.
we sent the manager survey to manager and collected responses .
.
anonymous survey responses are available at .ycoqcs 0lfd.
a. about experiences and recommendations fig.
shows that findings in table iii are representative of onboarding experiences of developers and managers from microsoft.
most developers agree with our interview findings and most managers find our recommendations useful.
in fig.
3a the average percent of developers who agree or strongly agree with our statements about developer experiences is .
and the min is .
.
in fig.
3b out of managers who are not using the recommended practice at the time the average percent of managers who believe that recommended practices are useful for onboarding is .
and the min is .
.
besides fig.
3c shows that on average .
managers are already using recommended practices indicating that the recommended practices are useful and recommended practices are actionable.
therefore our findings echo with a majority of developers and managers from microsoft.
as microsoft has many divisions with difference engineering culture these results suggest that our findings can generalize to other software engineering teams and organizations as well.
b. about the three strategies fig.
3b shows that the three strategies presented in section iii b can represent most onboarding strategies that managers use in microsoft.
in fig.
4a the three strategies cover .
onboarding experiences.
fig.
4b and fig.
4c show that .
and .
managers use one of the three strategies to describe their onboarding strategy.
therefore the three strategies can explain the design intention of most onboarding experiences.
comparing fig.
4b and fig.
4c .
managers onboard junior developers with simple complex strategy as compared to .
when onboarding senior developers .
managers use exploration based strategy when onboarding senior developers as compared to .
for junior developers.
these two arguments are consistent with our interview findings.
the comparison also suggests that managers have more diverse onboarding strategies for senior developers.
v. d iscussion and related work onboarding is more broadly studied in other areas especially management and human resources .
nonetheless domain specific observations are necessary because software development tasks have unique properties.
for example open ended tasks used in exploration based strategies are not common in other teams such as service teams.
besides our study focuses on onboarding collocated teams while assigning tasks in distributed teams requires more considerations .
future studies may generalize our findings to distributed teams.our work is inspired by deganais et al.
s study on developers moving into a new landscape .
in comparison some of our observations about learning are consistent with theirs.
we notice beyond deganais et al.
s study that learning the landscape is not the only objective for onboarding so we include other indicators such as social connections .
for example deganais et al.
recommend early experimentation to facilitate learning our study shows that early experimentation is one strategy simple complex to onboard new members and other strategies priority first and exploration based could also be used in certain cases.
similarly our work echos with begel simon s research on novice developers while we present a more comprehensive view of longitudinal onboarding around tasks.
in sim holt interviewed four developers and summarized seven patterns in four major categories .
compared with this work our study is more complete and modern.
for example sim holt s pattern is initial tasks were open ended problems or simple bug repairs we summarize this pattern into two strategies exploration based and simple complex and we have additionally uncovered the priority first strategy which has a close relationship with agile development method that became mainstream after sim holt s work.
our study is closely related to studies on selecting tasks to enter open source communities .
our work distinguishes from theirs in two significant ways.
first we focus on industry which have major distinctions from open source communities in terms of motivations roles and responsibilities .
second we examine a process towards an independent contributor while they focus on entering a community.
as our study shows onboarding has multiple stages with different objectives and entering a community team is just one stage.
only when all stages are considered together can we explain some strategies such as priority first that practitioners use to onboard new members there are a few other studies that are related to tools to choose tasks for onboarding .
one such example is wang sarma s work on finding the right bug for new members .
our study provides more guidance for researchers to design and test such automated systems.
for example egelman et al.
s recent work on detecting negative interpersonnal interactions from code reviews could be used to support onboarding as our study suggests that negative feedback in code reviews could hurt a new developer s confidence and leads to a less successful onboarding experience.
vi.
t hreats to validity our study is a mixed method case study with interviews and surveys.
we address three types of threats to validity .
a construct validity in section iv we use the percentage of agreements in our survey as an indirect measurement of validity.
we assume that developers and managers who have reported agreement to our results have had experiences or perspectives that are consistent with our results.
in response to concerns about the validity of this measurement we design surveys to be clear concrete and neutral.
for example we a developer survey results b manager survey results c practices in use fig.
survey results about developer experiences and recommended practices.
labels are listed in table iii.
all questions in the developer survey have at least replies .
all questions in the manager survey have at least relies .
a developer reported onboarding strategies n .
b manager reported onboarding strategies for junior developers n .
c manager reported onboarding strategies for senior developers n .
fig.
survey results about onboarding strategies.
refer to practice recommendations as practices in manager survey to avoid biases we also frame questions so that managers are not forced to agree with the usefulness of presented practices.
in both surveys each question offers participants a place to explain their choices.
from these answers we have seen no indicator that any question is vague or misleading.
b internal validity in interviews we ask subjects to recall their recent activities and feelings which are subject to biases.
to address this we choose subjects who have joined a new team recently or who have a new member joined recently.
as a future direction a longitudinal study that observes developers who are onboarding a team might provide more insights.
another threat to validity is that our summary of interviews is subject to researchers personal biases.
therefore most interviews are conducted by two researchers and interview findings are consolidated among researchers.
besides all interviews are recorded so that researchers can refer to the original data when needed.
we have also shared our results with several domain experts within microsoft in the form of write ups and presentations to avoid biases.
c external validity this study is conducted in one company which poses a threat to the study s external validity.
while we recognize that similar studies from more companies are desired we believe our study should generalize to most modern software engineering teams.
microsoft is a large com pany with teams working on multiple technical areas serving various customers.
its teams are self organized and thus have the autonomy to practice various development methods and to different degrees.
furthermore we sampled participants from two company divisions that have different products businesses and cultures.
this sampling method also improves the external validity of our results.
vii.
c onclusion and future directions to our best knowledge this study is the first research work on software developer onboarding tasks and strategies.
by interviewing developers and managers we present how tasks influence three representative themes of onboarding learning confidence and social interactions.
our findings lead us to some recommendations for practitioners to improve onboarding processes.
furthermore we have summarized three strategies that managers use to onboard new members.
our work benefit both researchers and practitioners.
for researchers we provide observations and insights for software developer onboarding.
for practitioners we provide a list of recommendations in table iii.
practitioners from microsoft have validated that these recommendations are useful and practical for onboarding new members.
we encourage future studies to provide quantitative perspectives on onboarding.
for example experiments that compare 622the three onboarding strategies would bring many benefits to the software engineering community.
our findings also open up venues for empirical and experimental research in onboarding area.
for example in section iii b we hypothesize that exploration based onboarding strategies could cause a bad onboarding experience for less experienced developers.
such a hypothesis could be validated more rigorously by experiments.
as a case study our measurements of tasks are subjective based on our interviews and we encourage future studies to design objective measurements to further assist onboarding.
onboarding is a fundamental issue correlated with productivity job satisfaction retention creativity and other desired outcomes of an organization.
with tasks new members are shaped by the team but also reshape the team.
we envision a theory where we can understand this dynamic profound and critical process.
such a theory would help the community to keep teams the minimal units of the software engineering industry efficient safe and lively.