investigating the impact of interpersonal challenges on feeling welcome in oss bianca trinkenreich zixuan feng rudrajit choudhuri marco gerosa anita sarma igor steinmacher colorado state university united states bianca.trinkenreich colostate.edu oregon state university united states fengzi choudhru anita oregonstate.edu northern arizona university united states marco.gerosa igor.steinmacher nau.edu abstract the sustainability of open source software oss projects hinges on contributor retention.
interpersonal challenges can inhibit a feeling of welcomeness among contributors particularly from underrepresented groups which impacts their decision to continue with the project.
how much this impact is varies among individuals underlining the importance of a thorough understanding of their effects.
here we investigate the effects of interpersonal challenges on the sense of welcomeness among diverse populations within oss through the diversity lenses of gender race and dis ability.
we analyzed the large scale linux foundation diversity and inclusion survey n to model a theoretical framework linking interpersonal challenges with the sense of welcomeness through structural equation models partial least squares pls sem .
we then examine the model to identify the impact of these challenges on different demographics through multi group analysis mga .
finally we conducted a regression analysis to investigate how differently people from different demographics experience different types of interpersonal challenges.
our findings confirm the negative association between interpersonal challenges and the feeling of welcomeness in oss with this relationship being more pronounced among gender minorities and people with disabilities.
we found that different challenges have unique impacts on how people feel welcomed with variations across gender race and disability groups.
we also provide evidence that people from gender minorities and with disabilities are more likely to experience interpersonal challenges than their counterparts especially when we analyze stalking sexual harassment and doxxing.
our insights benefit oss communities informing potential strategies to improve the landscape of interpersonal relationships ultimately fostering more inclusive and welcoming communities.
index terms disengagement challenges oss diversity i. i ntroduction a core principle of open source software oss is its openness anyone from anywhere in the world can contribute irrespective of their background.
however despite this apparent openness oss projects have a severe lack of diversity.
for example data reveals that less than of the contributors are women and rates are also low for non whites .
and people who have disabilities .
this lack of diversity is not just a social justice problem it also undermines the innovation and sustainability of oss projects .
literature has also extensively explored the multiple facets of challenges faced by oss contributors including barriers faced by newcomers one time contributors and mentors .
prior work has investigated how a sense of virtual community svc in oss is created by intrinsic factors such as membership identity and attachment to a group andaffects their sense of belonging .
however does not tie this feeling of svc to the challenges that individuals face which are the antecedents of svc.
more specifically studies have identified interpersonal challenges as a major obstacle to contributing to oss especially for those who are a minority in oss .
what is missing however is an understanding of how these interpersonal challenges hinder the contributors feeling of welcomeness in the project which in turn impacts their decision to continue contributing.
this oversight is not trivial the feeling of welcomeness is key to sustained engagement particularly in environments built on open collaboration principles .
this brings us to our first research question rq1 how are interpersonal challenges associated with the feeling of welcomeness in oss?
research has also shown that individuals in the minority in oss often face a higher frequency of interpersonal challenges such as toxic communication or gender stereotyping which in turn impacts their turnover .
however the extent to which interpersonal challenges affect the feeling of welcomeness among minority communities is yet to be determined.
additionally our worldview is an amalgamation of our individual backgrounds and lived experiences.
consequently various interpersonal challenges may exert disparate influences on individuals belonging to distinct demographic groups.
thus far no research has quantified the differential effects of various challenges on feeling welcome nor on the interpersonal challenges across demographic dimensions.
this leads us to our other two research questions rq2 how does the association between interpersonal challenges and feeling welcome differ for those who are in gender race or disability minorities?
rq3 how differently do those in gender race or disability minority face interpersonal challenges?
the current absence of a comprehensive understanding that delineates the impact of challenges on the feeling of welcomeness across various population segments implies that endeavors by oss communities to retain a diverse pool of contributors are likely to fail.
our study closes this gap through a large scale n mixed methods analysis of linux foundation survey data .
specifically we build a theoretical model using partial least squares structural equation modeling pls sem to determine and delineate the different types of interpersonal challenges their extent and their impact on feeling welcome rq1 .
wearxiv .01601v1 nov 2024then model the differential impact of the various interpersonal challenges on demographic dimensions of gender race and disabilities through multi group analysis rq2 .
following we modeled individual logistic regressions to evaluate the differences in experiencing interpersonal challenges across demographic dimensions of gender race and disabilities rq3 .
our study follows a concurrent embedded strategy and uses qualitative analysis of the open ended survey responses about reasons to feel or not feel welcome to understand the participants specific experiences that contributed to their feeling or lack of welcomeness in the community.
this serves as a form of data triangulation to provide rigor to our findings.
our theoretical model empirically shows that experiencing interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling welcome in oss.
moreover it highlights the nuanced nature of how different challenges impact different demographics differently.
for example in our data while race minorities felt less welcome interpersonal challenges had a strong association with not feeling welcome for gender minorities and people with disabilities but not for race.
by understanding how specific challenges impact diverse contributors feelings of welcomeness our study not only advances the academic literature on the field of behavioral software engineering but also holds practical implications.
the results are paramount to inform oss communities on the specific aspects to focus on to foster diversity in oss which in turn can result in innovation and drive the sustainability of oss projects.
our contributions offer valuable insights that may go beyond oss informing broader software industry efforts on creating inclusive and equitable spaces.
ii.
r elated work diversity and inclusion in oss.
diversity and inclusion in oss have received attention in recent years .
most of the literature related to minorities and underrepresentation in oss is focused on women .
a literature survey by trinkenreich et al.
identified that women are poorly represented and aggregates eight significant challenges women face when contributing to oss.
by analyzing repositories vasilescu et al.
showed that projects with higher gender diversity within their development teams tend to experience more effective collaboration and productivity.
similarly a survey by lee and carver highlighted notable perceptions of gender bias and inclusivity issues within the oss community.
participants acknowledged barriers to women s participation and emphasized the need for better practices to foster inclusivity.
however fewer studies have focused on other underrepresented populations in oss besides gender.
previous research claimed for more studies about racial diversity in software engineering .
race minority was evidenced as underrepresented in oss .
in this context nadri et al.
found that perceptibly black and asian pacific developers faced higher contribution rejection rates than those from perceptibly white developers.
a literature review by rodr guez p erez et al.
indicates limited knowledge about the impact of race nationality and disability in oss.
despite this respondents in a recent survey reported that their disability influences their emotions and perceptions of others feelings .
interpersonal challenges in oss.
open source has a reputation for being aggressive .
toxicity and incivility are prevalent issues in oss discussions and code reviews adversely affecting contributor engagement collaboration and overall community health miller et al.
ferreira et al.
.
contributors who are underrepresented in oss are experiencing even worse collaboration environments.
harassing verbal comments sexual jokes insults and bullying are not uncommon .
singh and brandon found that less than of online communities are safe to women contributors free of sexism and discrimination.
however from a quantitative analysis of oss software package websites only of them have a code of conduct or relevant rules .
such prevalent interpersonal challenges are creating barriers that make contributors feel unwelcome in oss especially for contributors who are underrepresented.
welcomeness in oss.
feeling welcome antecedes belonging .
gill describes welcomeness as more than a mere acknowledgment of arrival or permission for entry.
it embodies a deeper sense of emotional and relational connection between the welcomer and the newcomer implying a willingness to engage and suggesting a deeper level of engagement beyond mere permission.
it involves an exchange of emotions that transcend bureaucratic processes .
we introduce the concept of welcomeness in oss which focuses on conveying a genuine positive reception of newcomers as contributors to the project.
while onboarding primarily addresses the procedural and technical requirements necessary to contribute welcomeness emphasizes the interpersonal dynamics that foster an engaging atmosphere characterized by mutual respect and connection.
welcomeness is a construct investigated in the context of the inclusion of minorities in other areas like a education sports international relations and healthcare .
while there is no previous work specifically focusing on welcomeness in software engineering it antecedes the sense of belonging which was the focus on recent studies in software engineering teams context .
the need for belonging is crucial in the oss domain as shown in studies of oss contributors .
more specifically close to the present work trinkenreich et al.
showed that the sense of virtual community plays a critical role in the contributors continued engagement and contributions.
trinkenreich s study highlights that factors such as shared experiences support and meaningful interaction within the community are vital in fostering a sense of belonging among contributors thereby influencing their commitment to the oss environment.
therefore the sense of belonging emerges as a key factor in retaining personnel which is vital for the sustainability of oss projects.
while previous research extensively investigates the various aspects analyzed in this study it does not connect aspects of belonging with the interpersonal challenges faced by contrib research questionrq1 determine the significance of associated factors section iv .a rq2 determine the dif ferences among groups section iv .b rq3 determine frequency of factors per group section iv .c composite assessment uncover reasons not to feel welcome section iii.d datasurvey data closed questions gender race disabilitiessurvey data open question analysis proceduresstructural equation models pls sem multi group analysis mga ordinal logistic regression olr qualitative analysissurvey data closed questions gender race disabilitiessurvey data closed questions gender race disabilitiesfig.
research design following a concurrent embedded mixed methods strategy utors nor consider the feeling of welcomeness as a distinct construct.
our present work complements the existing literature by evidencing the interplay between interpersonal challenges and welcomeness which anticipates belonging and their effect on gender race and disabilities minorities.
iii.
r esearch design fig.
presents an overview of the research design.
we followed a concurrent embedded mixed methods strategy with a dominant quantitative component.
answering rq1 involves using structural equation models partial least squares to model how interpersonal challenges are associated with the feeling of welcomeness.
in rq2 we investigated the heterogeneity in the model through multigroup analysis mga and established whether the association of the variables identified in rq1 varied according to gender race or ethnicity and abilities.
rq3 identifies the frequency of each demographic group experiencing each interpersonal challenge using ordinal logistic regression.
finally we qualitatively analyzed the open ended survey responses about why contributors do not feel welcome in oss as a form of data triangulation and conducted a follow up study to collect the practitioners perspectives about our results.
this work is different from the model of sense of belonging proposed by trinkenreich et al.
which investigated the association between intrinsic motivations and the sense of virtual community svc .
here we investigate the feeling of welcomeness which anticipates belonging and its association with challenges not motivations.
moreover trinkenreich et al.
s study used the diversity lens of gender while the present study also tackles the lens of race and disabilities.
a. dataset we used the data from the linux foundation diversity and inclusion survey .
the survey design was led by the linux foundation research in collaboration with industrial partners and researchers from our community including an author of this paper who provided ideas and feedback on the questionnaire.
this collaboration between industry and academic researchers helped increase the instrument s clarity reliability and reach.
the questionnaire was available between july and july in multiple languages but with the majority of responses in english.
the survey was advertised via social media and through the channels of the project partners e.g.
linux foundation amazon chaoss community comcast fujitsu github gitlab hitachi huawei intel nec panasonic red hat renesas vmware etc.
.
the survey was targeted at open source contributors.
the compensation for answering the survey was a discount when registering to attend the open source summit conference.
the survey received responses.linux foundation research made the questionnaire and the quantitative data publicly available and we obtained the qualitative data by contacting linux foundation research.
the survey included a question about the feeling of welcomeness a point likert scale item from strongly disagree to strongly agree with neutral .
the questions about the frequency of experiencing challenges were asked as point items never rarely occasionally and frequently.
for the gender and race questions respondents could mark as many options they identified with.
the disabilities question could be answered as yesorno.
since our analysis techniques require complete responses we removed responses with missing values as they represented more than of responses and imputation methods could bias results for multi group analyses used in rq2 .
given the large number of responses the tradeoff between introducing a potential bias versus increasing the usable sample size suggests a more conservative approach so we did not use imputation methods.
we removed the responses with blank values for the feeling of welcomeness question n any interpersonal challenge items n gender n race n and disabilities n .
post filtering our dataset included responses for the analyses.
we present demographics in table i. table i demographics of respondents n attribute n percentage gender only men .
gender minorities .
women .
non binary or third gender .
more than one gender .
disability no .
yes .
race only white .
racial minorities .
black .
hispanic .
asian .
native or indigenous .
pacific islander .
more than one race .
we added the subset of questions used in the study in the replication package together with prepared datasets to run rq1 rq2 and rq3 and the codebook used for qualitative analysis.
for the sake of confidentiality between researchers and the linux foundation research the raw data from the open question could not be shared.
b. hypothesis development in the context of this work feeling welcomeness refers to the self perception of an individual feeling that their presenceis desired accepted and valued by their oss colleagues without acts of microaggressions .
welcomeness is an inherently emotional and relational concept that entails more than simply being permitted to enter and includes interrelational subjectivity .
understanding the feelings of welcomeness in a given context plays an important role in identifying where barriers exist and how to break down these barriers to increase diversity in participation .
whether an oss community has a welcoming atmosphere is determined by the challenges that individuals face during the contribution process affecting both the retention of existing and the attraction of new contributors.
interpersonal challenges are difficulties or conflicts that arise from interpersonal relationships or lack thereof in oss projects and tend to have a more pronounced impact on demographics typically underrepresented in the tech industry .
these challenges can stem from differences in communication styles cultural backgrounds personal behaviors and social dynamics and can negatively impact collaboration productivity and the overall well being of the individuals involved .
in the questionnaire interpersonal challenges were defined based on the unacceptable behaviors listed in the linux foundation s code of conduct unwelcoming language stalking sexual harassment issues gathered from the literature and seen by practitioners lack of response to the rejection of contributions stereotyping doxxing and an overarching conflict related question conflict or tension with other contributors .
given the potential relationship between interpersonal challenges and the feeling of welcomeness we propose the following hypothesis hypothesis h1 .
experiencing interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling welcome.
we used partial least squares structural equation modeling pls sem to analyze the relationship between interpersonal challenges and feelings of welcomeness in oss.
sem facilitates the simultaneous analysis of relationships among constructs that can be measured by one or more indicator variables.
the main advantage of sem is being able to measure complex model relationships while accounting for measurement error when using latent variables e.g.
interpersonal challenges .
in the following we discuss the measurement model i.e.
operationalization of constructs and analysis.
interpersonal challenge is a theoretical concept that cannot be directly observed given its multiple facets.
therefore this concept is represented as a latent variable.
a latent variable cannot be directly measured but instead is measured through a set of indicators or manifest variables.
the interpersonal challenges were measured in our dataset via seven point likert scale items representing different interpersonal challenges.
.
doxxing derived from document dropping involves the public disclosure of private or personal information about an individual or organization often with harmful intentions.
regarded as a detrimental and unethical action doxxing canresult in privacy breaches and in some cases physical harm to the affected parties .
.sexual harassment is a well documented social issue that can occur offline or online with profound impacts on individuals and organizations.
in oss conferences and meetups serve as platforms for in person interaction and can expose minority attendees to inappropriate behavior.
sexual harassment can occur online also.
for instance when a newcomer who identifies as a woman seeks mentorship from a man her intentions are often responded to as a dating opportunity .
.stalking refers to actions meant to intimidate or instill fear which happens in oss as a form of toxicity .
.stereotyping represents discrimination based on perceived demographic characteristics usually referring to a form of negative and fixed impression that can happen implicitly or explicitly and relate to a socially shared set of beliefs about traits of members of a social category .
.unwelcoming language is defined as written or spoken communication that induces feelings of exclusion including instances of profanity racist jokes and name calling.
those who are in minority are more likely to experience unwelcoming language .
.conflict or tension with other contributors can manifest in diverse ways and may stem from variations in technical approaches communication styles or personal interactions.
for instance tension may arise due to misunderstandings misinterpretations or the use of ineffective communication channels .
technical debates such as differing opinions design philosophies or coding practices can also be sources of tension among contributors.
.lack of response to or rejection of contributions or questions refers to situations where contributors do not receive acknowledgment or approval for their work or when questions are met with indifference silence or dismissal.
delayed or absent responses lead to contributor attrition in oss c. rq1 analysis to answer rq1 we quantitatively analyzed the responses to the questions about interpersonal challenges and the feeling of welcomeness using structural equation models partial least squares pls sem utilizing smartpls version .
the first step in evaluating a structural equation model is to assess the soundness of the measurement of the latent variable this is referred to as evaluating the measurement model .
the second step is to evaluate the theoretical model which includes the evaluation of the hypothesis.
the measurement model is evaluated through tests of convergent validity internal consistency reliability discriminant validity and collinearity.
the theoretical model is evaluated according to the significance of the path coefficient and model fit which are obtained through a bootstrapping procedure it draws a large number e.g.
of random subsamples of the same size as the original sample using replacement .
the model is estimated for each subsample generating a sampling distribution used to determine a standard error that can subsequently be used to make statistical inferences.
the model fit is then evaluated using standardized root mean square residual srmr .d.
rq2 analysis to answer rq2 we evaluated the impact of interpersonal challenges as a single construct on the feeling of welcomeness across demographic groups.
to define the demographic groups of interest we followed the core categories identified by albusays et al.
.
gender and race are very relevant perspectives in oss with many communities implementing initiatives specifically focused on these populations whereas disability remains underexplored likely due to data scarcity .
by focusing on these categories we sought relevance maintained a clear focus on the paper and avoided data dredging i.e.
indiscriminately including all data .
we employed multi group analysis mga to understand how the model varies within distinct demographic groups.
we followed hair jr et al.
proposed structure that includes testing for invariance and comparing groups to analyze results.
testing for measurement invariance of composite models micom is a mechanism to assess whether or not the loadings of the items representing the latent variables differ significantly across different groups.
in other words we want to establish whether any differences can be attributed to the theoretical constructs and not how we measured those constructs .
the literature recommends conducting micom before mga to confirm its appropriateness .
if we find differences in the measurement model for the two groups then we cannot attribute any differences in the model to the theoretical constructs.
comparing group specific model relationships for significant differences using a multi group analysis requires establishing configural and compositional invariance .
configural invariance does not include a test and is a qualitative assessment to ensure all of the composites are equally defined configured for all of the groups such as equivalent indicators per measurement model equivalent treatment of the data and equivalent algorithm settings or optimization criteria.
compositional invariance exists when the composite scores are the same across both groups while small differences will naturally happen for different groups we tested whether those differences are significantly different.
we used micom procedure to examine the correlation between the composite scores of groups and assess that the correlation equals .
groups comparison and analysis was done through bootstrapping multigroup analysis and the statistical differences are assessed through parametric tests between path coefficients generated from different samples.
e. rq3 analysis results from rq1 showed that interpersonal challenges are associated with less feeling of welcome and rq2 showed that this association is more prevalent for gender minorities and people with disabilities.
however much is not known about the frequency of challenges each demographic experiences.
to answer rq3 we built seven individual logistic regression models with each interpersonal challenge as the dependent variable for each model.
the independent binary variables are gender minorities race minorities and disabilities table i allowing us to assess which group will more likely encountereach interpersonal challenge.
we used ordinal logistic regression since the dependent variables were from a point likertscale response never rarely occasionally and frequently .
the ordinal logistic regression is an extension of the logistic regression that can be used when the dependent variable is ordinal .
f .
composite assessment we qualitatively analyzed the open ended responses to the question about the reasons for not feeling welcome by inductively applying open and axial coding.
we built post formed codes as the analysis progressed and associated them with respective parts of the answer to code the reasons according to the respondents perspectives.
reasons to not feel welcome were related to six out of the seven interpersonal challenges and one technical challenge.
we also found a positive reason to feel welcome.
we used a negotiated agreement protocol and discussed the codes and categorization as a team until reaching a consensus about the themes as cataloged in our codebook that is part of our replication package .
from the answers we used for quantitative analysis we received answers for the open question of reasons to not feel welcome and we identified respondents as p1 to p588.
g. follow up community perceptions as a follow up we evaluated the community s perception of our findings.
the goal of the follow up study was to understand to what extent the interpersonal challenges investigated in this study persist in impacting the feeling of welcomeness in oss in .
we conducted an online survey with oss contributors which we advertised on social media and the authors professional network.
we conducted the survey in july .
we received responses from oss contributors from all regions north america central south america europe asia pacific and africa .
we also conducted an audience poll during the keynote at the scipy conference which is dedicated to scientific computing through open source python software.
we received an additional responses.
in the surveys we presented the seven interpersonal challenges and asked if they still happen today and to what extent they can influence how a contributor feels welcome in the oss community.
additionally we summarized our results into seven statements and asked the respondents agreement level.
finally we added an open question so they could share additional thoughts about challenges and feelings of being included in oss.
all questions were optional.
the questionnaire and its answers are part of the replication package .
iv.
a nalyses and results in this section we assess each research question followed by a composite assessment of the answers to the open question about the reasons to not feel welcome.
a. how are interpersonal challenges associated with the feeling of welcomeness in oss?
in this section we describe our results for rq1 which include the validate the measurement model sec.
iv a andthen we evaluate the hypothesis h1.
experiencing interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling welcome and control variables in the structural model sec.
iv a both computed through the survey data.
we assess the significance of our model using the structural model evaluation partial least squares pls sem and following the evaluation protocol proposed by previous research to make results consistent with our claims.
the path weighting scheme was estimated using smartpls .
pls sem is widely used in software engineering research to explore relationships between theoretical concepts not directly observable but measured through indicators or manifest variables .
in our study this applies to interpersonal challenges.
as in related work ii pls sem constructs a proxy of manifest variables as weighted composites and tests their association with another variable welcomeness.
measurement model evaluation we conducted a series of tests to validate the measurement of the theoretical concept including convergent validity internal consistency reliability discriminant validity and collinearity.
convergent validity relates to the degree to which a measure correlates positively with alternative measures of the same construct.
our model contains one reflective latent variable interpersonal challenges .
changes in the latent construct should be reflected in changes in the indicator variables .
we used two metrics to assess convergent validity the average variance extracted a ve and the loading of an indicator onto its construct the outer loading .
the a ve value for the latent construct in our model is .
which is above the threshold of explainability .
.
for the outer loading we remove variables that does not reflect a sufficiently large impact in the latent variable.
an outer loading of .
is considered sufficient because .
.
which means at least half of the indicator s variance can be explained by the latent variable and .
is considered sufficient for exploratory studies .
all indicators of our latent construct exceeded this threshold ranging between .
and .
.
we also verified the internal consistency reliability or how well the different indicators for interpersonal challenges are consistent with one another and able to reliably and consistently measure the constructs.
we calculated both cronbach s and composite reliability cr to measure the reliability .
a desirable range of values for both cronbach s and cr is between .
and .
.
the cronbach s was .
and cr was .
for our model.
we also verified whether each construct represented different concepts or entities through discriminant validity tests to assess the discriminant validity utilizing the heterotrait monotrait htmt ratio of correlations .
the discriminant validity could be problematic if the htmt ratio exceeds .
.
the htmt ratio between the latent construct and the endogenous variable was .
which is not a significant threat to this study.
finally we evaluated if the indicators from the exogenous construct interpersonal challenges were independent.
we calculated their collinearity using the variance inflation factor vif .
a widely accepted cut off value for the vif is in our model all vif values are below .
given these results we argue that the model is valid for evaluating our hypothesis.
evauating the hypothesis in the structural model we found support for our hypothesis p .
experiencing interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling welcome.
this relationship is depicted by an arrow in the diagram in fig.
.
the path coefficient interpreted as a standardized regression coefficient indicates the direct effect of one variable on another.
with a negative path coefficient b .
we conclude that interpersonal challenges are negatively associated with the feeling of being welcome.
this means that an increase of one standard deviation in interpersonal challenges results in a decrease of .
standard deviations in feeling welcome.
we assessed the relationship between constructs and the predictive capabilities of the theoretical model.
the r2value of the endogenous variable in our model feeling welcome was .
.
while some scholars have suggested thresholds to evaluate such values there is considerable debate about setting such thresholds.
other factors might play a role in feeling welcome.
we consider the r2value low moderate.
we analyzed the standardized root mean square residual srmr which is a common fit measure to detect misspecification of pls sem models .
srmr is a model fit measure that quantifies the divergence between observed and estimated covariance matrices.
the literature suggests using srmr to compare and evaluate sem models .
srmr is the square root of the sum of the squared differences between the modelimplied and the empirical correlation matrix or the euclidean distance between the two matrices .
a value of for srmr would indicate a perfect fit and values less than .
conservative or .
more lenient are considered a good fit .
our results suggest a good fit of the empirical data in the theoretical model srmr .
.
control variables we also examined our data to determine if being part of gender or race minorities or having disabilities could strengthen or weaken feeling welcome.
we found that identifying as gender or race minorities is associated with not feeling welcome but we did not find a significant association between having disabilities and feeling welcome.
table ii shows the results of the analysis including the mean of the bootstrap distribution b the standard deviation sd the confidence interval and p values.
table ii standardized path coefficients b standard deviations std confidence intervals ci and p values.
b std ci p value h1 .
.
.
.
.
gender minorities feeling welcome .
.
.
.
.
race minorities feeling welcome .
.
.
.
.
disabilities feeling welcome .
.
.
.
.
coefficients marked with are statistically significant rq1.
experiencing interpersonal challenges is associated with not feeling welcome within oss projects.
gender and racial minorities feel less welcome than their counterparts.
h .493interpersonal challengesdoxxing conflict or tension with other contributors lack of response to or rejection of contributions or questionsstereotypingstalkingsexual harassment unwelcoming language.
.
.
.
.777feeling welcome r2 .
gender minoritiesrace minoritiesdisabilities .
.
.
control v ariablesfig.
item loadings and path coefficient p .
indicated by a full line .
non significant links are indicated with a dashed line.
b. how does the association between interpersonal challenges and feeling welcome differ for those who are in gender race or disability minorities?
we answered rq2 by performing a multi group analysis in pls sem to investigate the moderation of the theoretical model across demographic groups.
we used mga to examine how the results from rq1 vary across cohorts.
we started by using the groups of i gender ii race and iii disabilities see table i .
following we observed that configural invariance is established in our model as no different settings or treatments were applied to the groups.
still in this step we ran the permutation test in smartpls and verified that compositional invariance is established for all latent variables in the pls path model.
we established partial measurement invariance and mga is suitable for the examined groups .
finally we analyzed the differences between the coefficients paths for the groups.
if they are significant they can be interpreted as having moderating effects.
in this step we used parametric tests to assess the multi group differences as in step we established partial measurement invariance .
as table iii shows parametric tests showed statistical differences regarding gender and disabilities but not regarding race.
gender minorities had b .
a .6x stronger association between interpersonal challenges and not feeling welcome than men b .
.
parametric tests showed no significant differences for race or disabilities.
table iii multi group analysis per demographics gender race disabilities all group minorities men minorities white yes no sample size n feeling welcome r2 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
h1 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
coefficients marked with are statistically significant and in gray are statistically significant differences between groups rq2 interpersonal challenges were more strongly associated with the lack of feeling welcome for gender minorities and people with disabilities while no significant difference was observed for race minorities in this context.
c. how differently do those in gender race or disability minority face interpersonal challenges?
in this section we investigate the frequency of interpersonal challenges experienced by the three demographic groupsof gender race and disability.
in fig.
we present the answers to the questions about the frequency of experiencing interpersonal challenges in oss from left to right frequently occasionally rarely and never .
we analyzed the graph by comparing the percentage of answers in the two top frequencies frequently and occasionally .
after each item we show the delta comparing the percentages for each minority and its counterpart.
next we conducted an ordinal logistic regression to follow up on the differences observed in the visualization table iv .
we have checked our variables covariance matrix and vif to confirm no multicollinearity.
we used the benjamini hochberg approach to adjust the p value for the coefficients to control the false rate due to multiple comparisons.
as we analyzed interpersonal challenges using three demographic variables as independent predictors resulting in multiple comparisons we applied the benjamini hochberg approach to adjust the p values in our ordinal logistic models to control the false discovery rate fdr given the multiple hypothesis tests.
this method allows control of fdr while maintaining statistical power and without being overly conservative.
an odds ratio suggests higher odds for minorities to face the challenge more frequently than their counterparts.
table iv odds ratios of challenges per demographics challenges race minorities gender minorities disability lack of response or rejection of contributions .
.
.
conflict with other contributors .
.
.
unwelcoming language .
.
.
stalking .
.
.
sexual harassment .
.
.
stereotyping .
.
.
doxxing .
.
.
coefficients marked with are statistically significant gender minorities and people with disabilities from our sample were more likely to experience all interpersonal challenges than their counterparts see table iv and fig.
.
for example gender minorities were .
times more likely to experience unwelcoming language with a delta of .
for the highest frequency answers and .
times more likely to experience sexual harassment with delta of .
than men.
people with disabilities reported .
more odds of experiencing unwelcoming language and .
more odds of experiencing doxxing than their counterparts.
however when we look at race minorities we could not find a statistically significant difference in the odds of experiencing any interpersonal challenge compared to those who identified as white only.
from the visualizations fig.
we can see that the frequency for all the categories does not vary significantly for any of the items and that for the conflict or tension with other contributors challenge the number of highfrequency answers is slightly higher for the non white sample.
from a cross demographics perspective we observed in fig.
that the number of respondents who reported lack of response or rejection of contributions frequently oroccasionally is high cross all demographics noted by around half of the respondents.
even with the prevalence of this challenge gender minorities and people with disabilities reported a higher frequency of occurrence gender minoritiesf r equent lyoccasionallyrar elyne v er race minoritywhit egender minoritydisability y esdisability nogender minoritymendisability y eslack of r esponse or r ejection of contributions15 .
.
.
.
conflict wit h ot her contribut ors0 .
.
.
unw elcoming language2 .
stalking1 .
.
.
se xual har assment2.
.
.
.
st er eotyping5 .
.
.
do xxing4 .
race minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability no race minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability norace minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability norace minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability norace minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability norace minoritywhit egender minoritymendisability y esdisability nofig.
responses to the points likert scale items for frequency of interpersonal challenges left race middle gender right disabilities .
the percentage at the bottom of each pair represents the delta comparing the answers to frequently and occasionally.
the whiskers present the differences experiencing challenges frequent occasional between the minority and majority groups.
more likely to face the challenge more often than their counterparts and people with disabilities more likely .
another major concern for contributors is the conflict or tension with other contributors .
while we did not observe any differences regarding race gender minorities and people with disabilities reported higher odds .
and .
respectively of experiencing this challenge than their counterparts.
this suggests that these two groups could experience unique challenges related to conflicts.
we noticed that challenges related to unwelcoming language and stereotyping followed a similar trend.
as conflicts.
to further investigate this we conducted a follow up analysis to assess the correlation of conflict or tension with other contributors with unwelcoming language and with stereotyping for the minority groups.
we noted that the correlations were statistically significant with a least moderate correlation spearman s rank correlation coefficient .
.
.
for unwelcoming language conflict and .
.
.
for stereotyping conflict considering gender race and disabilities minorities respectively.
this may suggest that the conflicts may have a relationship with these other two challenges especially for gender minorities and contributors with disabilities.
both fig.
and table iv highlight alarming concerns regarding sexual harassment stalking and doxxing which present the highest odds ratio disadvantaging minorities.
even though these interpersonal challenges are less common than others they bring a non negligible delta when we compare the highest frequency answers from gender and disabilities minorities with their counterparts and a really low number of frequently and occasionally answers of the majorities.
by looking at table iv we observe that gender minoritiesare .
times more likely to experience sexual harassment than men with high odds ratios also for stalking .
and doxxing .
these interpersonal challenges are at least two times more likely to be experienced by gender minorities than by men.
rq3 gender minorities and people with disabilities face significantly more interpersonal challenges compared to their counterparts.
the lack of response or rejection of contribution is prevalent among both minorities and majorities while sexual harassment stalking and doxxing are prevalent among minorities.
conflict or tension with other contributors is experienced together with either unwelcoming language or stereotyping by minorities of gender race and disabilities.
d. composite assessment as part of our mixed method concurrent embedded strategy we had a composite assessment from the open question of reasons to not feel welcome.
during this strategy we qualitatively analyzed data to reside side by side with quantitative analysis performed to answer rq1 rq2 and rq3 having different pictures to provide an overall composite assessment of the problem releaving details about why our participants feel or do not feel welcome in oss.
people are often biased against others outside of their social group showing prejudice emotional bias stereotypes cognitive bias and discrimination behavioral bias .
both minorities and majorities mentioned being discriminated against due to their demographic characteristics of race disabilities gender age religion political ideas or sexual preferences.
for example race minorities feel discriminated against during in person gatherings.
p80 mentioned being always the only african american and people act like why are you here?
.during technical group discussion meetings p141 remembered that being african american and the white people would all sit on the other side of the room.
discrimination against gender minorities was mostly mentioned as a glass ceiling as a woman reported they are still excluded from the critical discussions.
p508 .
discrimination against majorities appeared as another side of the spectrum.
in a notable contrast men white middleaged or respondents who have a straight sexual orientation feel forced into a box p123 discriminated against and hated because they are not part of minorities.
a white man mentioned in the last few years there has been a dramatic increase in the dismissal of straight white male contributions and demonizing of the same group.
p431 .
contributors mentioned feeling welcome because they can hide behind a profile picture and be anonymous p75 p75 p206 p567 .
however when their identities are revealed doxxing p551 complemented you re dead in the water .
although majorities feel discriminated against diversity incidents against minorities are still pervasive with tons of microaggressions macroaggressions and sexual harassment p232 .
microaggressions were mentioned as other kinds of conflicts or tension with other contributors who can make harsh criticism and impersonal responses p71 .
during conflicts p8 misses allies because when treated poorly not have a single memory of another person in a thread stepping up to disagree .
conflicts were mostly mentioned during communication and respondents reflected on toxic communication during technical discussions attributing it to the perception of unwelcoming language as being called as tranny or a dumb faggot p8 which leads to unsafety to ask questions p54 as when asking a question they faced hostility in which people are too negative when they should be inquisitive or just technical p133 .
besides toxicity contributors feel unwelcome due to lack of response to or rejection of contributions or questions when they feel maintainers ignore their attempts of making contact p105 p168 bringing the perception that pull requests will never get merged p526 .
on the positive side our respondents mentioned feeling welcome due to exchanging support when people are helpful and share their knowledge p128 but p148 they pondered there is an insular culture where they need to know insiders to feel welcome.
p282 agreed that in the communities that know feels very welcome.. in areas where unknown feels like not have a voice need to prove self.
although we were interested in interpersonal related reasons for not feeling welcome another type of reason appeared from the answers.
respondents mentioned feeling unwelcome due to lack of accessible tools particularly for people with sensory impairments like blindness.
p518 reported missing accessible linux mobile phones and remembered an episode when they asked a pinephone developer on mastodon if accessibility was considered but linux desktop accessibility had to develop further and that should be the change want to see in the world.
felt veryunwelcome since know can never come to the knowledge needed to fix an accessibility stack .
e. follow up community perceptions the follow up survey was designed to provide insights into how the community perceives our findings see sec.
iii g .
we first presented the seven interpersonal challenges and asked to what extent these challenges influence the feeling of welcomeness.
out of the respondents answered the question.
among them reported that the seven interpersonal challenges we investigated continue to significantly or extremely affect welcomeness in oss.
none of the respondents believed these challenges had any effect indicating that the issues identified in the survey persisted in when we conducted the follow up survey.
fourteen respondents evaluated a set of statements about how much our findings hold true in .
the results presented in fig.
show that more than of the respondents believe that six out of the seven findings remain completely or largely relevant in see numbers on the left of the bars .
the finding with the least support refers to the majority groups perceiving d i initiatives as segregative instead of constructive.
we also invited participants to share their insights about feeling welcome in oss.
one respondent highlighted that stereotyping persists as the implicit feeling that people aren t welcome if they don t look like of the maintainers.
another respondent suggested that future studies should analyze the language barrier for non native speakers as an interpersonal challenge affecting the feeling of welcomeness.
in summary this follow up study suggests that the findings from the analysis of the survey remain current at the time this paper was written.
v. d iscussion we investigated the relationship between interpersonal challenges and the feeling of welcomeness in oss projects.
interpersonal challenges are negatively associated with not feeling welcome even more strongly for gender minorities and people with disabilities.
results align with previous research that discussed that contributors do not feel welcome when facing challenges .
in the following we bringing exemplar quotes from the respondents responses.
interactions and conflicts.
in rq3 we found a correlation between conflict or tension with other contributors and unwelcoming language and between conflict or tension with other contributors and stereotyping considering the three minority groups of gender race and disabilities.
those conflicts can happen through uncivil comments and toxic discussions in mailing lists comments in pull requests or also during in person events.
the delicate balance of welcoming minorities without appearing unwelcoming to majorities stereotyping is a fixed oversimplified and often biased belief about a group of people .
our results from rq3 showed that gender minorities and people with disabilities have higher odds of experiencing stereotyping than their counterparts table iv .
however in sec.
iv d we found that stereotyping hurts regardless if they90.
.
.
.
.
.
.
textfig.
results from the follow up survey.
practitioners answered how much do you believe these statements hold true in oss in ?
for statements derived from our findings.
the list is sorted by the number of respondents who strongly support the statements i.e.
answered completely or to a great extent number on the left of the bars .
the percentages do not consider the answers marked as i don t know.
are part of a minority e.g.
i feel unwelcome because i m a woman or majority e.g.
i m a white guy.
everyone hates me.
.
we noticed that minorities and majorities perceive that somehow diversity is over pushed.
p56 .
as noted by p218 i never felt unwelcome in oss until this push for inclusion and diversity.
i am an asian female mixed greek yankee and japanese.
i never felt unwelcome in the 90s or early 2000s.
diversity equity inclusion and accessibility initiatives must navigate carefully to avoid societal division.
while focusing on demographic diversity they often overlook the deeper cultural shifts required for genuine equity and inclusion.
mere increases in minority representation don t guarantee progress.
true advancement demands transforming organizational culture.
to gain public acceptance we must reject dualistic thinking and emphasize universal inclusion .
our results show that contributors miss feedback on their questions or acceptance of their contributions .
as fig.
shows there is a high incidence of people who had experienced lack of response or rejection of contributions .
the reason for this phenomenon can be related to overloaded maintainers with several responsibilities as a result they have a hard time answering contributors requests.
more research is required to track the deep roots of why only approximately 3of the respondents reported that they never faced this challenge.
although communities can monitor pull requests and mailing lists to guarantee that members posts are not being missed more maintainers are needed to share their workload.
generative ai can be instrumental in providing better feedback and answers to contributors .
the trifecta impeding inclusion contribution bias identity hiding and doxxing diversity and inclusion initiatives are increasingly implemented in oss projects but people s culture still needs to change so minorities are truly included as mentioned by one of the respondents anti women attitudes are rampant in popular open source projects it is completely unacceptable and yet it is tolerated .
when knowing that discrimination is still tolerated gender minorities often opt to hide their identities and create pseudonyms to avoid judgment to avoid discrimination and code review bias .
this behavior was also observed by ford et al.
in online communities where participants use a gender neutral alias for websites like technical communities because get better help when asking questions or answering them.
p1087 men claimed for more anonymity not judging people based on their irrelevant features.
however one s identity should not be considered irrelevant.
as we showed in fig.
doxxing was more frequently experienced by gender minorities than men in our sample.
although people may perceive one s identity as not relevant when not revealing their identity gender minorities may suffer an even more severe disadvantage in survival probability .
although it prevents discrimination hiding identity can lead to a lack of trust and ultimately cause a higher exit rate for such users .
the pervasive set of challenges still affecting gender minorties sexual harassment stalking and stereotyping were the top three interpersonal challenges with higher odds to be experienced by gender minorities see table iv.
although most communities have strict rules against negative behaviors the enforcement of the code of conduct is crucial as is the need for proactive measures to detect and prevent such challenges from adversely affecting contributors.
the code of conduct comprises the collective norms of a community as mantras that shape the culture of collaboration as well as the community s expectations and values to create a friendly and welcoming community .
communities can use mining tools to identify gender pronouns in messages such as mailing lists pull requests and code reviews.
actions may include providing online training with practical examples of acceptable and non acceptable behaviors and training for allies to speak up and act as collaborators accomplices and co conspirators .
additionally lawyers should be involved in creating an enforcement plan and adding the appropriate terms to provide transparency about the punishments for those who violate the code of conduct.
implications to practice the insights from our research offer practical guidance for oss communities striving to become more inclusive.
for instance our findings on the particular challenges faced by gender minorities can informthe development of targeted mentorship programs codes of conduct and communication guidelines that specifically address these issues.
similarly the unique experiences of racial minorities and people with disabilities in oss highlighted in our study could lead to the implementation of community guidelines that promote respect and understanding across diverse backgrounds.
by focusing on reducing interpersonal challenges it is possible that the contributors feel more welcome and ultimately oss projects can enhance their attractiveness to a broader range of contributors enriching the community and the software products they develop.
our findings can inform communities in prioritizing interventions such as training mentorship and support programs.
for example since interpersonal challenges were more strongly associated with the lack of feeling welcome for gender minorities and people with disabilities rq2 communities aiming to improve the feelings of welcomeness of gender minorities should combat interpersonal challenges especially sexual harassment stalking and doxxing which our data rq3 showed are currently prevalent among minorities.
potential actions can be to have an enforceable code of conduct promote allies who can voice concerns without direct retribution and set up diversity equity and inclusion committees.
implications to research while our study sheds light on critical aspects of diversity in oss it also opens avenues for further research.
future research could explore longitudinal trends in the experiences of minority groups within oss communities providing insights into how inclusivity efforts evolve and their long term effectiveness.
examining the intersectionality of various demographic factors could offer a more comprehensive understanding of the challenges faced by individuals belonging to multiple underrepresented groups.
investigating how different strategies already in place e.g.
code of conduct near peer mentoring demographic specific support groups impact the perception of welcomeness by conducting case studies and in depth qualitative investigations.
another interesting future work would assess the association of welcomeness and sense of belonging given their theoretical relationship .
vi.
t hreats to validity we analyzed the answers to an existing survey conducted by the linux foundation research.
the survey was more extensive than what was analyzed in the context of this paper.
another option would be conducting another survey.
we opted to use the existing dataset given the breadth and the number of answers of this one which would not be possible since recruitment in software engineering has been an issue recently .
the constructs under analysis are captured by the survey and one of the authors took part in the design of the instrument which was tailored to existing measurement instruments for the constructs based on prior literature.
our analysis confirmed that the adopted constructs were internally consistent and scored satisfactorily on convergent and discriminant validity tests.
the hypothesis tested in this study proposes an association between different constructs rather than causal relationships as the present study is a cross sectional sample study .we acknowledge the limitation that our respondents comprise contributors who are more likely to feel welcome as they dedicated their time to answering the questionnaire suggesting a response bias.
while it is clear that contributors motivated by some intrinsic social reasons tend to feel more welcome a theoretical model such as ours cannot capture a complete and exhaustive list of factors.
moreover feeling welcome was measured on a single question and the nuanced complexity of this feeling could benefit by having a latent construct variable with multiple questions.
other factors can play a role and our results represent a starting point for future studies.
the respondent demographics align with the overall distribution of previous measurements of oss contributors making this a suitable starting point for understanding the link between interpersonal challenges and feeling welcome.
further replication studies in individual communities can replicate validate and extend our theoretical model.
according to previous research most oss contributors are men white and without disabilities consistent with our sample.
the responses were sufficiently consistent to find full support for the hypothesis.
the survey was conducted in and provides a rich and comprehensive perspective rarely seen in academic studies.
however since there may have been changes in the challenges oss contributors face and their perceptions of inclusivity.
to address this threat we conducted a follow up survey with practitioners see sec.
iv e .
eighty nine percent of respondents confirmed that the challenges we investigated still substantially influence the sense of welcome in oss as of when this paper was written.
none said these challenges do not influence welcomeness.
future longitudinal research is needed to investigate how our results may change over time as oss culture slowly changes.
vii.
c onclusion we assessed the interplay between interpersonal challenges and the perception of welcomeness in oss communities.
our findings indicate a significant negative correlation between interpersonal challenges and feelings of welcomeness with pronounced effects on gender minorities and people with disabilities.
while these results might not surprise practitioners our study reveals the strengths of the associations between each challenge and different demographic groups.
these findings hold significant implications for communities aiming to enhance welcomeness among their members by focusing on the challenges faced by diverse groups.
this involves more than just implementing inclusive policies it requires cultivating a culture that actively opposes bias champions diversity and fosters a sense of belonging and respect.
viii.
a cknowledgements we want to thank the respondents and the linux foundation research for making the survey dataset available.
this work was partially supported by the national science foundation grants and .
any opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the linux foundation.