does stress impact technical interview performance?
mahnaz behroozi mbehroo ncsu.edu nc state university raleigh nc usashivani shirolkar snshirol ncsu.edu nc state university raleigh nc usatitus barik titus.barik microsoft.com microsoft redmond wa usachris parnin cjparnin ncsu.edu nc state university raleigh nc usa abstract software engineering candidates commonly participate in whiteboard technical interviews as part of a hiring assessment.
during these sessions candidates write code while thinking aloud as they work towards a solution under the watchful eye of an interviewer.
while technical interviews should allow for an unbiased and inclusive assessment of problem solving ability surprisingly technical interviews may be instead a procedure for identifying candidates who best handle and migrate stress solely caused by being examined by an interviewer performance anxiety .
to understand if coding interviews as administered today can induce stress that significantly hinders performance we conducted a randomized controlled trial with computer science students comparing them in private and public whiteboard settings.
we found that performance is reduced by more than half by simply being watched by an interviewer.
we also observed that stress and cognitive load were significantly higher in a traditional technical interview when compared with our private interview.
consequently interviewers may be filtering out qualified candidates by confounding assessment of problem solving ability with unnecessary stress.
we propose interview modifications to make problem solving assessment more equitable and inclusive such as through private focus sessions and retrospective think aloud allowing companies to hire from a larger and diverse pool of talent.
ccs concepts software and its engineering human centered computing empirical studies in hci keywords cognitive load eye tracking program comprehension technical interviews acm reference format mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin.
.
does stress impact technical interview performance?.
in proceedings of the 28th acm joint european software engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software engineering esec fse november virtual event usa.
acm new york ny usa pages.
https permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
esec fse november virtual event usa copyright held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm isbn .
.
.
.
introduction most companies in the software industry administer a technical interview as a procedure for hiring a software developer .
companies believe technical interviews offer a reasonably consistent evaluation of problem solving ability communication skills and preparedness .
technical interviews can also give visibility to the personality of the candidate how they interact with their future colleagues and how much they pay attention to details such as checking all possible test cases and knowledge of programming languages.
companies also find it important to reduce unwanted stress during a technical interview as not everyone does their best work in fast paced high pressure situations .
in principle companies should expect the technical interview process to be a sound and fair assessment of a candidate s ability and thus yield a steady stream of qualified candidates for positions that open up in the company.
technical interviews can also introduce other effects on candidates who report unexpectedly bombing freezing or choking during this critical hiring procedure.
through a happy accident the software industry has seemingly reinvented a crude yet effective instrument for reliably introducing stress in subjects which typically manifests as performance anxiety .
a technical interview has an uncanny resemblance to the trier social stress test a procedure used for decades by psychologists and is the best known gold standard procedure for the sole purpose of reliably inducing stress.
the trier social stress test involves having a subject prepare and then deliver an interview style presentation and perform mental arithmetic all in front of an audience.
alone none of these actions consistently induce stress in a subject however the unique combination of cognitive demanding tasks with a social evaluative threat essentially being watched is consistent and powerful.
if a technical interview is essentially a de facto version of a trier social stress test then the implications can be profound.
rather than measuring the few that answer correctly in a timely manner companies are most likely measuring the ability of the few who perform well under stress .
rather than measuring explanation skills companies are most likely measuring the ability of candidates to handle or mitigate stress e.g.
through practice .
finally rather than avoiding unwanted stress technical interviews may be inadvertently designed with the sole purpose of inducing it.
to understand how to maintain the desirable goals of a technical interview e.g.
measure time and correctness while mitigating the undesirable effects of stress we created a design probe which removed the social evaluative threat component of a technical interview.
to this end we designed an interview format where participants privately solved a technical problem on a whiteboard without any monitoring or interaction with an interviewer.
we evaluated this format in a randomized controlled trial to understand the impact of stress during a technical interview and whether esec fse november virtual event usa mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin we could isolate and dampen its influence.
we then compared this to a typical interview format where a candidate used talk aloud to explain their problem solving in front of a proctor.
participants wore specialized eye tracking glasses which allowed us to obtain measurements associated with high cognitive load and stress.
we then compared the correctness self reported experiences and cognitive load and stress levels of participants across the interview settings.
we found that participants reported high levels of stress and often had difficulty coping with someone else being present while they attempted to solve a cognitively demanding task.
the impact on performance was drastic nearly twice as many participants failed to solve the problem correctly and the median correctness score was cut more than half when simply being watched.
in contrast participants in the private setting reported feeling at ease having time to understand the problem and reflect on their solution.
finally measures of cognitive load and stress were significantly lower in the private setting and majority of participants solved the problem correctly.
we also observed that no women successfully solved the problem in the public setting whereas all women solved it correctly in the private setting.
standard nasa tlx procedure and various cognitive metrics provided evidence that higher rates of stress could causally explain these differences across groups.
we suggest that private interview settings have considerable advantages for candidates that both reduce their stress and allow more accurate assessment of their problem solving abilities.
the implications of this work include several guidelines for more effective administrations of coding interviews.
by offering the ability to solve a problem in private even if only for an initial few minutes it could substantially increase the amount of qualified candidates particularly in traditionally underrepresented groups entering the workforce.
furthermore we can expect these changes to minimize or mitigate other problematic effects experienced by candidates such as stereotype threat that impact interview performance but are orthogonal to assessing candidates actual problem solving abilities.
methodology the goal of our experiment was to understand whether being watched causes stress in participants and affects their problemsolving.
we designed a block randomized controlled trial to compare a traditional version of a technical interview our control with an experimental condition involving a private problem solving session our treatment .
participants were randomly assigned to a condition performing the same task a between subjects design.
in this section we describe our experimental settings and the data we collected to measure the effects of our experiment.
.
participants we recruited undergraduate and graduate students at nc state university identified as female who participated in our study.
students were required to have knowledge of java or any other high level programming languages and previous course experience in algorithms and data structures.
we made sure that students had the typical knowledge required for a technical interview includingconstructing data structures implementing search and sorting algorithms and characterizing running time and space requirements.
furthermore students represent potential technical interview candidates as many were actively engaged in their initial job search prior to graduation.
to use head mounted eye trackers as a part of our study participants had to have normal or corrected to normal vision.
they received extra course credit through an experiment pool and could end the experiment at any time.
the study was approved by the local ethics board.
the first and second authors of the paper conducted the study.
to estimate our population size for our study we used the results of our pilot study to obtain estimators for effect size.
through a power analysis of sample sided test with power and type i error we found that approximately participants would be required in each group.
.
pilots and tasks we ran pilot studies at the authors institutions.
during our pilots we experimented with tasks that would satisfy the following criteria be solvable within the time limits of the experiment demonstrate sufficient difficulty such that cognitive load can be induced and is not trivial to solve and have ecological validity the problem should be similar to those used in actual interviews.
based on feedback and observations during the pilot studies we found some tasks were too complex where participants would quickly give up after a few minutes and some tasks too ambiguous which required too many clarification questions.
ultimately we found the following problem satisfied all our criteria longest substring without repeating characters .
the problem can be found in elements of programming interviews in java .
and represents a class of problems related to string manipulation a concept most candidates should be familiar with.
for example we did not want to conflate a lack of familiarity with complex data structures heaps or red black trees or specialized algorithms dynamic programming or quicksort with interview performance.
furthermore the problem itself contains a large solution space with multiple possible approaches including a brute force solution and other more sophisticated approaches.
finally we note that within the past six months this coding question has been used in technical interviews at well known software companies such as amazon google microsoft cisco facebook adobe and uber.
.
procedure .
.
onboarding.
using a script the experimenter verbally shared the details of the study with participants.
participants were informed they would be wearing a pair of mobile eye tracker glasses and recorded audio and video footage would be collected.
after consent was obtained participants filled out a pre survey to obtain background information.
.
.
interview formats.
we created two interview settings public setting andprivate setting see figure .
in the public setting wearing an eye tracker participants solved the technical interview problem in the presence of an experimenter.
the participant was 1based on reports from developers within the leetcode community an interview preparation site.
the problem can be solved interactively longest substring without repeating characters 482does stress impact technical interview performance?
esec fse november virtual event usa a private interview setting b public interview setting figure a solving a problem alone in a closed private room.
b solving a problem in a presence of an experimenter while thinking aloud.
these images are not taken from our actual experimenter and participants.
instructed to talk aloud while solving the task which is a standard practice in technical interviews .
the lab space contained a whiteboard at the front of the room.
an experimenter was situated near the participant for the entire session without interrupting participants thought process.
if a participant asked for clarification the response was brief.
for example if a participant asked does this look correct the experimenter was instructed to reply complete to the best of your ability .
in the private setting participants were provided a private room with a whiteboard to solve the technical interview problem in isolation.
participants were provided a private room with a whiteboard.
participants were informed that the experimenter will step out of the room and will not return while they are solving the problem.
thus they had to make sure that there is no questions left for them.
when the participant was ready to begin the task they wore the eye trackers the door was closed and the participant worked in privacy until the task was completed within allotted time.
after the experiment we clarified with participants if they had any uncertainty about the problem they just solved.
.
.
apparatus.
participants wore a head mounted mobile eye tracking device smi eye tracking glasses 2w smi etg which participants wore as normal glasses.
the smi etg captures both the environment with a high definition scene camera 960x760 pixel resolution frames per second and the participant s eye movements hz with binocular inner cameras positioned at the bottom rim of the glasses.
the glasses were connected to a mobile recording unit a customized samsung android device.
the smietg is capable of providing metrics related to eye measurements such as fixations saccades and pupil size and projecting the gaze point onto the visual scene and exporting into a video .
.
.
eyetracking data.
for each participant and task we collected screen recordings in video format at frames per second and a time indexed data file containing all eye movements and measurements recorded by the eye tracking instrument.
.
.
calibration.
calibration improves the accuracy of measurements collected from an eye tracking device.
before calibration we ensured that the eye tracker fit comfortably by adjusting the 2collected eye tracking data can be found at bridge.
we asked participants to confirm that they do not have difficulty seeing the coding area on the board.
to perform the calibration we initiated the calibration software and then we asked participants to fixate on three markers on the board.
target markers were selected in such a way that they cover different gaze angles.
.
.
experiment.
participants received a printed problem statement.
the printout also included three examples which indicated what the expected output would be when given an input.
for example given the input abcabcbb the answer is abc with the length .
we asked participants to provide a reasonable solution written in a programming language of their choice.
we emphasized that their thought process and correctness of the solution were important while efficiency and syntax were secondary.
participants could freely use basic utility functions such as sort if desired.
we asked participants to confirm their understanding of the problem before proceeding.
the experiment ended when the participant completed the task or a minute time limit had passed.
after the experiment the participant completed a post survey and a nasa task load index tlx questionnaire to collect information of participants self evaluation about their performance.
we designed our post survey to subjectively complement the questions of the nasa tlx questionnaire.
analysis we analyzed the data to assess performance on the task measure the resulting cognitive load and to identify possible sources of stress or cognitive load.
.
measuring correctness and complexity of solutions we scored the code against the following test cases which were also provided to participants consecutive letters in a substring.
for example given the input abcabcbb the output is abc .
only one letter.
for example given the input bbbbb the output is b .
483esec fse november virtual event usa mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin non consecutive letters in a substring.
for example given the input pwwkew the output is wke .
passing each test case is worth point.
hence the scores range .
to facilitate evaluation we went through each solution and manually translated it into executable code filling in incomplete syntax when necessary.
we consider passing all three test cases as indication of a successful task otherwise the participant has failed the task as done by wyrich and colleagues .
we did not require an optimal solution but we did examine the solution to determine its runtime complexity.
for example a solution using two nested loops would have a o n2 runtime complexity.
finally we recorded time to complete the experiment.
participants who exceeded the time limit before completing the task were not scored and instead marked with a timeout .
.
measuring cognitive load we measured cognitive load using two proxy measures wellestablished in the literature fixation duration andpupil dilation.
a fixation is when eyes stop scanning holding the central foveal vision in place so that detailed information about the stimulus can be caught by the visual system.
fixation duration measures how long the gaze remains engaged in a particular point.
a longer fixation is well correlated with task difficulty and indicates increased processing effort .
eye tracking studies do not traditionally normalize fixations when comparing task difficulty because in aggregate they measure effort in a unit of time and not in a unit of space.
it is standard to simply compare lengths of fixations between different text images and code when understanding relative difficulty of tasks.
pupil dilation measures the size of the pupil over time.
prior studies have identified a relationship between increases in pupil dilation and the mental demands of a task .
that is when people need to maintain more items in active memory or perform more mental operations the size of their pupils increase.
while fixation data is readily available from our eye tracker pupil dilation is notably noisy and requires more extensive data cleaning.
our eye tracker provides the pupil diameter millimeters over time approximately every .
milliseconds .
we adopted guidelines proposed by kret and sjak shie for filtering out data that coincided with blinks and any values out of pupil diameter normal range .5mm 9mm .
we then proceeded with removing disproportionately large absolute pupil size changes sympathetic to luminance changes 4mm which are not related to much smaller information related dilations .5mm .
to facilitate comparison across participants and reduce noise we adopted temporally course measures by averaging fixation and pupil diameter data in time windows of seconds.
hence each time window possesses a mean fixation duration and mean pupil dilation size.
lastly we used an empirically determined cutoff where we would stop analyzing windows when the number of active participants still engaged in the task dropped below .
.
measuring factors of task difficulty to identify contributing factors of cognitive load we first measured six factors obtained from the nasa tlx effort frustrationand stress mental demand temporal demand physical demand and performance each answered on a scale from .
each factor was averaged across participants and then compared across groups for differences.
to investigate whether stress played a role in performance differences we also investigated eye movements related to stress.
stress inhibits attentional processes and as a result eye movements become more difficult to control and slower .
in particular we used saccade velocity which measures the speed of traveling between areas of interest.
because saccadic velocity is not under voluntary control numerous studies have used it as an unbiased measure of stress level.
for example participants exhibiting high stress had slower eye movements compared with low stress participants in a gaze targeting task .
we also obtained temporally course measures by averaging saccade velocity into second time windows.
results from the participants we recruited two participants both were female decided to terminate and withdraw from the study.
three were unable to complete the task within the allocated time of the experiment.
finally one participant had successfully completed the task but had an incomplete recording due to equipment failure and four participants did not have pupil dilation data available.
as a result we had participants in private setting and in public setting that we could use for complete or partial data analysis e.g.
tlx correctness of solution etc.
.
.
participant experiences and observations participants shared general challenges with problem solving in both interview settings.
participants typically used to coding on a computer sometimes struggled with performing the task on a whiteboard.
participants deprived of programming environments with aids such as syntax highlighting and auto completion were burdened with recalling low level syntax details such as declaring a function or variable.
p24 found it challenging to remember certain aspects of java while i was working through the solution.
p18 had trouble remembering function calls specific to java for string builder which you could usually just google really quick.
participants also had trouble thinking of the appropriate data structures and string operations needed to solve the problems and strove to achieve an optimal solution p19 despite our guidance that they focus on completing the task correctly.
for example p34 felt they did poorly because they did not provide an optimized solution immediately wasting time of the proctor.
however each interview setting also brought unique experiences and challenges for participants.
stress from being watched and think aloud.
most participants in the public setting expressed concerns related to being watched time pressure and multiplexing tasks.
participants expressed feeling very nervous rushed stressed monitored and unable to concentrate.
p43 stated i was constantly supervised which made me nervous.
p25 felt unnerved that someone was watching me and they are not commenting on my progress.
p22 described being self conscious about the whole 484does stress impact technical interview performance?
esec fse november virtual event usa table participants and performance private1public2 id gender score complexity time m s id gender score complexity time m s p10 m o n p22 m o n p15 m o n p25 m o n p17 m o n p31 m o n p20 f o n 3p24 m o n2 p21 f o n p33 m o n2 p04 m o n2 p34 m o n2 p05 m o n2 p40 m o n2 p06 f o n2 p41 m o n2 p09 m o n2 p45 m o n2 p11 m o n2 p39 m o n3 p12 m o n2 p23 m p13 m o n2 p32 m p16 m o n2 p42 f p18 f o n2 p26 m p02 m p30 f p07 m p36 m p19 m p38 m p08 m p27 m p01 m p28 m p14 m p29 f p03 m p35 m p46 m timeout p37 m p43 f p44 f p47 m timeout p48 f timeout 1participants in private setting.
2participants in public setting.
3participant s time data was lost due to battery failure when recording.
process because their work was visible.
one participant similarly became more deliberate worrying about making the mistakes that are usually very obvious in front of someone they ultimately did not complete the task within the time limit.
the beginning was especially troublesome.
participants struggled with starting the task thinking of a solution immediately p27 organizing my mind in a short time p29 and as soon as i see the problem i become blank p36 .
for these participants the beginning was often the most stressful part of the task especially with someone else evaluating them and taking pauses might make me seem slow wired p22 .
even as this initial wave of stress wore off participants were still aware of time pressure throughout the task i feel like the more time i take the less chance of me getting the job p25 .
participants also had difficulty with performing tasks that involved multiple simultaneous actions.
participants felt stressed by having to talk while trying to write p44 and p25 and think and talk and do code at the same time p39 .
p41 found it difficult to constantly speak during solving and lost breath at a few places during the task.
time and space to work alone.
participants in the private setting particularly noted a reduction of stress.
solving the problem privately helped participants feel pretty comfortable p14 less stressed p20 or even not feel any stress p15 .
p18 expressed that solving the problem privately is better than panel watching you otherwise it would be difficult to code when someone watches over p16 .
participants did not feel rushed because they were working alone p2 .
p6 reported i liked having space time to think about the problem without worrying about making sure someone looking over my shoulder could follow what i was i did not feel very rushed since i was the one who determined when i was done.
challenges with isolation.
however the private setting also brought its own unique challenges for participants relating to lack of feedback and difficulty in time management.
p2 expressed uncertainty about the logistics of the question while being alone in the room.
they realized that they were unsure about the methods they were writing and needed feedback to proceed.
for one participant the lack of an examiner was problematic because they 485esec fse november virtual event usa mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin figure participants in private settings frequently performed mental execution of test cases to gain confidence in their solution as indicated by their scan path and utterances from audio recordings.
initially misunderstood the question and had no one available to explain as a result they decided to end participation in the study.
managing time became burdensome for some participants.
participants were not paying attention to the time during the task and remembered it at the very end resulting in them wondering if they were taking too long p4 .
without having awareness of time p8 at the beginning when participants realized how much the time passing some felt stressed by a huge margin p18 .
observations.
based on replays of video recordings and overlays of eyetracking data we noted a few observations that helped explain some of the participants behavior.
participants had a higher stability of eye movement when problem solving in a private setting versus public setting.
that is participants in public had a more scattered and erratic set of eye movements characterized by larger visual dispersion and scan paths whereas in private the eye movements were more focused and in control.
additionally participants in private were more likely to perform mental execution of their code that is tracing the behavior of their code under the control of a given test input.
for example in figure a participant s gaze can be seen following the control flow of the program while they verbally spoke about the result of each instruction.
many failed participants neglected to perform mental execution of their code when in the public setting an indication that they may have not felt at liberty to allocate time to it or felt uncomfortable performing mental executions while being observed.
finally we also have found some notable instances where participants suddenly reset their solution.
for example one participant was more than half way through their solution when they suddenly erased the board without any declaration or signal.
they wanted to start all over but only five minutes remained in the session and as a result they could not successfully complete their task.
.
impact on correctness and time performance participants in the public setting provided significantly lower scores .
they also tended to finish their tasks faster than participants inthe private setting on average minute and seconds sooner however not significantly so.
results for all participants can be seen in table .
figure also shows the percentage of the participants in each setting that remained active during each minute of the experiment.
in the public setting .
of the participants failed the task compared with .
in the private setting.
the correctness of the solutions in the public setting excluding timeouts was .
.
with median of passed test case.
in the private setting their score was .
.
with median of passed test cases.
a mann whitney u test showed the difference to be significant z .
p .
d .
.
interestingly a post hoc analysis revealed that in the public setting no women n successfully solved their task however in the private setting all women n successfully solved their task even providing the most optimal solution in two cases.
this may suggest that asking an interview candidate to publicly solve a problem and think aloud can degrade problem solving ability.
figure percentage of participants remaining active during the experiment session.
more than of the participants finished their task in less than minutes in the public setting.
in the private setting participants generally took longer.
.
impact on cognitive load participants in the public setting had a higher cognitive load .
to enable a better comparison across the settings we focused on data collected during the first minutes of the programming task since a majority had already completed the experiment in the public setting by that point see figure i.e.
analyzing data after minutes would only include a few participants.
figure shows the mean dilation size changes over time solid line and with the colored bands representing confidence intervals.
the pupil size remains relatively stabilized and low in the private setting while it remains high and fluctuates in the public setting.
participants had significantly longer fixations a robust measure of cognitive load when problem solving in a public setting.
the mean fixation duration in the public setting .
.37ms compared to the private setting .
.36ms was significantly different based on a wilcoxon signed rank test z .
p .
d .
.
participants had significantly larger pupil sizes in the public setting an indication of elevated cognitive load .
a mean dilation size in the public setting .
.009mm and in the private 486does stress impact technical interview performance?
esec fse november virtual event usa setting .
.003mm is significantly higher based on a wilcoxon signed rank test between the settings z .
p .
d .
.
returning to figure interestingly we observe a decrease typically around five minutes in the public setting.
after inspecting participant videos we hypothesize that this drop is due to participants reaching a partial solution e.g.
their first passing test case .
unfortunately this respite may be short as cognitive load continues to rise again as they must address bugs and more difficult test cases.
we also note that the two bands do overlap which indicates that a small subset of candidates in the public setting exhibited the same level of cognitive load as those solving it in private.
this represents a wider disparity between participants in the public setting as some participants may be disproportionately experiencing higher cognitive load.
these results indicate that the public setting increases the extraneous cognitive load of a task which could occur from additional demands from talk aloud stress from being watched or possible changes in problem solving strategies.
figure mean dilation size in first minutes of the experiment across the settings.
participants in the public setting experience larger mean dilation size indicating a larger cognitive load.
dilation size fluctuates for the public setting participants while it remains stable throughout the experiment in the private setting.
.
influence of stress on task performance participants experienced higher stress levels in the public setting.
a mann whitney u test on median ratings from five nasa tlx categories did not identify any significance difference in effort mental demand physical demand or performance across settings.
however frustration and stress was significantly higher in public vs. in private based on a mann whitney u test u .
p .
d .
.
participants had slower eye movements a marker for high stress when problem solving in a public setting.
we found that the average saccade velocity was slower for the participants in public setting .
.
s compared to private setting .
.
s .
a wilcoxon signed rank confirmed this was significantly differentbetween the settings z p .
d .
.
in figure a boxplot also depicts the distribution of ranges including median values public median private median .
.
the results of the tlx survey and slower saccade velocity both indicate that stress was higher in the public setting.
increased stress can explain some of the previously observed increase in cognitive load independent of the intrinsic cognitive load of the task itself.
figure participants in the public setting had slower eye movements as indicated by mean saccade velocity a measure of how fast a person looks away or towards an area of interest.
slow values coincides with high stress due to inhibited attention processes.
limitations except for one interview our interviews were all conducted by women.
in practice since most technical interviews are typically conducted by men additional factors such as stereotype threat may further influence and degrade performance of candidates.
a lack of peer parity among underrepresented minorities and hostile or indifferent interviewers could further influence performance.
we have chosen our question to be challenging but solvable.
in particular we asked for candidates to prioritize correctness over runtime optimality.
our reasoning was partly based on results by wyrich and colleagues where they found that only one participant out of could provide a correct and optimal coding challenge solution.
another reason was that it is a common expectation in interviews for a candidate to first reach a simple solution before engaging in optimization .
for our problem a brute solution o n3 is possible yet only one participant used the approach.
participants were also able to obtain the optimal solution o n in both settings.
also participants may have had prior exposure to the problems though no participant explicitly indicated this.
some factors of our experiment could affect the generalizability of the results.
our interview settings may be producing less stress than real interviews with real stakes while adding discomfort from the eye tracker.
furthermore our experimenters did not 487esec fse november virtual event usa mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin participate in problem solving.
they did not give feedback if participants were taking a wrong route to the solution nor interrupt with probing questions about the problem solving process it is unclear whether an interactive interviewer has an additional positive ornegative effect on performance.
although most students participate in technical interviews they may not fully represent industry developers who may perform differently in interview settings.
finally while our technical interview question is used by well known companies in practice other coding questions may be easier or more difficult individual task characteristics may elicit different kinds of mental effort and thus may have different interactions with stress.
similarly in some cases small amounts of stress can enhance performance .
hence we are not claiming that all interview questions will result in the same barriers.
one construct validity issue is the accuracy of the eye tracker.
while we used a professional eye tracking instrument environmental factors can disrupt the accuracy of our measures.
for example our eye tracker was also sensitive to lighting conditions.
furthermore dynamic and free movement in the environment limited our ability to perform automated analysis of fixed areas of interest such as fixations on particular words or lines in a coding solution.
some participant data was incomplete for example four participants did not have pupil dilation data available and one participant had no recording due to equipment malfunction during the participant session.
we mitigated against this issue by filtering and reducing sources of noise such as blink events using temporal coarse values in time windows and using multiple redundant measures.
future work can consider alternative ways to detect stress and analyze events with normalization .
related work despite their importance technical interviews are understudied in the scientific literature.
ford and colleagues conducted a study from the perspective of hiring managers and university students participating in mock technical interviews.
the study identified a mismatch of candidates expectations between what interviewers assess and what they actually look for in a candidate.
behroozi and colleagues conducted a qualitative study on comments posted on hacker news a social network for software practitioners.
posters report several concerns and negative perceptions about interviews including their lack of real world relevance bias towards younger developers and demanding time commitment.
posters report that these interviews cause unnecessary anxiety and frustration requiring them to learn arbitrary implicit and obscure norms.
researchers have investigated challenges faced by disadvantaged and low resource job seekers the effectiveness of resources such as online career mentoring and alternative job seeking interventions such as speed dating .
our study provides empirical evidence validating several of these concerns and provides additional interventions for job seekers.
using head mounted eye trackers behroozi and colleagues conducted a preliminary study with participants solving one problem privately on paper and one problem on a whiteboard.
they found that the settings significantly differed in metrics associated with cognitive load and stress.
the study concludes that programming is a cognitively intensive task that defies expectations of constant feedback of today s interview processes however more studies are needed to better understand what characteristics contribute to high cognitive load.
wyrich and colleagues conducted an exploratory study with software engineering students and found that coding challenge solvers also have better exam grades and more programming experience.
moreover conscientious as well as sad software engineers performed worse.
studies have also characterized the impact of interruptions on programming tasks including more frequent errors .
our study complements this prior work by offering empirical evidence that explains how think aloud and being watched contribute to lower technical interview performance.
examining the grey literature of software engineering that is non published nor peer reviewed sources of practitioners provides some additional though contradictory insights.
lerner conducted a study of over a thousand interviews using the interviewing.io platform where developers can practice technical interviewing anonymously.
their significant finding is that performance from one technical interview to another is arbitrary and that interview performance is volatile only of the interviewees are consistent in their performance and the rest are all over the place in terms of their interview evaluation.
in contrast a study conducted at google by shaper investigated a subset of interview data over five years to determine the value of an interviewer s feedback and found that the four interviews were enough to predict whether someone should be hired at google with confidence.
unfortunately this study simply establishes the number of interviews four needed to consistently reach a hire no hire decision not the accuracy nor validity of the decision.
regardless our study finds that interview practices may be confounding stress induced from assessment with problem solving ability.
discussion our findings demonstrate that stress impacts technical interview performance indeed in our study participants in a traditional technical interview format obtained significantly lower scores section .
experienced significantly higher extraneous cognitive load section .
and experienced significantly higher stress levels section .
.
furthermore participants reported section .
feeling very nervous rushed stressed monitored and unable to concentrate as a result of being watched.
participants also reported extraneous cognitive load associated with having to think and talk and do code at the same time p39 .
when not being monitored participants were more likely to perform mental execution allowing them an opportunity to evaluate and build confidence in their solution before having someone examine it.
moreover our findings suggest that social anxiety may cause the candidates not be capable of communicating their thoughts and solutions which can add up to their stress and deteriorate their performance.
we have demonstrated how one possible technical interview design a private interview significantly reduces the effects of unwanted stress on candidates and results in significant changes in performance stress and cognitive load.
for companies that want 488does stress impact technical interview performance?
esec fse november virtual event usa to avoid conflating assessment of technical and communication skills with handling and mitigating stress we have provided an experimental framework for designing and evaluating alternative technical interview procedures.
in the remainder of this section we present interim guidance for future directions on technical interviews consider the recommendations as hypotheses that need further evaluation rather than outright policy.
.
guidance i use retrospective think aloud for accessing explanation skills although companies want to accurately assess candidates based on their actual skills they can inadvertently favor a candidate s ability to handle or mitigate stress.
in most technical interview formats candidates are asked to think aloud.
think aloud protocols are methods to add visibility to cognitive process of a candidate while a set of specified tasks rather than only evaluating their final product.
there are two main types of think aloud methods concurrent think aloud and retrospective think aloud .
in concurrent think aloud candidates explain their thoughts in tandem with the task.
just as subjects given the trier social stress test candidates who must vocalize their thought process in real time risk exposure to a social evaluative threat that can hinder performance in both explanation and problem solving .
van den haak et al .
also showed that verbalising thoughts at the time of performing tasks generally increase errors and impede task completion.
in retrospective think aloud candidates first finish the task and then walk the interviewers through their thought process.
that is candidates can perform the task in their own manner with limited impact on performance .
to implement retrospective think aloud in technical interviews interviewers can first provide the candidate with a problem description and allow them to privately solve the problem followed by an explanation of their thought process and a discussion about their solution with the interviewer.
this interview format mitigates many of the issues our participants experienced from feeling monitored or supervised while giving companies an opportunity to still evaluate explanation skills.
another way to effectively assess explanation skills is to use interview formats that simultaneously reduce the social evaluative threat and while increasing focus on the explanation component of the assessment.
for interviewers who want to assess how the candidate would communicate with other members of the team the technical problem itself is primarily a shared vehicle through which the interviewer and candidate engage in a conversational dialogue.
for example microsoft has attempted to reframe technical interviews as as more of a conversation in which both the candidate and the interviewer work together to solve the problem .
we recommend starting with straight forward problems that are no more difficult than first year computer science exercises and then using these exercises as a way to progressively elicit explanations about their knowledge and experience on different topics.
for example consider the rainfall problem3 a programming task that has been used in a number of studies of programming ability .
3the basic description of the rainfall problem is to write a program that will read in integers and output their average stopping when the value is input.if the candidate does well in their explanation the interviewer can probe more complex scenarios such as scaling this problem to a distributed algorithm or building a user interface for such a system depending on the expectations of the position.
in certain scenarios it may not even be necessary to fabricate a problem to drive the discussion.
at netflix some interviewers ask the candidate to teach something that they know and the candidate can choose any topic of their interest job related or otherwise.
.
guidance ii evaluate the kinds of stress necessary for position although companies have been mindful to eliminate the influence of stress from their assessment procedures some view stress as an important characteristic of the job and should not hire candidates who cannot manage stress the real problem is in your head your anxiety about job interviews is sabotaging something you re otherwise perfectly good at .
in this case it is important to delineate the kinds of stress a developer would typically encounter in a day to day manner.
given important tasks that must be completed in a timely manner the ability to tolerate stress from time pressure is a reasonable consideration .
however time pressure is distinct from other sources of stress which might manifest during an evaluation but not during day to day tasks such as performance anxiety commonly called stage fright or closely related test anxiety .
therefore with interview formats explored in our study it is still possible to assess the ability for a candidate to perform under time pressure without evaluating other sources of stress.
if stress is an important consideration for the job companies should consider ways to help candidates mitigate its effects such as stress inoculation training.
as such interview candidates have been advised to practice or grind on various problems and solutions in order to become immune to its effects mekka okereke a senior manager at google recommends at least practice sessions.
while stress inoculate training can be effective developers also note the immense time commitment required to train for technical interviews and the disparity caused by some candidates not having the same available time or resources to train as others.
honeycomb a women lead devops company tries to eliminate stress by giving advanced details no surprises... unknowns cause anxiety and people don t perform well when they re anxious.
we willingly offer up as much detail in advance about the process as we can even down to the questions .
yet there may be some companies that still need to assess candidates on their stress tolerance.
for them handling stress may be even more important than candidates technical skills.
in that case companies should be clear about that requirement.
this let candidates to decide whether those companies are suitable for them or that is the culture they want to fit in.
.
guidance iii provide accessible alternatives we observed several instances where the nature of the whiteboard interview interfered with the candidate s ability to perform their 4personal correspondence with netflix interviewer.
489esec fse november virtual event usa mahnaz behroozi shivani shirolkar titus barik and chris parnin task.
several changes to the interview procedure can reduce the effects of stress and cognitive load.
.
.
warm up interview.
the technical interview format is substantially different from how developers do their day to day programming activities.
to reduce stress provide the candidate with a warmup exercise that gives them an opportunity to familiarize themselves with the interview setting experience the interview format and ask questions about the technical interview process.
ideally the warmup interview should be conducted by an interviewer who does not score the candidate.
.
.
free reset.
as we found in our study in stressful situations some participants may forget or blank on a particular solution.
interviewers should acknowledge that interviews are stressful situations and allow the candidate a free reset to request another problem or start again on the existing problem without incurring any penalty.
having such a safety net can reduce the candidates stress and improve their performance in the technical interview.
similarly dropping the lowest performance interview can reduce noise associated with problematic questions or unfavorable interviewer candidate interactions.
.
.
partial program sketches.
if you ve ever had to write a paper you know that starting from an entirely blank page can be both difficult and intimidating.
participants in our study also reported additional stress from having to write a program from scratch for example from having to recall the syntax of the language without having any cues.
instead of asking participants to write a program from scratch interviewers can provide participants with an initial skeleton that contains a partial solution such as the method signature a sample invocation a few input and output examples and even some sample code snippets for the programming language.
.
.
familiar affordances.
conducting technical interviews on the whiteboard can also unnecessarily increase the cognitive load for the candidate especially if the candidate does not routinely write on a whiteboard.
to mitigate this offer the candidate the option to use a laptop or allow them to solve the technical problems using pencil and paper.
by so candidates do not have to write code on an unfamiliar medium just for purposes of the interview.
although not well advertised interviewers at google can elect to use pencil and paper to conduct their interviews instead of a whiteboard.
.
guidance iv consider impacts on talent and diversity as companies embrace diversity and strive for inclusive hiring practices companies should evaluate how their technical interviews support or detract from that goal.
hiring procedures that inadvertently exclude large segments of population can contribute to leaky pipelines with impact to increased hiring costs and a disproportionate reduction in hiring of minorities and other underrepresented groups .
for example a large population of people are impacted by performance anxiety estimated percent of all adults in the u.s. .
collectively otherwise 5personal correspondence with google interviewer.qualified candidates who happen to perform poorly due to performance anxiety could be excluded from fair consideration for hiring.
furthermore scientific evidence finds that women experience disproportionately more negative effects from test and performance anxiety which could explain our observations.
as we observed in our study candidates who perform in traditional interview setting are more likely to fail but not necessarily for reasons related to problem solving ability.
as a result how an individual responses to stress and extraneous cognitive load can be driving hiring decisions instead of ability.
for example if two candidates performed equally well the job may still go to the candidate who better projects confidence .
beyond gender these procedures could further impact the performance and thus exclusion of other demographics such as high anxiety individuals and neurodiverse e.g.
dyslexia autism or anxiety job seekers.
even wider bands of demographics such as disadvantaged and low resource job seekers can be impacted by unwanted stress in hiring procedures.
for example mekka okereke a google senior manager speaking at a recent is the technical interview broken?
panel notes that students at stanford take courses for passing technical interviews cs9 problem solving for the cs technical interview.
mekka finds that most students typically lack these resources and specifically runs workshops at hbcus to provide interview training.
he reports that practice interviews are needed to help someone overcome performance anxiety a time consuming application of stress inoculation.
companies must decide at what cost they are willing to pay for verifying explanation skills in tandem with problem solving ability and what impact that has on their ability to hire diverse and talented candidates.
conclusion our study raises key questions about the validity and equity of a core procedure used for making hiring decisions across the software industry.
we suggest that private interview settings have considerable advantages for candidates that both reduce their stress and allow more accurate assessment of their problem solving abilities and can be easily extended to allow assessment of communication skills through retrospective think aloud.
although this study is one of the first to provide insights into impacts of stress on technical interviews we have only examined this effect in the context of one coding challenge from participants from one university.
a larger collection of studies including active participation by industry to pilot alternative hiring procedures would be valuable for informing how to create a valid and inclusive hiring process for all.