Investigating the Impact of Interpersonal Challenges
on Feeling Welcome in OSS
Bianca Trinkenreich∗, Zixuan Feng†, Rudrajit Choudhuri‡, Marco Gerosa‡, Anita Sarma†, Igor Steinmacher‡
∗Colorado State University, United States, {bianca.trinkenreich }@colostate.edu
†Oregon State University, United States, {fengzi,choudhru, anita }@oregonstate.edu
‡Northern Arizona University, United States, {marco.gerosa,igor.steinmacher }@nau.edu
Abstract —The sustainability of open source software (OSS)
projects hinges on contributor retention. Interpersonal challenges
can inhibit a feeling of welcomeness among contributors, particu-
larly from underrepresented groups, which impacts their decision
to continue with the project. How much this impact is, varies
among individuals, underlining the importance of a thorough
understanding of their effects. Here, we investigate the effects
of interpersonal challenges on the sense of welcomeness among
diverse populations within OSS, through the diversity lenses of
gender, race, and (dis)ability. We analyzed the large-scale Linux
Foundation Diversity and Inclusion survey (n = 706) to model
a theoretical framework linking interpersonal challenges with
the sense of welcomeness through Structural Equation Models
Partial Least Squares (PLS-SEM). We then examine the model to
identify the impact of these challenges on different demographics
through Multi-Group Analysis (MGA). Finally, we conducted
a regression analysis to investigate how differently people from
different demographics experience different types of interpersonal
challenges. Our findings confirm the negative association between
interpersonal challenges and the feeling of welcomeness in OSS,
with this relationship being more pronounced among gender
minorities and people with disabilities. We found that different
challenges have unique impacts on how people feel welcomed,
with variations across gender, race, and disability groups. We
also provide evidence that people from gender minorities and
with disabilities are more likely to experience interpersonal
challenges than their counterparts, especially when we analyze
stalking, sexual harassment, and doxxing. Our insights benefit
OSS communities, informing potential strategies to improve the
landscape of interpersonal relationships, ultimately fostering more
inclusive and welcoming communities.
Index Terms —disengagement, challenges, OSS, diversity
I. I NTRODUCTION
A core principle of Open Source Software (OSS) is its
openness—anyone from anywhere in the world can contribute,
irrespective of their background. However, despite this apparent
openness, OSS projects have a severe lack of diversity. For
example, data reveals that less than 10% of the contributors are
women [ 1], and rates are also low for non-whites (16.6%) [ 2]
and people who have disabilities (17%) [ 3]. This lack of
diversity is not just a social justice problem, it also undermines
the innovation and sustainability of OSS projects [4, 5].
Literature has also extensively explored the multiple facets
of challenges faced by OSS contributors [ 6–9], including
barriers faced by newcomers [ 6], one-time contributors [ 10],
and mentors [ 11]. Prior work has investigated how a Sense of
Virtual Community (SVC) in OSS is created by intrinsic factors
such as membership, identity, and attachment to a group andaffects their sense of belonging [ 12]. However, [ 12] does not
tie this feeling of SVC to the challenges that individuals face,
which are the antecedents of SVC. More specifically, studies
have identified interpersonal challenges as a major obstacle
to contributing to OSS [ 13], especially for those who are a
minority in OSS [1, 14, 15].
What is missing, however, is an understanding of how these
interpersonal challenges hinder the contributors’ feeling of
welcomeness in the project, which in turn impacts their decision
to continue contributing. This oversight is not trivial; the feeling
of welcomeness is key to sustained engagement, particularly
in environments built on open collaboration principles [ 16].
This brings us to our first research question: RQ1: How
are interpersonal challenges associated with the feeling of
welcomeness in OSS?
Research has also shown that individuals in the minority in
OSS often face a higher frequency of interpersonal challenges
such as toxic communication or gender stereotyping, which
in turn impacts their turnover [ 1,11,17]. However, the
extent to which interpersonal challenges affect the feeling
of welcomeness among minority communities is yet to be
determined. Additionally, our worldview is an amalgamation
of our individual backgrounds and lived experiences. Conse-
quently, various interpersonal challenges may exert disparate
influences on individuals belonging to distinct demographic
groups. Thus far, no research has quantified the differential
effects of various challenges on feeling welcome nor on the
interpersonal challenges across demographic dimensions. This
leads us to our other two research questions: RQ2: How does
the association between interpersonal challenges and feeling
welcome differ for those who are in gender, race, or disability
minorities? RQ3: How differently do those in gender, race, or
disability minority face interpersonal challenges?
The current absence of a comprehensive understanding
that delineates the impact of challenges on the feeling of
welcomeness across various population segments implies that
endeavors by OSS communities to retain a diverse pool of
contributors are likely to fail.
Our study closes this gap through a large-scale (n=706),
mixed-methods analysis of Linux Foundation survey data [ 18].
Specifically, we build a theoretical model using Partial-Least
Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) to determine
and delineate the different types of interpersonal challenges,
their extent, and their impact on feeling welcome (RQ1). WearXiv:2411.01601v1  [cs.SE]  3 Nov 2024then model the differential impact of the various interpersonal
challenges on demographic dimensions of gender, race, and
disabilities through Multi-Group Analysis (RQ2). Following,
we modeled individual logistic regressions to evaluate the
differences in experiencing interpersonal challenges across
demographic dimensions of gender, race, and disabilities (RQ3).
Our study follows a concurrent embedded strategy [ 19] and
uses qualitative analysis of the open-ended survey responses
about reasons to feel (or not feel) welcome to understand
the participants’ specific experiences that contributed to their
feeling (or lack) of welcomeness in the community. This serves
as a form of data triangulation to provide rigor to our findings.
Our theoretical model empirically shows that experiencing
interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling
welcome in OSS. Moreover, it highlights the nuanced nature
of how different challenges impact different demographics
differently. For example, in our data, while race minorities felt
less welcome, interpersonal challenges had a strong association
with not feeling welcome for gender minorities and people
with disabilities, but not for race.
By understanding how specific challenges impact diverse
contributors’ feelings of welcomeness, our study not only
advances the academic literature on the field of behavioral
software engineering but also holds practical implications. The
results are paramount to inform OSS communities on the
specific aspects to focus on to foster diversity in OSS, which
in turn can result in innovation, and drive the sustainability of
OSS projects. Our contributions offer valuable insights that may
go beyond OSS, informing broader software industry efforts
on creating inclusive and equitable spaces.
II. R ELATED WORK
Diversity and Inclusion in OSS. Diversity and inclusion
in OSS have received attention in recent years [ 1,4,5,12,
17,20–23]. Most of the literature related to minorities and
underrepresentation in OSS is focused on women [ 1,4,5,
17,22,24]. A literature survey by Trinkenreich et al. [1]
identified that women are poorly represented and aggregates
eight significant challenges women face when contributing to
OSS. By analyzing repositories, Vasilescu et al. [4]showed that
projects with higher gender diversity within their development
teams tend to experience more effective collaboration and
productivity. Similarly, a survey by Lee and Carver [17]
highlighted notable perceptions of gender bias and inclusivity
issues within the OSS community. Participants acknowledged
barriers to women’s participation and emphasized the need for
better practices to foster inclusivity.
However, fewer studies have focused on other underrepre-
sented populations in OSS besides gender. Previous research
claimed for more studies about racial diversity in software
engineering [ 14]. Race minority was evidenced as underrep-
resented in OSS [ 25,26]. In this context, Nadri et al. [15]
found that perceptibly Black and Asian/Pacific developers faced
higher contribution rejection rates than those from perceptibly
White developers. A literature review by Rodr ´ıguez-P ´erez et al.
[14] indicates limited knowledge about the impact of race,nationality, and disability in OSS. Despite this, respondents in
a recent survey reported that their disability influences their
emotions and perceptions of others’ feelings [27].
Interpersonal challenges in OSS. “Open source has a
reputation for being aggressive” [ 28]. Toxicity and incivility
are prevalent issues in OSS discussions and code reviews,
adversely affecting contributor engagement, collaboration, and
overall community health Miller et al. [29], Ferreira et al.
[30]. Contributors who are underrepresented in OSS are
experiencing even worse collaboration environments. Harassing
verbal comments, sexual jokes, insults, and bullying are not
uncommon [ 31,32]. Singh and Brandon [33] found that
less than 5% of online communities are “safe” to women
contributors, free of sexism and discrimination. However, from
a quantitative analysis of 355 OSS software package websites,
only 10% of them have a Code of Conduct or relevant rules [ 34].
Such prevalent interpersonal challenges are creating barriers
that make contributors feel unwelcome in OSS, especially for
contributors who are underrepresented.
Welcomeness in OSS. Feeling welcome antecedes belonging
[35]. Gill [36] describes welcomeness as more than a mere
acknowledgment of arrival or permission for entry. It embodies
a deeper sense of emotional and relational connection between
the welcomer and the newcomer, implying a willingness to
engage and suggesting a deeper level of engagement beyond
mere permission. It involves an exchange of emotions that
transcend bureaucratic processes [36].
We introduce the concept of welcomeness in OSS, which
focuses on conveying a genuine positive reception of newcom-
ers as contributors to the project. While onboarding primarily
addresses the procedural and technical requirements necessary
to contribute, welcomeness emphasizes the interpersonal dy-
namics that foster an engaging atmosphere characterized by
mutual respect and connection.
Welcomeness is a construct investigated in the context of
the inclusion of minorities in other areas, like, A [ 37], Edu-
cation [ 38,39], Sports [ 38], International Relations [ 40], and
Healthcare [ 41]. While there is no previous work specifically
focusing on welcomeness in software engineering, it antecedes
the sense of belonging [ 35]—which was the focus on recent
studies in software engineering teams context [12, 42, 43].
The need for belonging is crucial in the OSS domain,
as shown in studies of OSS contributors [ 12,23]. More
specifically, close to the present work, Trinkenreich et al. [12]
showed that the sense of virtual community plays a critical role
in the contributors’ continued engagement and contributions.
Trinkenreich’s study highlights that factors such as shared
experiences, support, and meaningful interaction within the
community are vital in fostering a sense of belonging among
contributors, thereby influencing their commitment to the OSS
environment. Therefore, the sense of belonging emerges as
a key factor in retaining personnel, which is vital for the
sustainability of OSS projects.
While previous research extensively investigates the various
aspects analyzed in this study, it does not connect aspects of
belonging with the interpersonal challenges faced by contrib-Research
QuestionRQ1: Determine the significance of
associated factors
(Section IV .A)RQ2: Determine the dif ferences
among groups
(Section IV .B)RQ3: Determine frequency of 
factors per group
(Section IV .C)Composite Assessment: Uncover
reasons (not) to feel welcome
(Section III.D)
DataSurvey data (closed questions)
Gender , race, disabilitiesSurvey data (open question)
Analysis
ProceduresStructural Equation Models
(PLS-SEM)Multi-Group Analysis
(MGA)Ordinal Logistic Regression
(OLR)Qualitative AnalysisSurvey data (closed questions)
Gender , race, disabilitiesSurvey data (closed questions)
Gender , race, disabilitiesFig. 1: Research design following a Concurrent Embedded Mixed Methods Strategy
utors nor consider the feeling of welcomeness as a distinct
construct. Our present work complements the existing literature
by evidencing the interplay between interpersonal challenges
and welcomeness—which anticipates belonging [ 35]—and their
effect on gender, race, and disabilities minorities.
III. R ESEARCH DESIGN
Fig. 1 presents an overview of the research design. We
followed a Concurrent Embedded Mixed Methods Strategy
[19] with a dominant quantitative component.
Answering RQ1 involves using Structural Equation Models
- Partial Least Squares to model how interpersonal challenges
are associated with the feeling of welcomeness. In RQ2, we
investigated the heterogeneity in the model through Multi-
Group Analysis (MGA) and established whether the association
of the variables identified in RQ1 varied according to gender,
race or ethnicity, and abilities. RQ3 identifies the frequency
of each demographic group experiencing each interpersonal
challenge using Ordinal Logistic Regression. Finally, we
qualitatively analyzed the open-ended survey responses about
why contributors (do not) feel welcome in OSS as a form of
data triangulation and conducted a follow-up study to collect
the practitioners’ perspectives about our results.
This work is different from the model of sense of belonging
proposed by Trinkenreich et al. [12], which investigated the
association between intrinsic motivations and the Sense of
Virtual Community (SVC). Here we investigate the feeling of
welcomeness, which anticipates belonging [ 35], and its associ-
ation with challenges, not motivations. Moreover, Trinkenreich
et al. [12]’s study used the diversity lens of gender, while the
present study also tackles the lens of race and disabilities.
A. Dataset
We used the data from the Linux Foundation Diversity
and Inclusion survey [ 18]. The survey design was led by the
Linux Foundation Research, in collaboration with 40 industrial
partners and researchers from our community [ 18]—including
an author of this paper, who provided ideas and feedback on
the questionnaire. This collaboration between industry and
academic researchers helped increase the instrument’s clarity,
reliability, and reach. The questionnaire was available between
July 15 and July 29, 2021, in multiple languages, but with the
majority of responses (89%) in English.
The survey was advertised via social media and through
the channels of the project partners (e.g., Linux Foundation,
Amazon, CHAOSS Community, Comcast, Fujitsu, GitHub,
GitLab, Hitachi, Huawei, Intel, NEC, Panasonic, Red Hat,
Renesas, VMware, etc.). The survey was targeted at open source
contributors. The compensation for answering the survey was
a 20% discount when registering to attend the Open Source
Summit Conference. The survey received 2,350 responses.Linux Foundation Research made the questionnaire and the
quantitative data publicly available [ 44], and we obtained the
qualitative data by contacting Linux Foundation Research.
The survey included a question about the feeling of wel-
comeness, a 5-point Likert scale item (from Strongly Disagree
to Strongly Agree, with neutral). The questions about the
frequency of experiencing challenges were asked as 4-point
items: Never, Rarely, Occasionally, and Frequently. For the
gender and race questions, respondents could mark as many
options they identified with. The disabilities question could be
answered as yesorno. Since our analysis techniques require
complete responses, we removed responses with missing values,
as they represented more than 10% of responses, and imputation
methods could bias results for multi-group analyses used in
RQ2 [ 45]. Given the large number of responses, the trade-
off between introducing a potential bias versus increasing the
usable sample size suggests a more conservative approach,
so we did not use imputation methods. We removed the
responses with blank values for: the feeling of welcomeness
question (n=4); any interpersonal challenge items (n=104);
gender (n=30); race (n=1503); and disabilities (n=2).
Post filtering, our dataset included 706 responses for the
analyses. We present demographics in Table I.
TABLE I: Demographics of respondents (n=707)
Attribute N Percentage
Gender
Only Men 539 76.3%
Gender Minorities 167 23.7%
Women 115 16.3%
Non-Binary or Third Gender 29 4.1%
More than one gender 23 3.3%
Disability
No 549 77.8%
Yes 157 22.2%
Race
Only White 486 68.8%
Racial Minorities 220 31.2%
Black 50 7.1%
Hispanic 43 6.1%
Asian 43 6.1%
Native or Indigenous 4 0.6%
Pacific Islander 2 0.3%
More than one race 78 11.0%
We added the subset of questions used in the study in the
replication package [ 46], together with prepared datasets to run
RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3, and the codebook used for qualitative
analysis. For the sake of confidentiality between researchers
and The Linux Foundation Research, the raw data from the
open question could not be shared.
B. Hypothesis Development
In the context of this work, Feeling Welcomeness refers to
the self-perception of an individual feeling that their presenceis desired, accepted, and valued by their OSS colleagues
without acts of microaggressions [ 47,48,48]. Welcomeness
is an inherently emotional and relational concept that entails
more than simply being permitted to enter and includes inter-
relational subjectivity [ 36]. Understanding the feelings of
welcomeness in a given context plays an important role in
identifying where barriers exist and how to break down these
barriers to increase diversity in participation [38].
Whether an OSS community has a welcoming atmosphere
is determined by the challenges that individuals face during
the contribution process [ 11], affecting both the retention of
existing and the attraction of new contributors. Interpersonal
challenges are difficulties or conflicts that arise from interper-
sonal relationships (or lack thereof) in OSS projects [ 6,17],
and tend to have a more pronounced impact on demographics
typically underrepresented in the tech industry [ 1,11,17].
These challenges can stem from differences in communication
styles, cultural backgrounds, personal behaviors, and social
dynamics, and can negatively impact collaboration, productivity,
and the overall well-being of the individuals involved [6].
In the questionnaire, interpersonal challenges were defined
based on (1) the unacceptable behaviors listed in the Linux
Foundation’s code of conduct [ 49] (unwelcoming language,
stalking, sexual harassment), (2) issues gathered from the
literature and seen by practitioners (lack of response to the
rejection of contributions, stereotyping, doxxing), and (3) an
overarching conflict-related question (conflict or tension with
other contributors).
Given the potential relationship between interpersonal chal-
lenges and the feeling of welcomeness, we propose the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1 (H1). Experiencing interpersonal challenges is
negatively associated with feeling welcome.
We used Partial Least Squares–Structural Equation Mod-
eling (PLS-SEM) [ 50] to analyze the relationship between
interpersonal challenges and feelings of welcomeness in OSS.
SEM facilitates the simultaneous analysis of relationships
among constructs that can be measured by one or more
indicator variables. The main advantage of SEM is being able
to measure complex model relationships while accounting
for measurement error when using latent variables (e.g.,
Interpersonal Challenges).
In the following, we discuss the measurement model (i.e.,
operationalization of constructs) and analysis.
Interpersonal challenge is a theoretical concept that cannot
be directly observed given its multiple facets. Therefore, this
concept is represented as a latent variable. A latent variable
cannot be directly measured but instead is measured through a
set of indicators or manifest variables. The interpersonal chal-
lenges were measured in our dataset via seven 4-point Likert
scale items representing different interpersonal challenges.
1.”Doxxing” , derived from ” document dropping ,” involves
the public disclosure of private or personal information about
an individual or organization, often with harmful intentions.
Regarded as a detrimental and unethical action, doxxing canresult in privacy breaches and, in some cases, physical harm
to the affected parties [51].
2.Sexual harassment is a well-documented social issue
that can occur offline or online with profound impacts on
individuals and organizations. In OSS, conferences and meetups
serve as platforms for in-person interaction and can expose
minority attendees to inappropriate behavior. Sexual harassment
can occur online also. For instance, when a newcomer who
identifies as a woman seeks mentorship from a man, her
intentions are often responded to as a dating opportunity [ 52].
3.Stalking refers to actions meant to intimidate or instill
fear [ 53,54], which happens in OSS as a form of toxicity [ 55].
4.Stereotyping represents discrimination based on perceived
demographic characteristics [ 56], usually referring to a form
of negative and fixed impression that can happen implicitly or
explicitly and relate to a socially shared set of beliefs about
traits of members of a social category [56].
5.Unwelcoming Language is defined as written or spoken
communication that induces feelings of exclusion, including
instances of profanity, racist jokes, and name-calling. Those
who are in minority are more likely to experience unwelcoming
language [1, 32, 52, 57, 58].
6.Conflict or tension with other contributors can manifest
in diverse ways and may stem from variations in technical
approaches, communication styles, or personal interactions.
For instance, tension may arise due to misunderstandings,
misinterpretations, or the use of ineffective communication
channels [ 59]. Technical debates, such as differing opinions,
design philosophies, or coding practices [ 60], can also be
sources of tension among contributors.
7.Lack of response to or rejection of contributions or
questions refers to situations where contributors do not receive
acknowledgment or approval for their work or when questions
are met with indifference, silence, or dismissal. Delayed or
absent responses lead to contributor attrition in OSS [ 29,61,62]
C. RQ1 Analysis
To answer RQ1, we quantitatively analyzed the responses to
the questions about interpersonal challenges and the feeling of
welcomeness using Structural Equation Models–Partial Least
Squares (PLS-SEM), utilizing SmartPLS version 4. The first
step in evaluating a structural equation model is to assess
the soundness of the measurement of the latent variable—this
is referred to as evaluating the ‘measurement model’ [ 63].
The second step is to evaluate the theoretical model, which
includes the evaluation of the hypothesis. The measurement
model is evaluated through tests of convergent validity, internal
consistency reliability, discriminant validity, and collinearity.
The theoretical model is evaluated according to the significance
of the path coefficient and model fit, which are obtained through
a ‘bootstrapping’ procedure: it draws a large number (e.g.,
5,000) of random ‘subsamples’ of the same size as the original
sample (using replacement). The model is estimated for each
subsample, generating a sampling distribution used to determine
a standard error [ 63] that can subsequently be used to make
statistical inferences. The model fit is then evaluated using
Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR).D. RQ2 Analysis
To answer RQ2, we evaluated the impact of interpersonal
challenges (as a single construct) on the feeling of welcomeness
across demographic groups. To define the demographic groups
of interest, we followed the core categories identified by
Albusays et al. [ 64]. Gender and race are very relevant
perspectives in OSS, with many communities implementing
initiatives specifically focused on these populations, whereas
disability remains underexplored, likely due to data scarcity
[65]. By focusing on these categories, we sought relevance,
maintained a clear focus on the paper, and avoided data
dredging (i.e., indiscriminately including all data).
We employed Multi-Group Analysis (MGA) to understand
how the model varies within distinct demographic groups. We
followed Hair Jr et al. [66] proposed structure that includes
testing for invariance and comparing groups to analyze results.
Testing for Measurement Invariance of Composite Models
(MICOM) is a mechanism to assess whether or not the loadings
of the items representing the latent variables differ significantly
across different groups. In other words, we want to establish
whether any differences can be attributed to the theoretical
constructs and not how we measured those constructs [ 66]. The
literature recommends conducting MICOM before MGA to
confirm its appropriateness [66]. If we find differences in the
measurement model for the two groups, then we cannot attribute
any differences in the model to the theoretical constructs.
Comparing group-specific model relationships for significant
differences using a multi-group analysis requires establishing
configural and compositional invariance [ 66,67]. Configural
invariance does not include a test and is a qualitative assessment
to ensure all of the composites are equally defined (“config-
ured”) for all of the groups, such as equivalent indicators
per measurement model, equivalent treatment of the data,
and equivalent algorithm settings or optimization criteria.
Compositional invariance exists when the composite scores
are the same across both groups; while small differences
will naturally happen for different groups, we tested whether
those differences are significantly different. We used MICOM
procedure to examine the correlation between the composite
scores of groups and assess that the correlation equals 1.
Groups Comparison and Analysis was done through boot-
strapping multigroup analysis, and the statistical differences
are assessed through parametric tests between path coefficients
generated from different samples.
E. RQ3 Analysis
Results from RQ1 showed that interpersonal challenges are
associated with less feeling of welcome, and RQ2 showed that
this association is more prevalent for gender minorities and
people with disabilities. However, much is not known about
the frequency of challenges each demographic experiences.
To answer RQ3, we built seven individual logistic regression
models, with each interpersonal challenge as the dependent
variable for each model. The independent binary variables are
gender minorities, race minorities, and disabilities (Table I),
allowing us to assess which group will more likely encountereach interpersonal challenge. We used ordinal logistic regres-
sion since the dependent variables were from a 4-point Likert-
scale response (never, rarely, occasionally, and frequently).
The ordinal logistic regression is an extension of the logistic
regression that can be used when the dependent variable is
ordinal [68].
F . Composite Assessment
We qualitatively analyzed the open-ended responses to the
question about the reasons for (not) feeling welcome by induc-
tively applying open and axial coding. We built post-formed
codes as the analysis progressed and associated them with
respective parts of the answer to code the reasons according
to the respondents’ perspectives. Reasons to not feel welcome
were related to six out of the seven interpersonal challenges,
and one technical challenge. We also found a positive reason
to feel welcome. We used a negotiated agreement protocol and
discussed the codes and categorization as a team until reaching
a consensus about the themes, as cataloged in our codebook
that is part of our replication package [46].
From the 706 answers we used for quantitative analysis, we
received 588 answers for the open question of reasons to (not)
feel welcome, and we identified respondents as P1 to P588.
G. Follow-up: Community Perceptions
As a follow-up, we evaluated the community’s perception of
our findings. The goal of the follow-up study was to understand
to what extent the interpersonal challenges investigated in
this study persist in impacting the feeling of welcomeness
in OSS in 2024. We conducted an online survey with OSS
contributors, which we advertised on social media and the
authors’ professional network. We conducted the survey in July
2024. We received 28 responses from OSS contributors from
all regions (North America, Central/South America, Europe,
Asia Pacific, and Africa). We also conducted an audience poll
during the keynote at the 2024 SciPy Conference [ 69], which is
dedicated to scientific computing through open-source Python
software. We received an additional 25 responses.
In the surveys, we presented the seven interpersonal chal-
lenges and asked if they still happen today and to what extent
they can influence how a contributor feels welcome in the OSS
community. Additionally, we summarized our results into seven
statements and asked the respondents’ agreement level. Finally,
we added an open question so they could share additional
thoughts about challenges and feelings of being included in
OSS. All questions were optional. The questionnaire and its
answers are part of the replication package [46].
IV. A NALYSES AND RESULTS
In this section, we assess each research question, followed
by a composite assessment of the answers to the open question
about the reasons to (not) feel welcome.
A. How are interpersonal challenges associated with the feeling
of welcomeness in OSS?
In this section, we describe our results for RQ1, which
include the validate the measurement model (Sec. IV-A 1), andthen we evaluate the hypothesis ( H1. Experiencing interper-
sonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling welcome)
and control variables in the structural model (Sec. IV-A 2), both
computed through the survey data.
We assess the significance of our model using the Structural
Model Evaluation - Partial Least Squares (PLS-SEM) and
following the evaluation protocol proposed by previous research
[63,70] to make results consistent with our claims. The path
weighting scheme was estimated using SmartPLS 4 [71].
PLS-SEM is widely used in software engineering research
to explore relationships between theoretical concepts not
directly observable but measured through indicators or manifest
variables [ 70]. In our study, this applies to interpersonal
challenges. As in related work II, PLS-SEM constructs a
“proxy” of manifest variables as weighted composites and tests
their association with another variable—welcomeness.
1) Measurement Model Evaluation: We conducted a series
of tests to validate the measurement of the theoretical concept,
including convergent validity, internal consistency reliability,
discriminant validity, and collinearity.
Convergent validity relates to the degree to which a measure
correlates positively with alternative measures of the same
construct. Our model contains one reflective latent variable
(Interpersonal Challenges). Changes in the latent construct
should be reflected in changes in the indicator variables [ 63].
We used two metrics to assess convergent validity: the Average
Variance Extracted (A VE) and the loading of an indicator
onto its construct (the outer loading) [ 63]. The A VE value
for the latent construct in our model is 0.52, which is above
the threshold of explainability (0.5). For the outer loading, we
remove variables that does not reflect a sufficiently large impact
in the latent variable. An outer loading of 0.708 is considered
sufficient (because 0.7082≈0.50, which means at least half of
the indicator’s variance can be explained by the latent variable),
and 0.60 is considered sufficient for exploratory studies [ 63].
All indicators of our latent construct exceeded this threshold,
ranging between 0.62 and 0.83.
We also verified the Internal Consistency Reliability, or how
well the different indicators for interpersonal challenges are
consistent with one another and able to reliably and consistently
measure the constructs. We calculated both Cronbach’s αand
Composite Reliability (CR) to measure the reliability [ 63]. A
desirable range of values for both Cronbach’s αand CR is
between 0.7 and 0.9 [ 63]. The Cronbach’s αwas 0.871, and
CR was 0.887 for our model.
We also verified whether each construct represented different
concepts or entities through discriminant validity tests to assess
the discriminant validity utilizing the Heterotrait-monotrait
(HTMT) ratio of correlations [ 72]. The discriminant validity
could be problematic if the HTMT ratio exceeds 0.9 [ 72]. The
HTMT ratio between the latent construct and the endogenous
variable was 0.460, which is not a significant threat to this study.
Finally, we evaluated if the indicators from the exogenous
construct (Interpersonal Challenges) were independent. We
calculated their collinearity using the Variance Inflation Factor(VIF). A widely accepted cut-off value for the VIF is 5 [ 63];
in our model, all VIF values are below 2.
Given these results, we argue that the model is valid for
evaluating our hypothesis.
2) Evauating the Hypothesis in the Structural Model: We
found support for our hypothesis (p = 0.000): experiencing
interpersonal challenges is negatively associated with feeling
welcome. This relationship is depicted by an arrow in the
diagram in Fig. 2. The path coefficient, interpreted as a
standardized regression coefficient, indicates the direct effect of
one variable on another. With a negative path coefficient ( B=-
0.493), we conclude that interpersonal challenges are negatively
associated with the feeling of being welcome. This means
that an increase of one standard deviation in Interpersonal
Challenges results in a decrease of 0.493 standard deviations
in Feeling Welcome.
We assessed the relationship between constructs and the
predictive capabilities of the theoretical model. The R2value
of the endogenous variable in our model (feeling welcome)
was 0.301. While some scholars have suggested thresholds to
evaluate such values, there is considerable debate about setting
such thresholds. Other factors might play a role in feeling
welcome. We consider the R2value low-moderate.
We analyzed the Standardized Root Mean Square Residual
(SRMR), which is a common fit measure to detect misspecifi-
cation of PLS-SEM models [ 70]. SRMR is a model fit measure
that quantifies the divergence between observed and estimated
covariance matrices. The literature suggests using SRMR to
compare and evaluate SEM models [ 73]. SRMR is the square
root of the sum of the squared differences between the model-
implied and the empirical correlation matrix, or the Euclidean
distance between the two matrices [ 74]. A value of 0 for
SRMR would indicate a perfect fit, and values less than 0.08
(conservative) or 0.10 (more lenient) are considered a good fit
[73]. Our results suggest a good fit of the empirical data in
the theoretical model (SRMR = 0.075).
Control Variables: We also examined our data to determine
if being part of gender or race minorities or having disabilities
could strengthen or weaken feeling welcome. We found that
identifying as gender or race minorities is associated with not
feeling welcome, but we did not find a significant association
between having disabilities and feeling welcome.
Table II shows the results of the analysis, including the mean
of the bootstrap distribution ( B), the standard deviation ( SD),
the 95% confidence interval, and p-values.
TABLE II: Standardized path coefficients ( B), standard devia-
tions (Std), confidence intervals (95% CI), and p-values.
B Std 95% CI p-value
H1 -0.49* 0.035 (-0.56, -0.42) <0.001
Gender Minorities →Feeling Welcome -0.25* 0.078 (-0.41, -0.10) 0.001
Race Minorities →Feeling Welcome -0.16* 0.073 (-0.31, -0.02) 0.028
Disabilities →Feeling Welcome -0.02 0.085 (-0.19, 0.14) 0.779
Coefficients marked with * are statistically significant
RQ1. Experiencing interpersonal challenges is associated
with not feeling welcome within OSS projects. Gender and
racial minorities feel less welcome than their counterparts. H (-) 
-.493Interpersonal
ChallengesDoxxing
Conflict or tension with other
contributors
Lack of response to or rejection
of contributions or questionsStereotypingStalkingSexual Harassment
Unwelcoming Language.624
.834
;745
;655.683
.724
.777Feeling
Welcome
R2=.301
Gender
MinoritiesRace
MinoritiesDisabilities-.251-.024-.161
Control V ariablesFig. 2: Item loadings and path coefficient (p <0.05 indicated by a full line).
Non-significant links are indicated with a dashed line.
B. How does the association between interpersonal challenges
and feeling welcome differ for those who are in gender, race,
or disability minorities?
We answered RQ2 by performing a Multi-Group Analysis
in PLS-SEM to investigate the moderation of the theoretical
model across demographic groups. We used MGA to examine
how the results from RQ1 vary across cohorts.
We started by using the groups of (i) gender, (ii) race, and
(iii) disabilities (see Table I). Following, we observed that
configural invariance is established in our model as no different
settings or treatments were applied to the groups. Still, in this
step, we ran the permutation test in SmartPLS and verified that
compositional invariance is established for all latent variables
in the PLS path model. We established partial measurement
invariance, and MGA is suitable for the examined groups [ 75].
Finally, we analyzed the differences between the coefficients’
paths for the groups. If they are significant, they can be
interpreted as having moderating effects. In this step, we used
parametric tests to assess the multi-group differences, as in
Step 2 we established partial measurement invariance [ 75]. As
Table III shows, parametric tests showed statistical differences
regarding gender and disabilities but not regarding race. Gender
minorities had ( B=−0.55) a 1.6x stronger association between
interpersonal challenges and not feeling welcome than men
(B=0.35). Parametric tests showed no significant differences
for race or disabilities.
TABLE III: Multi-Group Analysis per demographics
Gender Race Disabilities All
Group Minorities Men Minorities White Yes No
Sample size (N) 167 539 220 486 547 157 706
Feeling Welcome ( R2) 0.31 0.12 0.24 0.31 0.27 0.16 0.31
H1 -0.55* -0.35* -0.51* -0.55* -0.52* -0.40* -0.49*
Coefficients marked with ∗are statistically significant, and in gray are
statistically significant differences between groups
RQ2 Interpersonal challenges were more strongly associated
with the lack of feeling welcome for gender minorities and
people with disabilities, while no significant difference was
observed for race minorities in this context.
C. How differently do those in gender, race, or disability
minority face interpersonal challenges?
In this section, we investigate the frequency of interpersonal
challenges experienced by the three demographic groupsof gender, race, and disability. In Fig. 3, we present the
answers to the questions about the frequency of experiencing
interpersonal challenges in OSS (from left to right: Frequently,
Occasionally, Rarely, and Never). We analyzed the graph by
comparing the percentage of answers in the two top frequencies
(Frequently and Occasionally). After each item, we show the
delta, comparing the percentages for each minority and its
counterpart.
Next, we conducted an ordinal logistic regression to follow
up on the differences observed in the visualization (Table IV).
We have checked our variables’ covariance matrix and VIF to
confirm no multicollinearity. We used the Benjamini-Hochberg
approach to adjust the p-value for the coefficients [ 76] to control
the false rate due to multiple comparisons. As we analyzed
interpersonal challenges using three demographic variables
as independent predictors, resulting in multiple comparisons,
we applied the Benjamini-Hochberg approach to adjust the
p-values in our ordinal logistic models to control the false
discovery rate (FDR) given the multiple hypothesis tests. This
method allows control of FDR while maintaining statistical
power and without being overly conservative.
An odds ratio >1 suggests higher odds for minorities to
face the challenge more frequently than their counterparts.
TABLE IV: Odds ratios of challenges per demographics
Challenges Race Minorities Gender Minorities Disability
Lack of Response or Rejection of Contributions 0.87 1.57* 1.68*
Conflict with Other Contributors 0.79 1.58* 1.95*
Unwelcoming Language 0.85 3.09* 2.14*
Stalking 1.21 4.36* 1.97*
Sexual harassment 1.34 6.17* 2.67*
Stereotyping 1.38 3.25* 1.97*
Doxxing 1.67 2.03* 2.67*
Coefficients marked with ∗are statistically significant
Gender minorities and people with disabilities from our
sample were more likely to experience all interpersonal
challenges than their counterparts (see Table IV and Fig. 3).
For example, gender minorities were 3.09 times more likely to
experience UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE (with a delta of 31.7%
for the highest frequency answers) and 6.17 times more likely
to experience SEXUAL HARASSMENT (with delta of 22.5%)
than men. People with disabilities reported 2.14 more odds of
experiencing UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE and 2.67 more odds
of experiencing DOXXING than their counterparts.
However, when we look at race minorities, we could not find
a statistically significant difference in the odds of experiencing
any interpersonal challenge compared to those who identified
as white only. From the visualizations (Fig. 3, we can see that
the frequency for all the categories does not vary significantly
for any of the items and that for the CONFLICT OR TENSION
WITH OTHER CONTRIBUTORS challenge, the number of high-
frequency answers is slightly higher for the non-white sample.
From a cross-demographics perspective, we observed in
Fig. 3 that the number of respondents who reported LACK
OF RESPONSE OR REJECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS frequently
oroccasionally is high cross all demographics, noted by
around half of the respondents. Even with the prevalence of
this challenge, gender minorities and people with disabilities
reported a higher frequency of occurrence (gender minoritiesF r equent lyOccasionallyRar elyNe v er Race minorityWhit eGender minorityDisability:Y esDisability: NoGender minorityMenDisability:Y esLack of r esponse or r ejection of contributions15 . 9%13 . 5%1 .4%19%16 . 3%Conflict wit h Ot her Contribut ors0 . 8%31 . 7%21 .2%Unw elcoming language2%10%8 .4%Stalking1 . 9%22.2%12.4%Se xual Har assment2. 5%17 .4%17 .4%30 . 5%St er eotyping5 . 9%9 .4%10 . 3%Do xxing4 . 8%Race minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: No
Race minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: NoRace minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: NoRace minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: NoRace minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: NoRace minorityWhit eGender minorityMenDisability:Y esDisability: NoFig. 3: Responses to the 4-points Likert-scale items for “frequency of interpersonal challenges” (Left:Race; Middle: Gender; Right: Disabilities). The
percentage at the bottom of each pair represents the delta, comparing the answers to frequently and occasionally. The whiskers present the differences
experiencing challenges (frequent + occasional) between the minority and majority groups.
57% more likely to face the challenge more often than their
counterparts, and people with disabilities 68% more likely).
Another major concern for contributors is the CONFLICT
OR TENSION WITH OTHER CONTRIBUTORS . While we did
not observe any differences regarding race, gender, minorities
and people with disabilities reported higher odds (1.58 and
1.95, respectively) of experiencing this challenge than their
counterparts. This suggests that these two groups could
experience unique challenges related to conflicts. We noticed
that challenges related to UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE and
STEREOTYPING followed a similar trend. as conflicts. To
further investigate this, we conducted a follow-up analysis to
assess the correlation of CONFLICT OR TENSION WITH OTHER
CONTRIBUTORS with UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE and with
STEREOTYPING for the minority groups. We noted that the cor-
relations were statistically significant, with (a least) moderate
correlation (Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ρ[77]) —
0.71, 0.67, 0.69 for UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE /CONFLICT and
0.59, 0.59, 0.64 for STEREOTYPING /CONFLICT , considering
gender, race, and disabilities minorities, respectively. This may
suggest that the conflicts may have a relationship with these
other two challenges, especially for gender minorities and
contributors with disabilities.
Both Fig. 3 and Table IV highlight alarming concerns
regarding SEXUAL HARASSMENT ,STALKING , and DOXXING ,
which present the highest odds ratio disadvantaging minorities.
Even though these interpersonal challenges are less common
than others, they bring a non-negligible delta (when we compare
the highest frequency answers from gender and disabilities
minorities with their counterparts), and a really low number
of “frequently” and “occasionally” answers of the majorities.
By looking at Table IV, we observe that gender minoritiesare 6.17 times more likely to experience sexual harassment
than men, with high odds ratios also for STALKING (4.36) and
DOXXING (2.03); these interpersonal challenges are at least
two times more likely to be experienced by gender minorities
than by men.
RQ3 Gender minorities and people with disabilities face
significantly more interpersonal challenges compared to
their counterparts. The lack of response or rejection of con-
tribution is prevalent among both minorities and majorities,
while sexual harassment, stalking, and doxxing are prevalent
among minorities. Conflict or tension with other contributors
is experienced together with either unwelcoming language or
stereotyping by minorities of gender, race, and disabilities.
D. Composite Assessment
As part of our mixed method concurrent embedded strategy
[19], we had a composite assessment from the open question
of reasons to (not) feel welcome. During this strategy, we qual-
itatively analyzed data to reside side by side with quantitative
analysis performed to answer RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3, having
different pictures to provide an overall composite assessment
of the problem, releaving details about why our participants
feel (or do not feel) welcome in OSS.
People are often biased against others outside of their social
group, showing prejudice (emotional bias), STEREOTYPES
(cognitive bias), and discrimination (behavioral bias). Both
minorities and majorities mentioned being discriminated against
due to their demographic characteristics of race, disabilities,
gender, age, religion, political ideas, or sexual preferences.
For example, race minorities feel discriminated against during
in-person gatherings. P80 mentioned being “always the only
African American and people act like: why are you here?” .During technical group discussion meetings, P141 remembered
that“being African American and the white people would all
sit on the other side of the room. ” Discrimination against gender
minorities was mostly mentioned as a glass ceiling, as a woman
reported “they are still excluded from the critical discussions. ”
(P508). Discrimination against majorities appeared as another
side of the spectrum. In a notable contrast, men, white, middle-
aged, or respondents who have a straight sexual orientation
feel“forced into a box (P123), discriminated against and hated
because they are not part of minorities. A white man mentioned
“in the last few years, there has been a dramatic increase in the
dismissal of straight, white, male contributions and demonizing
of the same group. ” (P431).
Contributors mentioned feeling welcome because they can
“hide behind a profile picture” and be anonymous (P75, P75,
P206, P567). However, when their identities are revealed
(DOXXING ), P551 complemented: you’re dead in the water” .
Although majorities feel discriminated against, diversity
incidents against minorities are still pervasive with “tons of mi-
croaggressions, macroaggressions and SEXUAL HARASSMENT ”
(P232). Microaggressions were mentioned as other kinds of
CONFLICTS OR TENSION WITH OTHER CONTRIBUTORS who
can make “harsh criticism and impersonal responses” (P71).
During conflicts, P8 misses allies because “when treated poorly,
[she does] not have a single memory of another person in a
thread stepping up to disagree” .
Conflicts were mostly mentioned during communication, and
respondents reflected on toxic communication during technical
discussions, attributing it to the perception of UNWELCOMING
LANGUAGE as being called as tranny or a dumb faggot” (P8),
which leads to unsafety to ask questions (P54), as when asking a
question, they faced hostility in which “people are too negative
when they should be inquisitive or just technical” (P133).
Besides toxicity, contributors feel unwelcome due to LACK
OF RESPONSE TO OR REJECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS OR
QUESTIONS when they feel maintainers ignore their attempts
of making contact (P105, P168), bringing the perception that
“pull-requests will never get merged” (P526).
On the positive side, our respondents mentioned feeling
welcome due to EXCHANGING SUPPORT when “people are
helpful and share their knowledge” (P128), but P148 they
pondered there is an “insular culture” where they need to
“know insiders” to feel welcome. P282 agreed that “in the
communities that know [him], [he] feels very welcome.. in
areas where [he is] unknown, [he] feels like [he does] not
have a voice/need to prove [him]self. ”
Although we were interested in interpersonal-related reasons
for (not) feeling welcome, another type of reason appeared
from the answers. Respondents mentioned feeling unwelcome
due to LACK OF ACCESSIBLE TOOLS , particularly for people
with sensory impairments like blindness. P518 reported missing
accessible Linux mobile phones and remembered an episode
when they “asked a PinePhone developer on Mastodon if
accessibility was considered, but [were told that] Linux Desktop
accessibility had to develop further, and that [they] should be
the change [they] want to see in the world. [They] felt veryunwelcome, since [they] know [they] can never come to the
knowledge needed to fix an accessibility stack” .
E. Follow-up: Community Perceptions
The follow-up survey was designed to provide insights into
how the community perceives our findings (see Sec. III-G ).
We first presented the seven interpersonal challenges and
asked to what extent these challenges influence the feeling
of welcomeness. Out of the 53 respondents, 39 answered the
question. Among them, 89% reported that the seven interper-
sonal challenges we investigated continue to significantly or
extremely affect welcomeness in OSS. None of the respondents
believed these challenges had any effect, indicating that the
issues identified in the 2021 survey persisted in 2024 when
we conducted the follow-up survey.
Fourteen respondents evaluated a set of statements about how
much our findings hold true in 2024. The results, presented in
Fig. 4, show that more than 75% of the respondents believe
that six out of the seven findings remain completely or largely
relevant in 2024 (see numbers on the left of the bars). The
finding with the least support refers to the majority groups
perceiving D&I initiatives as segregative instead of constructive.
We also invited participants to share their insights about
feeling welcome in OSS. One respondent highlighted that
stereotyping persists as “the implicit feeling that people aren’t
welcome if they don’t look like 90% of the maintainers. ”
Another respondent suggested that future studies should an-
alyze the “language barrier for non-native speakers” as an
interpersonal challenge affecting the feeling of welcomeness.
In summary, this follow-up study suggests that the findings
from the analysis of the 2021 survey remain current at the
time this paper was written.
V. D ISCUSSION
We investigated the relationship between interpersonal
challenges and the feeling of welcomeness in OSS projects.
Interpersonal challenges are negatively associated with not
feeling welcome, even more strongly for gender minorities and
people with disabilities. Results align with previous research
that discussed that contributors do not feel welcome when
facing challenges [ 6,13]. In the following, we bringing
exemplar quotes from the respondents’ responses.
Interactions and conflicts. In RQ3, we found a correlation
between CONFLICT OR TENSION WITH OTHER CONTRIBUTORS
and UNWELCOMING LANGUAGE and between CONFLICT OR
TENSION WITH OTHER CONTRIBUTORS and STEREOTYPING ,
considering the three minority groups of gender, race, and
disabilities. Those conflicts can happen through uncivil com-
ments and toxic discussions in mailing lists, comments in
pull-requests [29], or also during in-person events.
The delicate balance of welcoming minorities without
appearing unwelcoming to majorities: Stereotyping is a fixed,
oversimplified, and often biased belief about a group of people
[56]. Our results from RQ3 showed that gender minorities
and people with disabilities have higher odds of experiencing
stereotyping than their counterparts (Table IV). However, in
Sec. IV-D , we found that stereotyping hurts regardless if they90.0%91.6%92.4%
83.3%81.8%77.0%50.0%TextFig. 4: Results from the follow-up survey. Practitioners answered “How much do you believe these statements hold true in OSS in 2024?” for statements
derived from our findings. The list is sorted by the number of respondents who strongly support the statements, i.e., answered “completely” or “to a great
extent” (number on the left of the bars). The percentages do not consider the answers marked as “I don’t know.”
are part of a minority (e.g., “I feel unwelcome because I’m a
woman”) or majority (e.g., “I’m a white guy. Everyone hates
me.”). We noticed that minorities and majorities perceive that
somehow “diversity is over pushed. ” (P56). As noted by P218,
“I never felt unwelcome in OSS until this push for inclusion
and diversity. I am an Asian female mixed, Greek Yankee and
Japanese. I never felt unwelcome in the ’90s or early 2000s. ”
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and accessibility initiatives must
navigate carefully to avoid societal division. While focusing
on demographic diversity, they often overlook the deeper
cultural shifts required for genuine equity and inclusion. Mere
increases in minority representation don’t guarantee progress.
True advancement demands transforming organizational culture.
To gain public acceptance, we must reject dualistic thinking
and emphasize universal inclusion [78].
Our results show that contributors miss feedback on their
questions or acceptance of their contributions . As Fig. 3
shows, there is a high incidence of people who had experienced
LACK OF RESPONSE OR REJECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS . The
reason for this phenomenon can be related to overloaded
maintainers with several responsibilities [ 79,80], as a result,
they have a hard time answering contributors’ requests. More
research is required to track the deep roots of why only
approximately 1/3of the respondents reported that they never
faced this challenge. Although communities can monitor pull
requests and mailing lists to guarantee that members’ posts are
not being missed [ 29], more maintainers are needed to share
their workload. Generative AI can be instrumental in providing
better feedback and answers to contributors [81, 82].
The trifecta impeding inclusion: contribution-bias, iden-
tity hiding, and doxxing: Diversity and inclusion initiatives
are increasingly implemented in OSS projects [ 25], but people’s
culture still needs to change so minorities are truly included,
as mentioned by one of the respondents: “anti-women attitudes
are rampant in popular open source projects, it is completely
unacceptable, and yet it is tolerated” . When knowing that
discrimination is still tolerated, gender minorities often opt
to hide their identities and create pseudonyms to avoid
judgment [ 17] to avoid discrimination and code review bias[32,83–85]. This behavior was also observed by Ford et al.
[86] in online communities, where participants use a “gender
neutral alias for websites like technical communities, because
[they] get better help when asking questions or answering
them.” P1087 (men) claimed for “more anonymity, not judging
people based on their irrelevant features. ” However, one’s
identity should not be considered irrelevant. As we showed in
Fig. 3, DOXXING was more frequently experienced by gender
minorities than men in our sample. Although people may
perceive one’s identity as not relevant, when not revealing their
identity, gender minorities may suffer an even more severe
disadvantage in survival probability [ 85]. Although it prevents
discrimination, hiding identity can lead to a lack of trust and
ultimately cause a higher exit rate for such users [1].
The pervasive set of challenges still affecting gender
minorties SEXUAL HARASSMENT , [52,87],STALKING , and
STEREOTYPING were the top three interpersonal challenges
with higher odds to be experienced by gender minorities
(see Table IV. Although most communities have strict rules
against negative behaviors, the enforcement of the code of
conduct is crucial, as is the need for proactive measures to
detect and prevent such challenges from adversely affecting
contributors. The code of conduct comprises the collective
norms of a community, as mantras that shape the culture of
collaboration as well as the community’s expectations and
values to create a friendly and welcoming community [ 55].
Communities can use mining tools to identify gender pronouns
in messages such as mailing lists, pull requests, and code
reviews. Actions may include providing online training with
practical examples of acceptable and non-acceptable behaviors
and training for allies to speak up and act as “collaborators,
accomplices, and co-conspirators” [ 88]. Additionally, lawyers
should be involved in creating an enforcement plan and
adding the appropriate terms to provide transparency about the
punishments for those who violate the code of conduct.
Implications to practice: The insights from our research
offer practical guidance for OSS communities striving to
become more inclusive. For instance, our findings on the
particular challenges faced by gender minorities can informthe development of targeted mentorship programs, codes
of conduct, and communication guidelines that specifically
address these issues. Similarly, the unique experiences of racial
minorities and people with disabilities in OSS highlighted in
our study could lead to the implementation of community
guidelines that promote respect and understanding across
diverse backgrounds. By focusing on reducing interpersonal
challenges, it is possible that the contributors feel more
welcome, and, ultimately, OSS projects can enhance their
attractiveness to a broader range of contributors, enriching
the community and the software products they develop.
Our findings can inform communities in prioritizing inter-
ventions such as training, mentorship, and support programs.
For example, since interpersonal challenges were more strongly
associated with the lack of feeling welcome for gender
minorities and people with disabilities (RQ2), communities
aiming to improve the feelings of welcomeness of gender
minorities should combat interpersonal challenges, especially
sexual harassment, stalking, and doxxing, which our data (RQ3)
showed are currently prevalent among minorities. Potential
actions can be to have an enforceable Code of Conduct, promote
allies who can voice concerns without direct retribution, and
set up Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion committees.
Implications to research: While our study sheds light on
critical aspects of diversity in OSS, it also opens avenues for fur-
ther research. Future research could explore longitudinal trends
in the experiences of minority groups within OSS communities,
providing insights into how inclusivity efforts evolve and their
long-term effectiveness. Examining the intersectionality of
various demographic factors could offer a more comprehensive
understanding of the challenges faced by individuals belonging
to multiple underrepresented groups. Investigating how different
strategies already in place (e.g., code of conduct, near-peer
mentoring, demographic-specific support groups) impact the
perception of welcomeness by conducting case studies and
in-depth qualitative investigations. Another interesting future
work would assess the association of welcomeness and sense
of belonging—given their theoretical relationship [35].
VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
We analyzed the answers to an existing survey conducted by
the Linux Foundation Research. The survey was more extensive
than what was analyzed in the context of this paper. Another
option would be conducting another survey. We opted to use the
existing dataset given the breadth and the number of answers
of this one, which would not be possible since recruitment
in software engineering has been an issue recently [ 89,90].
The constructs under analysis are captured by the survey, and
one of the authors took part in the design of the instrument,
which was tailored to existing measurement instruments for the
constructs based on prior literature. Our analysis confirmed that
the adopted constructs were internally consistent and scored
satisfactorily on convergent and discriminant validity tests.
The hypothesis tested in this study proposes an association
between different constructs rather than causal relationships,
as the present study is a cross-sectional sample study [ 91].We acknowledge the limitation that our respondents comprise
contributors who are more likely to feel welcome as they
dedicated their time to answering the questionnaire, suggesting
a response bias. While it is clear that contributors motivated
by some intrinsic-social reasons tend to feel more welcome,
a theoretical model such as ours cannot capture a complete
and exhaustive list of factors. Moreover, feeling welcome was
measured on a single question, and the nuanced complexity of
this feeling could benefit by having a latent construct variable
with multiple questions. Other factors can play a role, and our
results represent a starting point for future studies.
The respondent demographics align with the overall distribu-
tion of previous measurements of OSS contributors, making this
a suitable starting point for understanding the link between in-
terpersonal challenges and feeling welcome. Further replication
studies in individual communities can replicate, validate, and
extend our theoretical model. According to previous research,
most OSS contributors are men, white, and without disabilities,
consistent with our sample. The responses were sufficiently
consistent to find full support for the hypothesis.
The survey was conducted in 2021 and provides a rich and
comprehensive perspective rarely seen in academic studies.
However, since 2021, there may have been changes in the
challenges OSS contributors face and their perceptions of
inclusivity. To address this threat, we conducted a follow-up
survey with practitioners (see Sec. IV-E ). Eighty-nine percent
of respondents confirmed that the challenges we investigated
still substantially influence the sense of welcome in OSS as of
2024, when this paper was written. None said these challenges
do not influence welcomeness. Future longitudinal research is
needed to investigate how our results may change over time
as OSS culture slowly changes.
VII. C ONCLUSION
We assessed the interplay between interpersonal challenges
and the perception of welcomeness in OSS communities. Our
findings indicate a significant negative correlation between
interpersonal challenges and feelings of welcomeness, with
pronounced effects on gender minorities and people with
disabilities. While these results might not surprise practitioners,
our study reveals the strengths of the associations between
each challenge and different demographic groups. These
findings hold significant implications for communities aiming
to enhance welcomeness among their members by focusing
on the challenges faced by diverse groups. This involves more
than just implementing inclusive policies; it requires cultivating
a culture that actively opposes bias, champions diversity, and
fosters a sense of belonging and respect.
VIII. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We want to thank the respondents and The Linux Foundation
Research for making the survey dataset available. This work
was partially supported by the National Science Foundation
grants 2235601, 2236198, 2247929, and 2303042. Any opinions
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of The Linux Foundation.REFERENCES
[1]B. Trinkenreich, I. Wiese, A. Sarma, M. Gerosa, and I. Steinmacher,
“Women’s participation in open source software: A survey of the literature,”
ACM Trans Soft Eng Methodol , vol. 31, no. 4, 2022.
[2]R. Nadri, G. Rodr ´ıguez-P ´erez, and M. Nagappan, “On the relationship
between the developer’s perceptible race and ethnicity and the evaluation
of contributions in oss,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 2955–2968, 2021.
[3]H. Carter and J. Groopman, “The linux foundation report on diversity,
equity, and inclusion in open source,” 2021, [accessed 2023-06-27].
[4]B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. van den Brand, A. Serebrenik,
P. Devanbu, and V . Filkov, “Gender and tenure diversity in github teams,”
inProceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in
computing systems , 2015, pp. 3789–3798.
[5]A. Bosu and K. Z. Sultana, “Diversity and inclusion in open source
software (oss) projects: Where do we stand?” in 2019 ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(ESEM) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–11.
[6]I. Steinmacher, T. Conte, M. A. Gerosa, and D. Redmiles, “Social
barriers faced by newcomers placing their first contribution in open source
software projects,” in 18th ACM conference on Computer supported
cooperative work & social computing , 2015, pp. 1379–1392.
[7]I. Steinmacher, T. Conte, and M. A. Gerosa, “Understanding and
supporting the choice of an appropriate task to start with in open source
software communities,” in HICSS’15 . IEEE, 2015, pp. 5299–5308.
[8]C. Jensen, S. King, and V . Kuechler, “Joining free/open source software
communities: An analysis of newbies’ first interactions on project mailing
lists,” in HICSS 2011 . IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–10.
[9]C. Hannebauer and V . Gruhn, “On the relationship between newcomer
motivations and contribution barriers in open source projects,” in
International Symposium on Open Collaboration , 2017, pp. 1–10.
[10] G. Pinto, I. Steinmacher, and M. A. Gerosa, “More common than
you think: An in-depth study of casual contributors,” in 2016 IEEE
23rd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
Reengineering (SANER) , vol. 1. IEEE, 2016, pp. 112–123.
[11] S. Balali, I. Steinmacher, U. Annamalai, A. Sarma, and M. A. Gerosa,
“Newcomers’ barriers... is that all? an analysis of mentors’ and newcomers’
barriers in OSS projects,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol. 27,
no. 3-6, pp. 679–714, 2018.
[12] B. Trinkenreich, K.-J. Stol, A. Sarma, D. German, M. Gerosa, and
I. Steinmacher, “Do i belong? modeling sense of virtual community
among linux kernel contributors,” in ICSE 2023 . IEEE, 2023.
[13] M.-A. Storey, A. Zagalsky, F. Figueira Filho, L. Singer, and D. M.
German, “How social and communication channels shape and challenge
a participatory culture in software development,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 185–204, 2016.
[14] G. Rodr ´ıguez-P ´erez, R. Nadri, and M. Nagappan, “Perceived diversity in
software engineering: a systematic literature review,” Empirical Software
Engineering , vol. 26, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[15] R. Nadri, G. Rodriguez-Perez, and M. Nagappan, “Insights into non-
merged pull requests in github: Is there evidence of bias based on
perceptible race?” IEEE Softw. , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 51–57, 2021.
[16] A. Forte and C. Lampe, “Defining, understanding, and supporting open
collaboration: Lessons from the literature,” American Behavioral Scientist ,
vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 535–547, 2013.
[17] A. Lee and J. C. Carver, “Floss participants’ perceptions about gender
and inclusiveness: a survey,” in ICSE 2019 . IEEE, 2019, pp. 677–687.
[18] The Linux Foundation Research, “Diversity, equity, and inclusion in
open source,” https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/the-2021-linux-f
oundation-report-on-diversity-equity-and-inclusion-in-open-source?hs
Lang=en, 2021, [Online; accessed 2023-07-19].
[19] J. W. Creswell and J. D. Creswell, Research design: Qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches . Sage publications, 2017.
[20] Z. Feng, “The state of survival in oss: The impact of diversity,” in FSE
2023 , 2023, pp. 2213–2215.
[21] Z. Feng, M. Guizani, M. A. Gerosa, and A. Sarma, “The state of diversity
and inclusion in Apache: A pulse check,” in CHASE 2023 . IEEE, 2023,
pp. 150–160.
[22] B. Trinkenreich, M. Guizani, I. Wiese, A. Sarma, and I. Steinmacher,
“Hidden figures: Roles and pathways of successful oss contributors,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 4, no.
CSCW2, pp. 1–22, 2020.
[23] B. Trinkenreich, M. Guizani, I. Wiese, T. Conte, M. Gerosa, A. Sarma,
and I. Steinmacher, “Pots of gold at the end of the rainbow: What issuccess for open source contributors?” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 3940–3953, 2021.
[24] C. J. Mendez, A. Sarma, and M. Burnett, “Gender in open source
software: What the tools tell,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM 1st International
Workshop on Gender Equality in Software Engineering, GE@ICSE,
Gothenburg, Sweden, May 28, 2018 , 2018, pp. 21–24. [Online].
Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8452746
[25] M. Guizani, B. Trinkenreich, A. A. Castro-Guzman, I. Steinmacher,
M. Gerosa, and A. Sarma, “Perceptions of the state of d&i and d&i
initiative in the asf,” in ICSE-SEIS 2022 , 2022, pp. 130–142.
[26] Y . Huang, D. Ford, and T. Zimmermann, “Leaving my fingerprints:
Motivations and challenges of contributing to oss for social good,” in
ICSE 2021 . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1020–1032.
[27] Apache Software Foundation, “2023 diversity, equity, and inclusion
report,” 2023, accessed: 2024-03-14. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.apache.org/foundation/docs/2023DEIReport.pdf
[28] K. Finley, “Diversity in open source is even worse than in tech overall,”
https://www.wired.com/2017/06/diversity-open-source-even-worse-tec
h-overall/, 2023, accessed: 2024-03-19.
[29] C. Miller, S. Cohen, D. Klug, B. Vasilescu, and C. KaUstner, “” did
you miss my comment or what?” understanding toxicity in open source
discussions,” in ICSE 2022 , 2022, pp. 710–722.
[30] I. Ferreira, J. Cheng, and B. Adams, “The” shut the f** k up”
phenomenon: Characterizing incivility in open source code review
discussions,” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction ,
vol. 5, no. CSCW2, pp. 1–35, 2021.
[31] W. E. Powell, D. S. Hunsinger, and B. D. Medlin, “Gender differences
within the open source community: An exploratory study,” Journal of
Information Technology , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 29–37, 2010.
[32] B. Vasilescu, V . Filkov, and A. Serebrenik, “Perceptions of diversity on
git hub: A user survey,” in CHASE 2015 . IEEE, 2015, pp. 50–56.
[33] V . Singh and W. Brandon, “Discrimination, misogyny and harassment:
Examples from oss: content analysis of women-focused online discussion
forums,” in Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Gender Equality,
Diversity, and Inclusion in Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 71–79.
[34] V . Singh, B. Bongiovanni, and W. Brandon, “Codes of conduct in open
source software—for warm and fuzzy feelings or equality in community?”
Software Quality Journal , pp. 1–40, 2021.
[35] C. A. Hailey, “Racialized perceptions of anticipated school belonging,”
Educational Policy , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 879–910, 2022.
[36] N. Gill, “The suppression of welcome,” Fennia-International Journal of
Geography , vol. 196, no. 1, pp. 88–98, 2018.
[37] C. E. Foor, S. E. Walden, and D. A. Trytten, ““i wish that i belonged
more in this whole engineering group:” achieving individual diversity,”
Journal of Engineering Education , vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 103–115, 2007.
[38] T. Bopp, R. Turick, J. D. Vadeboncoeur, and T. J. Aicher, “Are you
welcomed? a racial and ethnic comparison of perceived welcomeness in
sport participation,” International Journal of Exercise Science , vol. 10,
no. 6, pp. 833–844, 2017.
[39] N. Pitterson, R. Streveler, and T. C. Douglas, “Helping newcomers feel
“at home”: Reflections on the start of careers in engineering education
research and implications for broadening participation,” in 2022 IEEE
Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[40] L. M. Williams, “Beyond enforcement: Welcomeness, local law enforce-
ment, and immigrants,” Public Administration Review , vol. 75, no. 3, pp.
433–442, 2015.
[41] C. K. Wen, P. L. Hudak, and S. W. Hwang, “Homeless people’s
perceptions of welcomeness and unwelcomeness in healthcare encounters,”
Journal of General Internal Medicine , vol. 22, pp. 1011–1017, 2007.
[42] L. Gren and P. Ralph, “What makes effective leadership in agile software
development teams?” in ICSE 2022 , 2022, pp. 2402–2414.
[43] B. Trinkenreich, M. A. Gerosa, and I. Steinmacher, “Unraveling the
drivers of sense of belonging in software delivery teams: Insights from
a large-scale survey,” in ICSE 2024 . IEEE, 2024, pp. 974–974.
[44] The Linux Foundation Research, “Survey data — 2021 diversity, equity,
and inclusion in open source,” https://data.world/thelinuxfoundation/2021
-diversity-equity-and-inclusion-in-open-source, 2021, [Online; accessed
2023-07-19].
[45] J. Hair, C. L. Hollingsworth, A. B. Randolph, and A. Y . L. Chong, “An
updated and expanded assessment of pls-sem in information systems
research,” Industrial management & data systems , 2017.
[46] Blind, “Replication package,” https://figshare.com/s/9b0763fac157e954
93be, 2023.
[47] C. Bembich and E. Bortolotti, “Early childhood services: Improvingthe relational and emotional skills of educators to ensure inclusiveness,”
Early Childhood Services: improving the relational and emotional skills
of educators to ensure inclusiveness , pp. 30–44, 2017.
[48] B. Stewart, B. Ju, and K. D. Kendrick, “Racial climate and inclusiveness
in academic libraries: perceptions of welcomeness among black college
students,” The Library Quarterly , vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 16–33, 2019.
[49] T. L. Foundation, “The linux foundation code of conduct,” 2021, [online;
accessed 2024-07-02].
[50] C. Ringle, D. Da Silva, and D. Bido, “Structural equation modeling with
the smartpls,” Bido, D., da Silva, D., & Ringle, C.(2014). Structural
Equation Modeling with the Smartpls. Brazilian Journal Of Marketing ,
vol. 13, no. 2, 2015.
[51] S. Dubberley, A. Koenig, and D. Murray, Digital witness: using open
source information for human rights investigation, documentation, and
accountability . Oxford University Press, USA, 2020.
[52] D. Nafus, “‘patches don’t have gender’: What is not open in open source
software,” New Media & Society , vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 669–683, 2012.
[53] M. L. Pittaro, “Cyber stalking: An analysis of online harassment and
intimidation,” International journal of cyber criminology , vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 180–197, 2007.
[54] P. Q. Brady and M. R. Nobles, “The dark figure of stalking: Examining
law enforcement response,” Journal of interpersonal violence , vol. 32,
no. 20, pp. 3149–3173, 2017.
[55] P. Tourani, B. Adams, and A. Serebrenik, “Code of conduct in open
source projects,” in 2017 IEEE 24th international conference on software
analysis, evolution and reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 24–33.
[56] C. McCauley, C. L. Stitt, and M. Segal, “Stereotyping: From prejudice
to prediction.” Psychological Bulletin , vol. 87, no. 1, p. 195, 1980.
[57] R. Paul, A. Bosu, and K. Z. Sultana, “Expressions of sentiments during
code reviews: Male vs. female,” in 2019 IEEE 26th International
Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) .
IEEE, 2019, pp. 26–37.
[58] H. S. Qiu, Y . L. Li, S. Padala, A. Sarma, and B. Vasilescu, “The signals
that potential contributors look for when choosing open-source projects,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 3, pp.
1–29, 2019.
[59] G. Robles, L. Arjona, A. Serebrenik, B. Vasilescu, and J. Gonz ´alez-
Barahona, “Floss 2013: A survey dataset about free software contributors:
challenges for curating, sharing, and combining,” in Conference on
Mining Software Repositories , 2014, pp. 396–399.
[60] M. Guizani, A. Chatterjee, B. Trinkenreich, M. May, G. Noa, L. Russell,
G. Zambrano, D. Izquierdo-Cortazar, I. Steimacher, M. Gerosa, and
A. Sarma, “The long road ahead: Ongoing challenges in contributing to
large oss organizations and what to do,” Computer Supported Cooperative
Work , 2021.
[61] R. Kaur and K. K. Chahal, “Exploring factors affecting developer
abandonment of open source software projects,” Journal of Software:
Evolution and Process , vol. 34, no. 9, p. e2484, 2022.
[62] I. Steinmacher, I. Wiese, A. P. Chaves, and M. A. Gerosa, “Why do
newcomers abandon open source software projects?” in Cooperative and
Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE), 2013 6th International
Workshop on . IEEE, 2013, pp. 25–32.
[63] J. F. Hair, J. J. Risher, M. Sarstedt, and C. M. Ringle, “When to use and
how to report the results of pls-sem,” European business review , 2019.
[64] K. Albusays, P. Bjorn, L. Dabbish, D. Ford, E. Murphy-Hill, A. Sere-
brenik, and M.-A. Storey, “The diversity crisis in software development,”
IEEE Software , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 19–25, 2021.
[65] K. K. Silveira and R. Prikladnicki, “A systematic mapping study of diver-
sity in software engineering: a perspective from the agile methodologies,”
inCooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering . IEEE,
2019, pp. 7–10.
[66] J. F. Hair Jr, M. Sarstedt, C. M. Ringle, and S. P. Gudergan, Advanced
issues in partial least squares structural equation modeling . saGe
publications, 2017.
[67] J. Henseler, C. M. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, “Testing measurement
invariance of composites using partial least squares,” International
marketing review , 2016.
[68] F. E. Harrell, Jr and F. E. Harrell, “Ordinal logistic regression,” Regression
modeling strategies: with applications to linear models, logistic and
ordinal regression, and survival analysis , pp. 311–325, 2015.
[69] SciPy, “Scipy 2024 conference,” https://www.scipy2024.scipy.org/, 2024,
accessed: 2024-07-22.
[70] D. Russo and K.-J. Stol, “Pls-sem for software engineering research:
An introduction and survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 54,no. 4, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[71] M. Sarstedt and J.-H. Cheah, “Partial least squares structural equation
modeling using smartPLS: a software review,” 2019.
[72] J. Henseler, C. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, “A new criterion for assessing
discriminant validity in variance-based structural equation modeling,”
Journal of the academy of marketing science , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 115–135,
2015.
[73] J. Henseler, G. Hubona, and P. Ray, “Using pls path modeling in new
technology research: updated guidelines,” Ind. Manag. Data Syst. , 2016.
[74] J. Henseler, T. K. Dijkstra, M. Sarstedt, C. M. Ringle, A. Diamantopoulos,
D. W. Straub, D. J. Ketchen Jr, J. F. Hair, G. T. M. Hult, and R. J.
Calantone, “Common beliefs and reality about pls: Comments on r ¨onkk ¨o
and evermann,” Organ Res Methods , vol. 17, no. 2, 2014.
[75] C. M. Ringle and M. Sarstedt, “Gain more insight from your pls-
sem results: The importance-performance map analysis,” Industrial
management & data systems , 2016.
[76] D. Thissen, L. Steinberg, and D. Kuang, “Quick and easy implementation
of the benjamini-hochberg procedure for controlling the false positive
rate in multiple comparisons,” Journal of educational and behavioral
statistics , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 77–83, 2002.
[77] P. Sedgwick, “Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient,” Bmj, vol. 349,
2014.
[78] H. H. Friedman and S. Vlady, “The paradox of dei: How lofty ideals
became hated,” North East Journal of Legal Studies , vol. 44, no. 1, p. 4,
2024.
[79] E. Dias, P. Meirelles, F. Castor, I. Steinmacher, I. Wiese, and G. Pinto,
“What makes a great maintainer of open source projects?” in ICSE 2021 .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 982–994.
[80] N. Raman, M. Cao, Y . Tsvetkov, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “Stress and
burnout in open source: Toward finding, understanding, and mitigating
unhealthy interactions,” in 42nd International Conference on Software
Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging Results , 2020, pp. 57–60.
[81] J. a. Correia, M. C. Nicholson, D. Coutinho, C. Barbosa, M. Castelluccio,
M. Gerosa, A. Garcia, and I. Steinmacher, “Unveiling the potential of
a conversational agent in developer support: Insights from Mozilla’s
PDF.js project,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference
on AI-Powered Software , ser. AIware 2024. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 10–18. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3664646.3664758
[82] S. Abedu, A. Abdellatif, and E. Shihab, “Llm-based chatbots for mining
software repositories: Challenges and opportunities,” in Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in
Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 201–210.
[83] J. Terrell, A. Kofink, J. Middleton, C. Rainear, E. Murphy-Hill,
C. Parnin, and J. Stallings, “Gender differences and bias in open
source: Pull request acceptance of women versus men,” PeerJ
Computer Science , vol. 3, p. e111, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.1733v2
[84] A. Kofink, “Contributions of the under-appreciated: gender bias in an
open-source ecology,” in Companion Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
SIGPLAN International Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages
and Applications: Software for Humanity , 2015, pp. 83–84.
[85] E. D. Canedo, R. Bonif ´acio, M. V . Okimoto, A. Serebrenik, G. Pinto,
and E. Monteiro, “Work practices and perceptions from women core
developers in oss communities,” in International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement , 2020, pp. 1–11.
[86] D. Ford, M. Behroozi, A. Serebrenik, and C. Parnin, “Beyond the code
itself: how programmers really look at pull requests,” in ICSE-SEIS 2019 .
IEEE, 2019, pp. 51–60.
[87] V . Singh, “Women-only spaces of open source,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 2nd
International Workshop on Gender Equality in Software Engineering
(GE) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 17–20.
[88] T. M. Melaku, A. Beeman, D. G. Smith, and W. B. Johnson, “Be a better
ally,” Harvard Business Review , vol. 98, no. 6, pp. 135–139, 2020.
[89] A. Alami, M. Zahedi, and N. Ernst, “Are you a real software engineer?
best practices in online recruitment for software engineering studies,” in
International Workshop on Methodological Issues with Empirical Studies
in Software Engineering , 2024.
[90] A. Danilova, A. Naiakshina, S. Horstmann, and M. Smith, “Do you
really code? designing and evaluating screening questions for online
surveys with programmers,” in ICSE 2021 . IEEE, 2021, pp. 537–548.
[91] K.-J. Stol and B. Fitzgerald, “The abc of software engineering research,”
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) ,
vol. 27, no. 3, p. 11, 2018.