“Get Me In The Groove”: A Mixed Methods Study
on Supporting ADHD Professional Programmers
Kaia Newman∗, Sarah Snay†, Madeline Endres‡, Manasvi Parikh†, Andrew Begel∗
∗Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
†University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
‡University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
{klnewman, abegel}@andrew.cmu.edu, {ssnay, manasvi}@umich.edu, mendres@umass.edu
Abstract —Understanding the work styles of diverse program-
mers can help build inclusive workplaces, enabling all software
engineers to excel. An estimated 10.6% of programmers have
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), a condition char-
acterized by differences in attention and working memory. Prior
work has just begun to explore the impact of ADHD on software
development, finding that inadequate support may negatively im-
pact team productivity and employment. This prevents software
organizations from benefiting from ADHD-related strengths.
To investigate these impacts, we conducted a two-phase mixed
methods study. First, we qualitatively analyzed 99 threads (1,658
posts and comments) from r/ADHD_Programmers , the largest
public forum dedicated to the ADHD programmer community.
We constructed a mapping that reveals how ADHD programmers
apply personal strategies and organizational accommodations to
address software task-specific challenges. Second, we conducted a
large-scale survey of 239 ADHD and 254 non-ADHD professional
programmers to validate how our qualitative data generalize
to the worldwide developer population. Our results show that
ADHD programmers are 1.8 to 4.4 times more likely to struggle
more frequently than neurotypical developers with all challenges
we consider, but especially with time management and design.
Our findings have implications for inclusive and effective tool-
and policy-building in software workplaces and motivate further
research into the experiences of ADHD programmers.
Index Terms —Neurodiversity, ADHD, Software Engineering,
Accommodations
I. I NTRODUCTION
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), a condi-
tion involving differences in attention and working memory,
has been linked to strengths and challenges such as cognitive
dynamism [81] and difficulty finishing work efficiently [29].
ADHD is of increasing relevance in software engineering
in terms of how the community works to build effective,
diverse workplaces and support marginalized groups [31],
[49], [59]. Many software developers have ADHD; 10.6% of
respondents in the 2022 Stack Overflow Developer Survey
reported having “a concentration and/or memory disorder (e.g.,
ADHD, etc.)" [86]. ADHD developers have under-addressed
challenges compared to their neurotypical peers: common
software workplace tasks or tools, such as virtual meeting
calls, open office plans, or pull request notifications, can be
ill-suited to neurodivergent (e.g., ADHD) programmers’ focus,
productivity, or wellbeing [20], [49], [59]. When unsupported,
similar challenges in other fields lead to negative outcomes
such as underperformance [43] or frequent job switching [60].Unfortunately, support for ADHD employees is often in-
sufficient [43]; accommodations are rarely requested (even
if needed) [4] and difficult to obtain [67]. In one survey, 9
out of 59 (15.5%) neurodivergent professional programmers
desired accommodations, but only 1 requested them [59].
Asking for accommodations can be risky: legal protections
against discrimination may not guard against more insidi-
ous inequities, such as implicit bias or firing employees for
nominally-legitimate reasons [22]. In addition, accommoda-
tions for particular needs can violate privacy due to their
specificity [65], making information about them and how to
obtain them harder to navigate. Specific accommodations are
usually created from an understanding of barriers and the
strategies used to overcome them [36].
There is not yet a complete understanding of the associa-
tions between ADHD developer strategies, accommodations,
and challenges, how they impact specific software tasks, or
how they generalize. This knowledge would allow companies
to develop and deploy targeted interventions for software
tasks. Although there has been recent growth in researching
neurodivergent programmers, prior work mostly focuses on
other groups (e.g., autism [2] or dyslexia [53]), does not
separate out ADHD software engineers as their own participant
group [59], or does not identify software task-specific chal-
lenges or relationships between them and support options [49].
Understanding the challenges and strategies of ADHD de-
velopers may inform interventions that better support their
needs without requiring disclosure. Studying the problem-
solving strategies of developers is valuable for tool build-
ing [46], and it may also help policy building: GenderMag, a
framework for understanding how gender-diverse users interact
with software, has helped companies identify and fix inclusive-
ness issues [13], [61]. Supporting neurodiverse programmers
may also lead to organizational-level productivity gains; di-
verse teaming across multiple attributes has been shown to
increase productivity in software contexts [90]. Due to the
efficacy of diverse software teams and the prevalence and po-
tential strengths of ADHD software engineers, understanding
how to support their unique work styles is merited.
An effective investigation into the experiences of ADHD
programmers would both uncover developer experiences from
intersectional backgrounds and also lead to insights that gen-
eralize to a broad range of developers. We thus carried outa two-phase mixed methods study . We first qualitatively
analyzed data from the subreddit r/ADHD_Programmers
to gather detailed, subjective experiences. The anonymity of
online forums permits relatively safe community-building and
disclosure around sensitive topics [68]. We then conducted
a large-scale survey of professional programmers to see if
these experiences generalize to programmers with and without
ADHD. In this work, we focus on programmers’ workplace
challenges and strengths, personal strategies, and organiza-
tional accommodations. Our contributions are:
•A qualitative analysis of 99 posts and 1,559 comments from
the forum r/ADHD_Programmers (∼160,000 words).
•A survey of 493 professional programmers of varying self-
reported neurotypes, including 239 with ADHD.
•A mapping between ADHD programmers’ workplace chal-
lenges, and the accommodations and strategies they use.
This includes the first breakdown by software task and the
first academic investigation into existing accommodations
for ADHD software engineers.
•We find that while challenges impact ADHD programmers
at significantly higher rates, they also impact non-ADHD
programmers. As a result, organizational support may lead
to generalizable productivity gains.
II. B ACKGROUND
Neurodiversity describes the range of variation in human
cognition [64]. The majority cognitive profile is called neu-
rotypical ; minority neurotypes, including ADHD and autism,
areneurodivergent . Some minority neurotypes co-occur, e.g.,
40% of autistic people also have ADHD [77]. ADHD is
present in 5–7% of the global population [91].
People with ADHD have documented strengths including
hyperfocus (“episode[s] of long-lasting, highly focused atten-
tion" [39]), entrepreneurship [58], and creativity [9]. These
strengths have been measured objectively: not only did people
with ADHD report significantly more creative achievements
in the real world, but they also scored higher on a validated
test of divergent thinking when competing with others (with a
medium-to-large effect size) [9], [17]. However, people with
ADHD struggle disproportionately with challenges, such as
distractions, organization, and job loss, which can prevent
them from leveraging their strengths in the workplace [5].
For example, one study found that ADHD adults experienced
significantly more job-switching than neurotypical adults [60].
Another found that ADHD adults were affected significantly
more by distractors during a letter search task [28].
We follow the social model of disability [82], which posits
that difficulties faced by disabled people, such as those with
ADHD, are impacted by social and environmental barriers.
To address difficulties, we advocate for removal of these
barriers. We now overview existing work on challenges faced
by ADHD employees and support in a non-software context.
Research has found that ADHD-related challenges can be
reduced by environmental, managerial, and behavioral prac-
tices [1], [15], [36], [76], [78]. This includes both personalstrategies and organizational accommodations. As an exam-
ple of the former, one study found that ADHD participants
used routines and checklists to aid with distractions, time
management, and organization [15]. Another study described
strategies such as choosing environments that were best suited
to one’s ADHD symptoms and using timers [45].
At the organizational level, support helps mitigate distrac-
tions. This includes providing a private work space, head-
phones, or flexible schedules so that employees can choose
quieter times [1]. Incentivizing task completion and delegating
tedious work can help support ADHD employees [1]. To
mitigate for difficulties with communication and time man-
agement, research suggests that managers communicate job
tasks clearly, including defining timelines and creating a list of
job-related responsibilities [76]. Accommodations for ADHD
have been shown to be effective in non-software contexts:
for example, one review found that providing a list of tasks
to choose from rather than assigning tasks directly increased
engagement for ADHD students in multiple studies [36].
The intersection of ADHD and software is less studied.
Liebel et al. conducted a case study, interviewing 19 ADHD
professional developers [49]. For a comparison, see §VIII.
III. R ESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODOLOGY
We carried out a two-phase mixed methods study of ADHD
programmers. We qualitatively analyzed posts from r/ADHD_
Programmers and then checked if our findings generalize
via a survey of 493 professional programmers. Developed
using previous literature and initial readings of this subreddit,
we directed our analysis around four research questions:
RQ1: What challenges do ADHD software engineers have,
and which software tasks are impacted?
RQ2: What strategies and accommodations do ADHD soft-
ware engineers use to address challenges at work?
RQ3: Which strategies or accommodations may help with
which work challenges?
RQ4: Do non-ADHD programmers also think these strategies
and accommodations would be helpful?
We now overview each phase’s methodology. Supporting
material (including our full qualitative codebook, survey in-
strument, and analysis scripts) are in our replication package.1
A. Phase 1: Qualitative Analysis of Archival Data
Dataset. We desire a nuanced understanding of the ADHD
programmer experience in a natural setting. We thus analyzed
posts and comments from r/ADHD_Programmers , a public
forum where ADHD programmers engage in community dis-
cussion. As of August 2024, this forum has 61,000 members,
making it in the top 2% in size on Reddit. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to analyze this forum academically
and it is the largest public community of ADHD programmers.
We collected posts in late 2022 using the Pushshift API,
which is commonly used to create qualitative datasets [6]. We
1Our replication package, including our final codebook, is available at
https://github.com/kaianew/GetMeInTheGroove_ICSE2025.TABLE I. % job-related r/ADHD_Programmers posts by cate-
gory, and the 99 analyzed posts. Posts can be in multiple categories.
Post Content % Posts Document IDs in Analysis
Challenges 46%1,3–8,11,13–18,21–24,26–27,29–31,33,35,37–38,41,44, 47–
52,57–58,60,64–66,72,74,77–78,80–85,87,89–91,94,97–99
Strategies 44%3–4,6–10,12–18,20–24,26–32,35,37,41–44,47–51,55,57–
58,62,64–67,70,72,74–75,77,80–82,84–85,87,89,91–95,99
Disclosure 9.1%1–2,5,7,19–20,32–34,37,39–41,45–47,54,59–61,63,67–69,
73,76,78,83,86,94,96,98
Accommodations 8.6%1,4–5,7–10,13,25,28,33,36–38,40–41,43,45–47,49,53,56,
63,68,71,73,76–77,79,88,91,94,96,98
scraped using RQ-related keywords such as career roles (e.g.,
“employee”), parts of the software process (e.g., “debugging”),
and ADHD-related vocabulary (e.g., “hyperfocus”). This led
to 2,037 posts, of which 881 were software-job-related (via
manual annotation by the authors). We defined software-job-
related using three intersecting criteria: employment-related
words in a software context (e.g., job, boss, Agile), phases in
the job cycle (e.g., interviewing, job searching, being fired),
or posts soliciting comments about software employment.
The first four authors categorized these job-related posts
into four non-mutually-exclusive categories: challenges, ac-
commodations, disclosure, and strategies. Of these, challenges
and strategies were the most common (see Table I). We focus
this work on challenges, strategies, and accommodations, as
we found these topics were relevant for software engineering-
specific intervention. We intend to publish our findings on
disclosure in another venue; that paper will not include
challenges, strategies, or accommodations. We used separate
analyses to model disclosure motivations and outcomes. In
addition, the papers differ in methodology and data used.
We chose 15 posts spanning all non-mutually-exclusive
categories (challenges, accommodations, strategies, disclosure)
to facilitate initial codebook development. The remaining 84
posts were sampled from the 881 software-job-related posts in
a stratified manner, i.e., 21 random posts from each category,
since the categories were imbalanced in the overall sample
(Table I). This follows best practice [40], and helps ensure
that our codebook would generalize to a random sample. We
reached thematic saturation (i.e., we were not discovering new
codes) after 33 posts, lending confidence that our sample size
was sufficient. We performed an in-depth qualitative analysis
of all 99 job-related posts and their 1,559 comment threads
(∼160,000 words: max 66, avg. 16comments per post).
Analysis. Our thematic analysis followed Deterding and Wa-
ters’s twenty-first century approach [23]. To build and apply
our codebook, we used a three-pass process: one to identify
relevant quotes via semantic unitization [14], one to apply top-
level codes, and one to fully analyze the data. Posts had passes
by at least two authors. We applied 12,891 code instances to
3,555 quotes using ATLAS.ti, a qualitative analysis software.
When building the codebook, authors coded the same doc-
uments independently and met weekly to resolve conflicts and
refine definitions in a process of negotiated agreement [14].
When our codebook did not change for three meetings in a rowTABLE II. Demographics overview of our survey population.
Gender / Neurotype ADHD Other ND NT Total
Man 180 (36.5%) 52 (10.6%) 178 (36.1%) 410 (83.3%)
Woman 29 (5.9%) 4 (0.8%) 13 (2.6%) 46 (9.3%)
Nonbinary 25 (5.1%) 1 (0.2%) 3 (0.6%) 29 (5.9%)
Other/NA 5 (1.0%) 3 (0.6%) 0 8 (1.6%)
Total 239 (48.5%) 60 (12.2%) 194 (39.4%) 493
Min Max Median
Age (in Years) 18 74 32
Full Years of Professional Experience 0 48 9
(i.e., reached saturation [30]), the authors started annotating
posts alone, discussing edge cases. We achieved high top-level
inter-rater reliability (IRR) (Krippendorff’s α= 0.75[37]),
lending confidence to our categorical consistency. Following
best HCI research practice [55], we did not calculate IRR for
lower-level codes (despite using negotiated agreement); we use
codes to discover themes rather than as our final product.
Final Codebook. We identified 168 lower-level codes orga-
nized into 11 top-level groups, including W ORKCHALLENGE ,
COPING MECH (i.e., a personal strategy a developer uses to
mitigate challenges), W ORKSTRENGTH , and A CCOMMODA -
TION . We define an A CCOMMODATION as any support that
needs approval from someone higher up in an organization.
This is explicitly not a legal definition ; commenters used
various colloquial definitions and we wanted to capture all
support ADHD developers may desire or receive.
Axial Coding. We mapped strategies and accommodations to
challenges using axial coding, which involves reassembling
codes into abstracted categories to develop relationships be-
tween concepts [80]. The first three authors organized codes
into a mapping based on challenges, abstracted codes into
broader categories, and ensured relationships were grounded
in the original coding via code co-occurrence (see Figure 1).
B. Phase 2: Quantitative Analysis of a Large-Scale Survey
Survey Design. To triangulate, validate, and expand on our
qualitative results, we designed a 20-minute online survey.
We made 5-item Likert-style questions derived directly from
our main qualitative themes (e.g., work challenges, strategies,
accommodations, and strengths). We consulted with HCI and
neurodiversity outreach experts to ensure the quality and
sensitivity of our survey. We did not include all qualitative
codes or relevant software tasks as it would have made the
survey prohibitively long. Instead, we prioritized common
themes and concepts. While we have 13 software tasks in our
codebook, we only have 6 in our survey: code review, debug-
ging, brainstorming, meetings, design, and documentation.
Though we included ADHD-specific questions, we designed
our survey to be completable by people of all neurotypes to
better contextualize the ADHD experience. We also included
a validated assessment of positive mental health [50]; we the-
orized that mental health may moderate challenge frequency.
Survey Recruitment. We primarily recruited via public
GitHub emails. We used the GitHub REST API2to identify
2https://docs.github.com/en/rest?apiVersion=2022-11-28the top 25 contributors from the top 100 repositories across
30 languages. After duplicate filtering, we had 17,202 emails.
Our broad recruitment allowed us to reach ADHD pro-
grammers, as they make up a minority of developers. We
sent emails in batches of ∼5,000 per week to ensure quick
response to comments or concerns. GitHub recruitment is well-
established in software engineering surveys of professional
developers [26], [38], [47], [48], [57]. We discussed the ethics
of recruiting via public GitHub emails when choosing this
strategy, especially around a potential violation of their terms
of service. Following prior arguments [34], [57], we consider
the principles of beneficence and respect for persons outlined
in the Belmont report [83], and believe that on balance, our
work’s potential to benefit inclusive software development
through insights on neurodiverse programmers outweighs the
low costs to GitHub users (e.g., an unwanted email). During
the first 1.5 weeks of recruitment, we advertised using posters
in three US metro areas, on an email list of programmers
interested in our research, and by word of mouth. These
approaches resulted in a low yield (n = 26). We considered
other strategies, such as MTurk or Prolific, but ultimately
decided on GitHub because of data quality concerns [19], [74].
We offered an optional drawing for $120 (or an equivalent
amount proportional to the recipient’s minimum wage). 502
participants submitted our survey (out of 821 who started,
a 61% completion rate). Through self-consistency filters and
removing two responses with hate speech, we had 493 valid
responses. We recruited from May 16 to June 18, 2024.
Analysis. We organized our statistical analysis around three
groups: those with ADHD, those who are neurodivergent but
do not have ADHD (Other ND), and neurotypicals (NT). For
Other ND, we had a narrow definition, excluding conditions
not always considered neurodivergent (e.g., depression, tinni-
tus). We performed all statistics in an R Notebook [72].
To analyze high-level differences between neurotypes, we
used the χ2test of independence, a non-parametric test ap-
propriate for categorical data [56]. However, for Likert-type
questions on challenge or strength frequency, we theorized
there may be confounds beyond neurotype. We use ordinal
logistic regression (OLM) to determine whether changing a
predictor variable significantly affects the response [54]. We
use OLMs rather than linear regression because Likert-type
items are ordered. Though it is appropriate to treat Likert-
type data as interval data in some cases, we treated them as
ordinal because we do not aggregate responses and responses
are not numerical [35]. OLMs rely on the proportional odds
assumption in which model coefficients must be consistent
across the different levels of the response variable [10]. We
tested for this assumption to ensure the validity of our models.
All model results reported in this work satisfy this assumption.
We used the R packages MASS [75] ( polr ) and BRANT [79].
We chose predictors based on related work and our qual-
itative analysis. For challenge models, we used neurotype,
years of experience, positive mental health, work-from-home
status, and reported task competency. For strengths, we used
neurotype, years of experience, and positive mental health.We used a significance threshold of p < 0.05. As we gen-
erated p-values for dozens of models, we used the Benjamini-
Hochberg (BH) adjustment to correct for multiple comparisons
within research questions [7] and avoided trying factors in
models which have no backing from theory. All results re-
ported in this work survived correction unless otherwise noted.
IV. S URVEY POPULATION CONTEXTUALIZATION
Table II contains our survey demographics. All respondents
were at least 18 and had worked at a job that required software
development. The most common job titles in our sample
were “Software Engineer" or “Software Developer" (60%).
Participants were from 58 countries across seven regions:
North America ( n= 202 ), Europe & Central Asia ( 201), East
Asia & Pacific ( 48), Latin America ( 22), South Asia ( 12),
Middle East & North Africa ( 6), and Sub-Saharan Africa ( 1).
For self-reported neurotype, 239 (48.5%) had ADHD, 60
(12.2%) were neurodivergent without ADHD (Other ND, 73%
autistic), and 194 (39.4%) were neurotypical (NT). 99 ADHD
participants were also autistic. Our findings are intersectional
as we combine all ADHD participants in one group (see §VII).
ADHD diagnosis prevalence varies by culture, socioeco-
nomic status, and gender, and many are undiagnosed [3]. We
thus combined diagnosed and self-diagnosed ADHD partici-
pants: 112 (47%) were diagnosed, while 127 (53%) were self-
diagnosed. We include an analysis of challenges and strengths
of diagnosed programmers in our replication package. Diag-
nostic status does not impact our high-level findings. However,
3.6% of statistical tests with significant differences in the
diagnosed group were not significant for the combined group.
Also, odds ratios (i.e., effect sizes) in this paper are generally
lower than if we had only considered diagnosed programmers.
V. R ESULTS : CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
We identified and validated 5 challenge types that are
faced disproportionately by ADHD developers. These chal-
lenge types are Challenges Involving Cognition ,Challenges
Involving Time ,Challenges Involving Distractions ,Challenges
Involving Communication , and Challenges Involving Align-
ment . We identified each challenge in our qualitative analysis
ofr/ADHD_Programmers and then validated that they
impact ADHD developers disproportionately via our survey.
In Fig. 1, we propose a mapping between these challenges
and relevant personal strategies and organizational accom-
modations (as determined by our axial coding, see §III-A).
We focus on challenges related to work outcomes. We leave
an investigation of mental health challenges to future work.
In the rest of this section, we address RQs 1–3 (see §III).
We first overview each challenge and discuss which software
tasks are most impacted. Table III summarizes our qualitative
and quantitative results by challenge. Some tasks identified
qualitatively were not included in the survey, and were thus
not possible to validate (see §III-B). We then detail strategies
and accommodations used by ADHD programmers.Organizational Accommodations
Environment
ChangeAssistive
TechnologyJob Coaching Modified .
Deadlines Work Hours
Different Job
TasksWritten
CommunicationStructured
FeedbackAdjusted
Training Mat.Additional
NotesPersonal Strategies
Adjust
StimuliSelf-
MedicationADHD
Medication
Increased .
Communication Medication
Self-RegulationTake Control
Better 
Aligned JobFinding
NoveltyLeveraging
StrengthsDeadlines as
MotivationExternalizing .
Time Work Hours Take BreaksBody
DoublingTask VizTask
ChunkingExternalizing .
Info Procedure Practice*Challenges
Boring TaskMisaligned
Task/JobWaiting for
Program RunsDistractionsContext
Switching
Verbal
CommunicationExternal
PressureInertiaTime
ManagementConsistent
PerformanceAbstraction Memory
*
**Fig. 1. Our axial coding of challenges, personal strategies, and organizational accommodations relevant to ADHD programmer experiences.
The five challenge types are: Cognition (Memory, Abstraction), Time (Time Management, Consistent Performance, Inertia), Distractions
(Waiting for Program Runs, Distractions, Context Switching), Communication (External Pressure, Verbal Communication), and Alignment
(Boring Task, Misaligned Job/Task). We connect these five challenge types to personal strategies and organizational accommodations that
can be used to mitigate them. Symbols indicate additional challenges for which a strategy or accommodation is also used. * Practice and
Modified Deadlines are connected to the Communication challenge in the context of the interview process. ** Leveraging Strengths refers to
seeking jobs, company environments, and working cultures that align with and incorporate the strengths of ADHD programmers (see §V-E).
A. Challenges Involving Cognition: Memory and Abstraction
Building software is memory-intensive; clear mental models
are essential for designing software systems [88]. In our qual-
itative results, ADHD programmers reported struggles with
short- or long-term memory (29 posts) and task abstraction
(34 posts), e.g., not seeing the big picture beyond the details,
or being overwhelmed by of the magnitude of a system.
Impacted Software Tasks. In our survey, ADHD developers
reported challenges with memory more frequently than NT
developers during meetings, design, code review, reading doc-
umentation, and brainstorming (see Table III). These validate
our qualitative results; for instance, “daily standups can be
hell because I have no idea what I was doing since the last
standup" (D59, or Document ID 59—see Table I). Similarly,
ADHD developers perceive abstraction more challenging dur-
ing design, debugging, code review, documentation, and meet-
ings. For example, one commenter struggled with “breaking
down the logic of each ticket without being paralyzed by
branches on branches of tangential thoughts" (D91).
Strategies. In our qualitative analysis, we identified 5 primary
strategies that ADHD developers use to support memory and
abstraction (see Fig. 1): procedures, externalizing information,
practice, task visualization, and task chunking. In our survey,
The most commonly-used strategies by ADHD programmers
were task chunking (72%), taking meeting notes (40%), task
visualization (38%), and procedures (23%) (see Table IV). We
delve into our qualitative results below.
ADHD developers chunk tasks to keep track of which level
of abstraction to focus on. They also externalized information
by recording meetings, taking notes, and writing code com-
ments. This helped programmers recall context, prepare for
interviews, or remember meeting content. “Are you interview-
ing on Zoom? Make a. . . poster of all the things you might
need to talk about during the interview and put it behind yourwebcam on the wall" (D83). Practicing LeetCode was used to
memorize content for technical interviews.
Task visualization was helpful for abstraction, especially
when translating from design to implementation. “Talking out
my ideas and showing process through pictures. . . help[s] me
collect my thoughts. . . [and] translate it into syntax" (D47).
Task ordering procedures also helped memory and abstrac-
tion. These ranged from to-do lists to workflow-integrated
programs, such as issue trackers, GNU Emacs “org mode",
or notes apps. “[I] have a mental list of ‘common pitfalls’. . . I
read over the changes once looking only for potential concur-
rency problems; then paying attention to names; [etc.]" (D92).
Accommodations. In our qualitative analysis, we identified
2 accommodations provided to ADHD developers to help
with memory and abstraction-heavy tasks: additional notes
and adjusted training . Some developers desired support in
acquiring meeting notes including “written recaps after 1 [on]
1s detailing action items, expectations, and deadlines" (D96).
Accommodations were also sometimes needed for permission
to record meetings. Programmers also received extra or mod-
ified training to help with task abstraction. “Instead of being
given a huge and dry book, they paid for a more interactive
online course." (D5) Both of these accommodations validated
in our survey: additional notes (16% desired, 9% granted) and
adjusted training materials (6% desired, 4% granted).
ADHD developers struggle with memory and task ab-
straction , especially in meetings ,software design ,code
review , and technical interviews (RQ1). Strategies include
breaking tasks into smaller pieces, externalizing informa-
tion, and following procedures (RQ2, RQ3). Accommoda-
tions include extra notes or modified training (RQ2, RQ3).
B. Challenges Involving Time: Time Management and Inertia
Effective time management is essential for software engi-
neering [11], [44]. ADHD developers reported struggles withTABLE III. Work challenges for ADHD programmers from our qualitative data (left three columns), triangulated with our survey (right
two columns). Associated SE Tasks are software tasks that co-occur with a challenge in our qualitative data, ordered by prevalence. Bolded
tasks are validated by our survey. Significant Tasks for ADHD Developers were more challenging for ADHD developers than NT developers
in our survey (BH-adjusted p < . 05when holding other variables constant, see §III-B). For each, we report an Odds Ratio (OR). This is
the odds of an ADHD participant rating themselves more highly on a question’s scale as compared to a NT participant. For example, the
odds of an ADHD developer struggling more frequently with time management during software design is 4.42 times that of a NT developer.
Some qualitative tasks were not in our survey, and are thus not possible to validate (see §III-B). Survey Questions are modified for space.
Challenge Indicative Quote Associated SE Tasks Survey QuestionSignificant Tasks for ADHD
Developers (Task: OR)
Memory
“I am supposed to be able to sit in long
meetings, and remember all the information
afterwards, despite there being no notes or
recordings." (D41)Meetings , Interviews,
Documentation ,Design ,
Code ReviewHow often do you struggle
with memory during each
software task?Meetings: 2.4, Design: 1.9, Code
Review: 1.8, Reading
Documentation: 1.8,
Brainstorming: 1.8
Abstraction
“I’ve had many experiences of going down a
rabbit hole with a JIRA ticket, spending days
to come up with a pull request and then had
to throw it all away because I misunderstood
the requirements." (D13)Coding, Code Review ,
Interviews, Version
Control, Documentation ,
Design ,Meetings ,
Refactoring, Requirements
Elicitation, TestingHow often do you struggle
with getting lost in the
small details of each
software task?Design: 3.2, Debugging: 2.9, Code
Review: 2.9, Reading
Documentation: 2.4, Writing
Documentation: 2.4, Meetings: 2.2
Time
Management
“One of my biggest issues is I get sucked in
to my projects so much that I lose track of
time. It’s even worse when I am trying to
debug something." (D26)Meetings , Interviews,
Agile, DebuggingHow often do you struggle
with time management
during each software task?Design: 4.4, Brainstorming: 3.8,
Code Review: 3.2, Writing
Documentation: 3.1, Debugging:
3.1, Reading Documentation: 3.1,
Meetings: 3.0
Inertia
“I am always present at the meetings but when
I have to develop and deliver code, sometimes
I beg myself [to sit] in the chair. . . I postpone
everything until the deadline." (D85)Version Control, CodingHow often do you struggle
with starting or
continuing each software
task?Writing Documentation: 3.0, Code
Review: 2.4, Reading
Documentation: 2.3, Debugging:
1.8
Distractions
“It is such a bad habit of mine to cmd+tab to
chrome and open facebook in a new tab while
things compile and get sucked in." (D66)Meetings , Interviews,
Debugging, Code ReviewHow often do you struggle
with getting distracted
during each software task?Meetings: 3.7, Writing
Documentation: 3.4, Code Review:
3.0, Reading Documentation: 2.8,
Design: 2.2, Brainstorming: 1.8
Communication
“My boss called me in today for some
feedback. We don’t have good
communication, and as he pointed out. . . we
always have misunderstandings that trigger
uncomfortable feelings." (D9)Meetings, Interviews,
AgileHow often do you struggle
tocommunicate at your
workplace?Overall: 3.0†
Disliked or
Boring Tasks
“At this point I can’t even practice leetcode
anymore, I look at the problem and my brain
goes to sleep like ‘yeah, that’s boring...’ and I
literally can’t do it. . . " (D43)Meetings, Interviews,
Documentation, Agile,
Refactoring, CodingHow motivated are you to
complete rote or simple
programming tasks?Overall: .42, adjusted = 2.4*
†Participants in the Other ND group also struggled more frequently with communication ( OR = 2.38,p=.024). No other questions in this table were
significant for participants in the Other ND group. *The adjusted (inverse) odds ratio here describes ADHD participants’ odds of being less motivated .
time management and related challenges in our qualitative
analysis: 30 posts mentioned time management explicitly, 26
mentioned inertia (i.e., trouble starting or finishing tasks), and
12 mentioned inconsistent performance.
Impacted Software Tasks. In our survey, ADHD developers
struggled more frequently with time management during de-
sign, brainstorming, code review, documentation writing, de-
bugging, documentation reading, and meetings ( p < 0.05). In
our qualitative analysis, commenters mentioned time manage-
ment alongside meetings, interviews, Agile, and debugging.
“One of my biggest issues is I get sucked in to my projects so
much that I lose track of time. It’s even worse when I am trying
to debug something. I could easily get stuck on a problem for
hours without realizing how much time has passed. . . " (D26)
In our qualitative analysis, inertia was a general problem
that cropped up with new projects or tasks (due to overwhelm),
or almost-finished ones (due to the end stages of a project or
task being boring). In our survey, ADHD developers reported
struggling more frequently than NT developers with inertiaduring writing documentation, code review, reading documen-
tation, and debugging. It may be that writing documentation is
especially hard to start because the process of coding was not
traceable, and hard to finish because it is subjectively tedious.
With less supportive managers, consistent performance
could impact stand-ups with some developers sleeping through
meetings or afraid to report during low-performance weeks.
However, as some programmers comfortably hit deadlines but
had inconsistent performance week-to-week, it could become
a non-issue. “I told my tech lead I slack off a lot. . . He didn’t
notice because I deliver high quality work at a blistering
pace. . . [and] if ‘slacking off’. . . helps me in my work and
keeps me satisfied, he doesn’t mind if I do it" (D25).
Strategies. We identified 5 primary strategies in our qualitative
analysis used by ADHD programmers to help with time-
related challenges: body doubling, using deadlines, external-
izing time, taking breaks, and adjusting work hours. The most
common strategies reported by ADHD developers in our sur-
vey were taking breaks (51%), coworking or “body doubling"(35%), using routines or deadlines (33%), and timers (31%)
(see Table IV). We describe our qualitative results below.
Developers often took breaks oradjusted their schedule to
better manage their time. One commenter encouraged another
to“walk away from your desk for a few minutes. If possible,
go to an area that is visually/thematically/environmentally
different. . . and clear your head" (D69).
Several strategies helped increase motivation. For example,
coworking (sometimes referred to as “body doubling" [24])
was used as motivation to work and increase productivity.
“Something you could try is finding a focus buddy in your
team. . . where you set up games/competitions/accountability"
(D68). Deadlines were also used as motivation, gamifying
work and making it more exciting. “If I have a meeting at
10, then I only have 1 hr before that to get a task done. It
becomes a challenge to see if I can complete that task" (D13).
Commenters said that externalizing time (e.g., using timers)
helped them stay in a flow state. One common method
was the “pomodoro" technique, which combines work sprints
with breaks [16]. “25 min work, the timer rings, 5 minutes
mandatory break. . . I made a little bash script that time my
cycles and notify me when it’s break time or work time" (D15).
The use of ADHD medication and task chunking was also
reported to help with managing time (see §V-A and §V-C).
Accommodations. We qualitatively identified 3 time-related
accommodations used by ADHD programmers that we vali-
dated in our survey (see Table IV): adjusted schedules (41%
desired, 35% granted), relaxed deadlines (26% desired, 19%
granted), and help from personnel (e.g., job coaches or thera-
pists, 10% desired, 4% granted).
Some programmers desired or were granted changes in work
hours or vacation time. For example, one commenter advised
another that “. . . it’s not unreasonable to ask for a flexible
working hours as an accommodation" (D7). Developers also
desired or were granted delayed or incremental deadlines . As
with task chunking , incremental deadlines motivate program-
mers to start or complete work. Since ADHD programmers
can“. . . struggle with driving progress on long-term projects
when they don’t have clear milestones,. . . asking for an accom-
modation for more structured work might be helpful” (D96).
A few commenters also mentioned personnel or job coach-
ingas a helpful accommodation. “If your company will pay
for job coaching as an accommodation, it’s almost always the
best way to go because a job coach will partner with you to co-
design new tools/strategies for task initiation that are tailored
for you" (D96). Given the diverse work improvements that
can be explored via job coaching, this accommodation may
generally benefit challenges beyond time management.
ADHD developers struggle with time management and
inertia , especially during software design ,writing doc-
umentation , and code review (RQ1). Strategies include
working with others, and using deadlines as motiva-
tion (RQ2, RQ3). Accommodations include flexible work
hours, adjustable deadlines, and job coaching (RQ2, RQ3).C. Challenges Involving Distractions: Focus and Environment
Sustained focus and flow is essential for software productiv-
ity [27], [51]. In our qualitative analysis, we found that ADHD
programmers experience distractions (42 posts), trouble con-
text switching (15 posts), and losing focus while waiting
for program runs (4 posts). We found three categories of
distractions: environmental (e.g., audio or visual noise), virtual
(e.g., notifications), and internal (i.e., wandering thoughts).
Impacted Software Tasks. Distractions were mentioned most
frequently alongside meetings, as well as interviews, debug-
ging, code review, and design. One commenter mentioned,
. . . last august I got a job but they said I couldn’t pay attention
in meetings and got fired." (D38) Context switching was
mentioned most frequently alongside meetings, as well as code
review, interviews, and version control. “It’s a huge pet peeve
of mine when someone asks me to jump on a quick call. . . I’ll
need to schedule the call and have to interrupt what I was
doing.. and after the call, I have to get back into my flow
state again” (D81). Waiting for program runs was challenging
during testing and version control. “Compilation. Running
Tests. Starting up your dev server. 5 Seconds is effing forever
for me. Whatever I was thinking is just gone, or I ALT+TAB
and fall down a rabbit hole" (D66).
Compared to NT developers, ADHD developers in our
survey reported more frequent distractions during meetings,
documentation, code review, design, and brainstorming ( p <
0.05). ADHD developers also reported more trouble with
context switching at work ( OR = 3.1,p < . 001).
Strategies. We identified 3 strategies ADHD developers use
to mitigate distractions: adjusting stimuli, prescribed medica-
tion, and self-medication. In our survey, the most common
way ADHD developers adjusted stimuli were adding stimuli
(e.g., listening to music or fidgeting [84]) (72%), blocking
distractions (67%), and changing their environment (54%). Of
respondents with ADHD, 40% used prescribed medication. We
did not survey self-medication, as prior work has uncovered
barriers to medication for ADHD developers and how they
may compensate [63]. We now describe the primary actionable
strategies we identified in our qualitative analysis.
Commenters often adjusted stimuli to avoid getting dis-
tracted. This included adding stimuli, blocking noise, or modi-
fying work environments. “Having something to keep me busy
in a way that doesn’t pull my attention from the meeting
is a must. A notebook where I can take notes or doodle is
great." (D13) A common method for blocking distractions
in our sample was noise-cancelling headphones, especially
in the context of open office plans. “I have noise cancelling
headphones and can work with them no matter how loud it is
around me." (D5) To help with waiting for program runs, some
commenters built scripts that remind them to return to their
work when it finished. “When I need to run a CLI command
that takes a while, I just add ‘&& say ‘All done, check your
terminal” at the end, and the computer literally tells me to go
check" (D66) (see externalizing time, §V-B).
Commenters also externalized information to remain ontask, find a job that did not have as many distractors, and
increase communication about their need to not be disturbed
(see §V-A, §V-E, and §V-D for details on these strategies).
Accommodations. We identified 2 primary accommodations
that ADHD developers desire and are granted to help with
distractions. In our survey, the most commonly desired and
granted accommodations for ADHD developers for these
challenges were adjusted working spaces (18% desired, 13%
granted) and assistive technology (11% desired, 7% granted).
In our qualitative analysis, commenters desired or were
granted adjusted environments in the form of quiet offices,
blocked distractions (e.g., pull request notifications), or work
location. Some commenters preferred working from home to
block distractions, while others preferred working in person
to be motivated by others around them (i.e., body doubling).
Commenters also mentioned assistive technology , such as
headphones, sit-stand desks, or captions to mitigate distrac-
tions. For example, one commenter’s company offers “a larger
monitor to help maintain focus" (D1).
Programmers with ADHD struggle with distractions , es-
pecially during meetings , writing documentation , orwait-
ing for software execution (RQ1). Developers added stim-
uli (e.g., fidgeted), blocked stimuli (e.g., with headphones),
and used medication (RQ2, RQ3). Helpful accommoda-
tions included adjusted working environments and assistive
technology (RQ2, RQ3).
D. Challenges Involving Communication: Misunderstandings
Communication within and between software teams is es-
sential for effective development [21]. We found that ADHD
programmers struggle with misaligned communication (22
posts) and pressure from others (10 posts). In our survey, both
ADHD and Other ND programmers struggled with communi-
cation more than did NT programmers ( p < 0.05, Table III).
Impacted Software Tasks. In our qualitative analysis, verbal
misunderstandings were reported during meetings, interviews,
and collaborative tasks (e.g., code review or mob program-
ming). “The tasks were assigned verbally, which is my weakest
form of communication. . . I spent months constructing an
elaborate test suite for one project after I thought I was
given the request to do so, only to be told that it was
entirely unnecessary" (D34). Commenters also reported that
external pressure (e.g., timed tasks or confusing demands) hurt
performance during interviews and code review: “on the spot
with someone I don’t know, I’m not going to do as well" (D47).
Strategies. In our qualitative analysis, we identified 3 pri-
mary strategies used by ADHD programmers to mitigate for
challenges with communication: taking control, increasing or
adjusting communication, and self-regulating medication use.
ADHD developers increased communication to clear up
misunderstandings and communicate needs. “I have a sign
with ‘Sorry, I’m busy’ that I put on my desk. . . . When I’m
focused and people want to talk to me, I try to explain they
should only drag me from my hyperfocus when it’s urgent."(D24). In our survey, 51% of ADHD participants used frequent
communication to aid with misunderstandings.
Commenters also took control in meetings to clear up
misunderstandings or make them run efficiently. “If I’m feeling
lost,. . . , [I] interrupt and ask a lot of questions. . . They appre-
ciate being heard, and neither of us suffer the consequences
of miscommunication, so I’m not shy about it" (D23).
Accommodations. We identified 2 communication-related ac-
commodations used by ADHD developers. Commenters from
our qualitative data desired or received accommodations for
written communication andstructured feedback from bosses as
it was easier to interpret and act on. Written communication,
such as “using emails or instant messages instead of meetings
wherever possible" (D68), removed the need to parse and
recall speech. The use of a different mode of communication
generalized in our survey (29% desired, 17% granted).
ADHD programmers struggle with communication in
meetings and interviews , often due to misunderstandings
during verbal conversations (RQ1). Strategies include
explicitly communicating needs or using written com-
munication (RQ2, RQ3), which were supported by the
accommodations of an adjusted communication mode or
structured feedback (RQ2, RQ3).
E. Challenges Involving Alignment: Misaligned Tasks/Jobs
We refer to activities with social, environmental, or phys-
ical barriers for ADHD developers as misaligned . 28 posts
mentioned misaligned tasks and 7 mentioned misaligned jobs.
Impacted Software Tasks. In our qualitative analysis, feelings
of misalignment were expressed during timed technical inter-
views, daily standup, and refactoring with commenters finding
them stressful, repetitive, or inefficient. Misaligned jobs had
rigid schedules, required intense attention to details, or heavily
surveilled employees. “For me, everyone leaves a bit after my
mid day, with on and off meetings between 8-1ish. . . I am at
peak dysfunction around that time, always have been" (D13).
We also found that boredom was common during misaligned
tasks, especially during meetings or documentation writing.
Boredom can lead to lower productivity [18], and ADHD
“makes a challenge for things like documentation or highly
repetitive/low effort tasks" (D34). This validated in our survey:
ADHD developers were less motivated to complete rote or
simple tasks than NT developers ( p < 0.05).
Strategies. We identified 2 strategies that ADHD developers
use to help with alignment: finding novelty and obtaining a
better fitting job. One of these validated in our survey: 60%
of ADHD participants have chosen a job based on work-style
fit (vs. 46% of NT, p < 0.05, see Table IV). We also identified
strengths that ADHD developers can better leverage when in
an aligned environment including creativity, and hyperfocus.
In our qualitative analysis, commenters sought novelty to
mitigate boredom. “Alternating WFH and office is a spectac-
ular way to keep your brain thinking ‘Oh yay I’m moving!’"
(D46). Commenters also sought better aligned jobs , often
leaving current jobs to do so. Such jobs had flexibility in taskallocation and scheduling, work-from-home support, limited
distractions, and general good engineering practices.
Leveraging Strengths. We identified 6 strengths of ADHD
developers that are supported by aligned environments: cre-
ativity, working with novelty, crisis management, breadth of
knowledge, hyperfocus, and better aligned tasks.
Commenters reported creativity during brainstorming and
problem solving. Surveyed ADHD developers reported more
creativity during programming tasks (vs. NT, OR= 2.7,p <
.001). Commenters also thrived with novelty , noting it can
give “. . . those with ADHD a large competitive advantage”
(D21). Crisis management was also a strength. “I actually get
better as the situation gets worse. It’s the reason why I always
get promoted to manager/director" (D12). Commenters also
reported breadth of knowledge as a strength. “[As] a jack of
all trades[,. . . I] help [my team] understand why and how their
task fits into the big picture" (D2).
At aligned jobs, commenters reported the ability to hyper-
focus on a specific task, increasing productivity. “I love to
CNC program. . . Where it will take someone a day to release
1 thing, I usually have 2-2.5 done. . . I hyperfocus on it and get
what needs to be done, and I have a lot of fun" (D76). ADHD
developers in our survey reported hyperfocusing more during
software tasks than NT programmers ( OR= 1.9,p=.002).
In terms of aligned tasks, ADHD developers reported more
skill at brainstorming (vs. NT, OR = 1.6,p= 0.02). Both
ADHD ( OR = 1.6,p= 0.03) and Other ND ( OR = 2.0,
p= 0.03) reported more skill at debugging. We note that par-
ticipants that only had ADHD did not report higher debugging
ability, associating this result with autistic participants. These
were expected results; the creativity of people with ADHD [9]
may lead to skill with brainstorming, and attention to detail
and systematizing have been linked to autism [2]. Overall,
adapting software workplaces and assigned tasks to highlight
strengths and remove blockers for ADHD developers may be
beneficial for both developers and their workplaces.
Accommodations. Our survey validated one accommodation
used for challenges involving alignment: different task assign-
ment (desired: 31%, granted: 22%). In our qualitative analysis,
some commenters negotiated with their manager for more
challenging work. Many commenters also desired modified
technical interviews. While some worried that asking would
impact their hiring chances, others said “yes, you can and
should ask. . . I had people at my company ask for a different
style of assessment and it’s fine" (D43).
ADHD programmers encounter jobs that are misaligned
with their working styles (e.g., emphasize simple tasks,
have rigid schedules) (RQ1). This can cause developers
to switch jobs or desire different tasks, including for
interviews (RQ2, RQ3).
VI. R ESULTS : ADHD VS. NON-ADHD D EVELOPERS
Though the frequency or qualia of challenges experienced
by ADHD developers may differ for non-ADHD developers,
Always Most of the time About half the time Sometimes NeverChallenge Frequencies by Neurotype
Memory and
Meetings
CommunicationDistractions and
Meetings
Inertia and Writing
Documentation
Time Management
and DesignAbstraction and
Design
Motivation for Rote
Programming TasksADHD Other ND NT
Median Median MedianFig. 2. Frequencies for software/task pairs from each challenge type
that were the most challenging for ADHD programmers (vs. NT,
p <0.05,OR>2). Communication by software task was not asked
about in our survey, and thus stands alone.
our survey may have generalizable insights. The “curb-cut
effect"—when interventions for one disadvantaged group ben-
efit a broader population [8]—occurs in many contexts [25],
[41], [73]. We focus on how identified challenges affect
non-ADHD programmers and strategies and accommodations
could be introduced for more widespread support (RQ4).
Although all identified challenge types were experienced
more frequently by ADHD developers ( p < 0.05), they were
also relevant for NT and Other ND. Fig. 2 shows the frequen-
cies by neurotype for the challenge/task pairs that impacted
ADHD developers the most disproportionately. Notably, the
median frequency for NT and Other ND was consistently
“Sometimes" or “About half the time", indicating that non-
ADHD developers experience these challenges a non-trivial
amount of the time. Therefore, providing organizational sup-
port could be beneficial for more than just ADHD developers.
Table IV shows strategy frequency by neurotype. Some
techniques such as blocking distractions, coworking, or medi-
cation were used more frequently by ADHD developers ( p <
0.05). However, many strategies were common regardless of
neurotype, such as task chunking (80% of NT) or taking breaks
(53% of NT). Even if more common for ADHD developers,
NT developers were also likely to block distractions (49%)
or add stimuli (e.g., fidgeted, 41%). This suggests supporting
these strategies may allow software companies to leverage a
potential curb-cut effect, leading to broader productivity gains.
We have preliminary evidence that organizational support
could also generalize: 58% of NT participants desired at least
one organizational accommodation. While some accommoda-
tions were desired more by ADHD programmers (e.g., differ-
ent job task or communication mode, p < 0.05), others were
desired by developers at all neurotypes at similar rates. For
example, 35% of NT participants desired an adjusted schedule
(compared to 41% of ADHD participants, p=.41, see
Table IV). Implementing such accommodations as publicly-
accessible support options may thus benefit developers regard-
less of neurotype. We discuss potential next steps in §VIII.TABLE IV . Percent of ADHD, Other ND (O. ND), and NT survey
participants that use each strategy or desire each accommodation,
ordered by prevalence across all responses. Items used or desired
significantly more by a group are bolded and marked teal, while
those used or desired less are tan ( χ2-test, BH-corrected p <0.05).
Strategy Overall ADHD O. ND NT
Task chunking 75% 72% 68% 80%
Blocking distractions 59% 67% 57% 49%
Adding stimuli 58% 72% 58% 41%
Choosing a better fitting job 54% 60% 55% 46%
Taking breaks 53% 51% 60% 53%
Changing environment 53% 54% 55% 49%
Frequent communication 51% 51% 48% 52%
Recording/taking meeting notes 42% 40% 52% 42%
Task visualization 39% 38% 45% 37%
Regular routines/deadlines 32% 33% 28% 31%
Timers (e.g., pomodoro) 28% 31% 27% 24%
Coworking or “body doubling" 25% 35% 12% 18%
Prescribed medication 24% 40% 12% 7%
Outlined procedures 21% 23% 22% 18%
Desired Accommodation†
None 40% 38% 39% 42%
Adjusted schedule 39% 41% 44% 35%
Different job tasks 25% 31% 25% 17%
Relaxed deadlines 23% 26% 19% 20%
Different communication mode 22% 29% 26% 12%
Adjusted working space 19% 18% 19% 21%
Additional notes or materials 13% 16% 11% 11%
Assistive technology 9% 11% 7% 7%
Help from personnel 8% 10% 9% 4%
Extra or modified training 5% 6% 7% 4%
†In §III, we inline the percent of accommodations granted for ADHD
developers. All were granted at a lower rate than desired.
VII. T HREATS TO CONFIRMABILITY AND VALIDITY
Qualitative Threats. Our qualitative findings may not be
credible to ADHD programmers or other researchers [32]. To
mitigate this, we triangulate with prior work, between authors,
and with our survey. In addition, before our analysis we read
hundreds of posts on r/ADHD_Programmers , familiarizing
ourselves with the community via prolonged engagement [32].
Our qualitative results may not transfer to other contexts due
to negativity bias in online communities [89], unique Reddit
aspects (e.g., region skew), and low self-efficacy seen among
ADHD populations [62]. We mitigate this by validating our
results through a large-scale survey of professional program-
mers where we ask about strengths and measure wellbeing,
which can inform how people cope with disability [33].
Finally, qualitative results must have a traceable pro-
cess [32]). We collected meeting notes, records of analysis
passes, and codebook versions. We do not publicly release our
data for ethical reasons, but we include all processes-related
documents (including codebooks) in our replication package.
Quantitative Threats. We use our survey to validate our
qualitative findings in a different context. However, our survey
may not generalize due to self-selection bias and data quality.
For example, participants with non-standard ADHD-related
experiences might be more likely to participate. We note that
key sample demographics align with those of GitHub [90],partially mitigating this concern. To ensure data quality, we use
previously-validated measures when possible, and also employ
consistency and time-related data quality checks.
Our participant groupings may also impact our statistical
results. Due to the intersectional nature of our qualitative
data, we combine diagnosed and self-diagnosed ADHD pro-
grammers and do not consider multiple diagnoses. We gain
confidence in our approach by conducting several additional
analyses with different groupings, where we find minimal im-
pacts on our overall conclusions. For the interested reader, we
include these additional analyses in our replication package.
VIII. D ISCUSSION
We contextualize our results with regard to related work
on neurodivergent developers and general challenges faced
by software developers. We then discuss broad categories of
interventions grounded in our findings and future work.
A. Comparison to Related Work
We consider related work at the intersection of ADHD and
professional programming. Morris et al. identified challenges
disproportionately impacting neurodivergent programmers via
a survey of 846 software engineers (59 neurodivergent) [59].
They found that 13.6% of neurodivergent participants desired,
but had not asked for or received accommodations. While
38 participants had ADHD, they grouped all neurodivergent
participants in their analysis. Some identified challenges were
similar to ours, including difficulties focusing on tasks and
with workplace communication. Common strengths found
between our work and theirs were hyperfocus and creativity
(“divergent thinking”). However, many identified themes were
different (e.g., challenges with “handling changes in routine”
and a strength in “detecting patterns in code”) [59].
In a study on substance use in software, Newman et al.
found that 15 out of 26 participants had ADHD and used
medication (e.g., Adderall) as a strategy at work, reporting
improved productivity at most software tasks [63]. Kasatskii
et al. found a significant effect of visual noise and ADHD
symptoms on debugging efficiency, but the effect was not
direct [42]. In a qualitative study with 5 participants, Gama
et al. found that Agile practices such as effort estimates may
reduce efficiency for ADHD developers [31].
Liebel et al. [49] studied the challenges, strategies, and
strengths of ADHD developers in a case study of 19 inter-
viewees. Several of the challenges and strategies we identified
replicate those in the case study, including distractions, time
management, medication, and taking breaks. We also identified
new challenges (e.g., abstraction and waiting for program
runs) and strategies (e.g., task chunking and using deadlines
as motivation). We are also the first to identify software
task-specific challenges for ADHD programmers, to research
accommodations for ADHD programmers, to map strategies
and accommodations to challenges they may mitigate for, and
to generalize these findings via a large-scale survey.B. Contextualization with General Software Challenges
For all challenge types, we find evidence from our survey
that ADHD developers are affected more frequently than neu-
rotypical developers. These broad challenge types may affect
developers generally, meaning that interventions which support
ADHD developers could lead to widespread benefit [8].
Memory is vital for navigating large codebases. Limitations
of human memory can impact software engineering and devel-
opment tools can be used as aids [66]. Working in a distracting
environment can also challenge neurotypical programmers.
In a control trial, Ma et al. found that both automated and
interpersonal distractions can lead to increased physiological
stress during software development [51]. Developers can also
struggle with time management. One study on time pressure in
software engineering found that time pressure, often caused by
errors in cost estimation, can lead to decreased software qual-
ity [44]. Poor communication within software teams [21] or
unaligned task allocation [52] can decrease team productivity.
Our survey demonstrates that these challenges impact
ADHD programmers disproportionately. We also found that
they can impact ADHD programmers in unique ways. For
example, while communication can be a challenge for software
teams in general, the preference for written communication
is more associated with ADHD; general works focus on the
amount of communication rather than the modality [21]. Simi-
larly, a distraction for someone with ADHD, such as a passing
thought, might not be a distraction for someone neurotypical
(prior work focuses on environmental distractions [51]).
C. Interventions and Future Work
Given ADHD developers’ strengths and challenges, we
provide recommendations for interventions that may help
them excel. Since “official" accommodations can be risky to
obtain and are underused [4], [22], [59], we propose general
interventions that have the potential to not only help ADHD
software engineers, but also software engineers at large. We
propose changes to workplace structures , such as incremental
deadlines and information scaffolding; flexibility in task allo-
cation, work hours, and work-from-home status; time-blocking
and asynchronous communication for meetings; and publicly-
available assistive technology , such as headphones or “stim
objects” (i.e., fidget toys). Many of these align with soft-
ware engineering best practices. For example, asynchronous
communication is important for global software teams [87]
and incremental deadlines (often used in Agile) aid with cost
estimations and scope creep [70]. We recognize that certain
environments may not admit all changes (e.g., a startup may
not be able to flexibly allocate tasks). However, we believe
that at least one could be implemented in most environments.
Based off our findings, we propose technological inter-
ventions targeting increasing “flow” (i.e., periods of focused
work), which is identifiable via log data [12]. Tools which no-
tify programmers upon program run completion could mitigate
for unnecessary context switching; some forum commenters
built their own. In-IDE games could also help with wait times,
as gamification and fidgeting have been shown to improvefocus and learning for people with ADHD [71], [84]. Finally,
AI-summarization in meetings (e.g., in [69]) could be used
to assist working memory. Distractions during meetings was
the most frequent challenge for both ADHD and non-ADHD
developers, making it salient to target for widespread change.
Future work may benefit from objective measures of behav-
ioral outcomes with our identified support mechanisms. In this
work, we use subjective measures and experiences of ADHD
developers; observational or experimental work is needed to
see if identified support translates to outcomes (e.g., improve-
ments in accuracy or time efficiency). For tool- or policy-
building, we recommend using participatory design [85] to
determine what tools ADHD developers find useful.
IX. C ONCLUSION
ADHD is common among software developers. However,
ADHD developers can struggle disproportionately with certain
software tasks, and support options are not well understood.
We conducted a mixed methods study of ADHD professional
programmers: a qualitative analysis of 1,658 Reddit posts and
comments, and a survey of 493 professional programmers.
We propose the first software task-specific mapping between
ADHD developers’ challenges, strategies, and accommoda-
tions. We are also the first to study ADHD developer accom-
modations, finding that many could support both ADHD and
neurotypical programmers alike. Our findings have implica-
tions for tools and policies supporting ADHD programmers,
along with potential lightweight changes for software work-
places. These include changes to workplace structures (e.g.,
incremental deadlines), work environment flexibility (e.g.,
work from home support), time-blocked meetings ,publicly-
accessible assistive technology (e.g., noise-canceling head-
phones), task allocation flexibility (e.g., allowing developers
to choose tasks), and prioritized written communication . We
believe that software workplaces that invest in this way could
see increased productivity in not just ADHD developers, but
more generally. We hope our work leads to more inclusive
software environments for developers of all neurotypes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Andrew Grogan-Kaylor,
Jodi Forlizzi, Jim Herbsleb, and Bogdan Vasilescu for advice
on methods and mentorship. The authors would also like to
acknowledge the friendship of their kitty companions, namely:
Holly, Pepper, Cayenne, Sage, and Cleo.
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program
under Grant No. DGE2140739. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] Marios Adamou, Muhammad Arif, Philip Asherson, Tar-Ching Aw,
Blanca Bolea, David Coghill, Gísli Guðjónsson, Anne Halmøy, Paul
Hodgkins, Ulrich Müller, et al. Occupational issues of adults with
ADHD. BMC psychiatry , 13:1–7, 2013.[2] Hala Annabi, Karthika Sundaresan, and Annuska Zolyomi. It’s not
just about attention to details: Redefining the talents autistic software
developers bring to software development. In 50th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS, January 4-7, 2017 , pages 1–10.
ScholarSpace / AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2017.
[3] Philip Asherson, Ron Akehurst, JJ Sandra Kooij, Michael Huss, Kath-
leen Beusterien, Rahul Sasané, Shadi Gholizadeh, and Paul Hodgkins.
Under diagnosis of adult ADHD: cultural influences and societal burden.
Journal of Attention Disorders , 16(5_suppl):20S–38S, 2012.
[4] David C Baldridge and Michele L Swift. Withholding requests for dis-
ability accommodation: The role of individual differences and disability
attributes. Journal of Management , 39(3):743–762, 2013.
[5] R. A. Barkley, K. R. Murphy, and M. Fischer. ADHD in adults: What
the science says . Guilford Press, 2010.
[6] Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire,
and Jeremy Blackburn. The pushshift reddit dataset. In Munmun De
Choudhury, Rumi Chunara, Aron Culotta, and Brooke Foucault Welles,
editors, International Conference on Web and Social Media, ICWSM,
June 8-11, 2020 , pages 830–839. AAAI Press, 2020.
[7] Craig M Bennett, Michael B Miller, and George L Wolford. Neural
correlates of interspecies perspective taking in the post-mortem atlantic
salmon: An argument for multiple comparisons correction. Neuroimage ,
47(Suppl 1):S125, 2009.
[8] Angela Glover Blackwell. The curb-cut effect. Stanford Social
Innovation Review , 15(1):28–33, 2016.
[9] Nathalie Boot, Barbara Nevicka, and Matthijs Baas. Creativity in
ADHD: goal-directed motivation and domain specificity. Journal of
attention disorders , 24(13):1857–1866, 2020.
[10] Rollin Brant. Assessing proportionality in the proportional odds model
for ordinal logistic regression. Biometrics , 46(4):1171–1178, 1990.
[11] Frederick C Brooks. The Mythical Man-Month (1975) . Addison-Wesley,
2021.
[12] Adam Brown, Sarah D’Angelo, Ben Holtz, Ciera Jaspan, and Collin
Green. Using logs data to identify when software engineers experience
flow or focused work. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , pages 1–12, 2023.
[13] Margaret M. Burnett, Anicia Peters, Charles Hill, and Noha Elarief.
Finding gender-inclusiveness software issues with GenderMag: A field
investigation. In Jofish Kaye, Allison Druin, Cliff Lampe, Dan Morris,
and Juan Pablo Hourcade, editors, Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI), May 7-12, 2016 , pages 2586–2598. ACM,
2016.
[14] John L Campbell, Charles Quincy, Jordan Osserman, and Ove K Peder-
sen. Coding in-depth semistructured interviews: Problems of unitization
and intercoder reliability and agreement. Sociological methods &
research , 42(3):294–320, 2013.
[15] Carlos Canela, Anna Buadze, Anish Dube, Dominique Eich, and
Michael Liebrenz. Skills and compensation strategies in adult ADHD–a
qualitative study. PloS one , 12(9):e0184964, 2017.
[16] Francesco Cirillo. The Pomodoro technique: The acclaimed time-
management system that has transformed how we work . Currency, 2018.
[17] Jacob Cohen. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences .
routledge, 2013.
[18] Mary L Cummings, Fei Gao, and Kris M Thornburg. Boredom in the
workplace: A new look at an old problem. Human factors , 58(2):279–
300, 2016.
[19] Anastasia Danilova, Alena Naiakshina, Stefan Horstmann, and Matthew
Smith. Do you really code? designing and evaluating screening questions
for online surveys with programmers. In 43rd IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2021, Madrid, Spain, 22-30
May 2021 , pages 537–548. IEEE, 2021.
[20] Maitraye Das, John Tang, Kathryn E. Ringland, and Anne Marie
Piper. Towards accessible remote work: Understanding work-from-home
practices of neurodivergent professionals. ACM Hum. Comput. Interact. ,
5(CSCW1):183:1–183:30, 2021.
[21] Joanna F Defranco and Philip A Laplante. Review and analysis of
software development team communication research. IEEE Transactions
on Professional Communication , 60(2):165–182, 2017.
[22] Eros R DeSouza, Eric D Wesselmann, and Dan Ispas. Workplace
discrimination against sexual minorities: Subtle and not-so-subtle. Cana-
dian Journal Of Administrative Sciences/Revue canadienne des sciences
de l’administration , 34(2):121–132, 2017.[23] Nicole M Deterding and Mary C Waters. Flexible coding of in-depth
interviews: A twenty-first-century approach. Sociological methods &
research , 50(2):708–739, 2021.
[24] Tessa Eagle, Leya Breanna Baltaxe-Admony, and Kathryn E Ringland.
Proposing body doubling as a continuum of space/time and mutuality:
An investigation with neurodivergent participants. In ACM SIGACCESS
Conference on Computers and Accessibility , pages 1–4, 2023.
[25] Elizabeth F Emens. Integrating accommodation. U. Pa. L. Rev. , 156:839,
2007.
[26] Madeline Endres, Kevin Boehnke, and Westley Weimer. Hashing it out:
A survey of programmers’ cannabis usage, perception, and motivation.
InInternational Conference on Software Engineering , pages 1107–1119,
2022.
[27] Nicole Forsgren, Margaret-Anne Storey, Chandra Maddila, Thomas
Zimmermann, Brian Houck, and Jenna Butler. The space of developer
productivity: There’s more to it than you think. Queue , 19(1):20–48,
mar 2021.
[28] Sophie Forster, David J Robertson, Alistair Jennings, Philip Asherson,
and Nilli Lavie. Plugging the attention deficit: perceptual load counters
increased distraction in ADHD. Neuropsychology , 28(1):91, 2014.
[29] Anselm Fuermaier, Lara Tucha, Marah Butzbach, Matthias Weisbrod,
Steffen Aschenbrenner, and Oliver Tucha. ADHD at the workplace:
ADHD symptoms, diagnostic status, and work-related functioning. Jour-
nal of Neural Transmission , 128(7):1021–1031, 2021.
[30] Patricia I Fusch Ph D and Lawrence R Ness. Are we there yet? data
saturation in qualitative research. The Qualitative Report , 20(9):1408–
1416, 2015.
[31] Kiev Gama and Aline Lacerda. Understanding and supporting neurodi-
verse software developers in Agile teams. In Brazilian Symposium on
Software Engineering , pages 497–502, 2023.
[32] Egon G Guba and Yvonna S Lincoln. Fourth generation evaluation .
Sage, 1989.
[33] Martin S Hagger and Sheina Orbell. A meta-analytic review of the
common-sense model of illness representations. Psychology and health ,
18(2):141–184, 2003.
[34] Alexander Halavais. Overcoming terms of service: A proposal for ethical
distributed research. In Disinformation and Data Lockdown on Social
Platforms , pages 45–59. Routledge, 2021.
[35] Spencer E Harpe. How to analyze likert and other rating scale data.
Currents in pharmacy teaching and learning , 7(6):836–850, 2015.
[36] Judith R Harrison, Nora Bunford, Steven W Evans, and Julie Sarno
Owens. Educational accommodations for students with behavioral
challenges: A systematic review of the literature. Review of educational
research , 83(4):551–597, 2013.
[37] Andrew F Hayes and Klaus Krippendorff. Answering the call for a
standard reliability measure for coding data. Communication methods
and measures , 1(1):77–89, 2007.
[38] Yu Huang, Denae Ford, and Thomas Zimmermann. Leaving my
fingerprints: Motivations and challenges of contributing to OSS for
social good. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 1020–1032, 2021.
[39] Kathleen E Hupfeld, Tessa R Abagis, and Priti Shah. Living “in
the zone”: hyperfocus in adult ADHD. ADHD Attention Deficit and
Hyperactivity Disorders , 11:191–208, 2019.
[40] Glenn D Israel. Sampling the evidence of extension program impact .
Citeseer, 1992.
[41] Donna M Johnson and Judith A Fox. Creating curb cuts in the class-
room: Adapting universal design principles to education. Curriculum
transformation and disability: Implementing universal design in higher
education , pages 7–21, 2003.
[42] Vseslav Kasatskii, Agnia Sergeyuk, Anastasiia Serova, Sergey Titov, and
Timofey Bryksin. The effect of perceptual load on performance within
IDE in people with ADHD symptoms. In International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction , pages 122–141. Springer, 2023.
[43] Ronald C Kessler, Lenard Adler, Minnie Ames, Russell A Barkley,
Howard Birnbaum, Paul Greenberg, Joseph A Johnston, Thomas
Spencer, and T Bedirhan Üstün. The prevalence and effects of adult
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder on work performance in a na-
tionally representative sample of workers. Journal of occupational and
environmental medicine , 47(6):565–572, 2005.
[44] Miikka Kuutila, Mika Mäntylä, Umar Farooq, and Maelick Claes. Time
pressure in software engineering: A systematic review. Information and
Software Technology , 121:106257, 2020.[45] Kate Kysow, Joanne Park, and Charlotte Johnston. The use of com-
pensatory strategies in adults with ADHD symptoms. ADHD Attention
Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorders , 9:73–88, 2017.
[46] Thomas D LaToza and Brad A Myers. On the importance of understand-
ing the strategies that developers use. In ICSE Workshop on Cooperative
and Human Aspects of Software Engineering , pages 72–75, 2010.
[47] Jenny T. Liang, Chenyang Yang, and Brad A. Myers. A large-scale
survey on the usability of AI programming assistants: Successes and
challenges. In International Conference on Software Engineering , ICSE
’24, New York, NY , USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
[48] Jenny T. Liang, Chenyang Yang, and Brad A. Myers. A large-scale
survey on the usability of AI programming assistants: Successes and
challenges. In International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE
2024 , pages 52:1–52:13. ACM, 2024.
[49] Grischa Liebel, Noah Langlois, and Kiev Gama. Challenges, strengths,
and strategies of software engineers with ADHD: A case study. In ICSE
Software Engineering in Society , 2024.
[50] Justina Lukat, Jürgen Margraf, Rainer Lutz, William M van der Veld,
and Eni S Becker. Psychometric properties of the positive mental health
scale (PMH-scale). BMC psychology , 4:1–14, 2016.
[51] Yimeng Ma, Yu Huang, and Kevin Leach. Breaking the flow: A study
of interruptions during software engineering activities. In International
Conference on Software Engineering , pages 1–12, 2024.
[52] Zainab Masood, Rashina Hoda, Kelly Blincoe, and Daniela Damian.
Like, dislike, or just do it? how developers approach software develop-
ment tasks. Information and Software Technology , 150:106963, 2022.
[53] Ian McChesney and Raymond Bond. Eye tracking analysis of computer
program comprehension in programmers with dyslexia. Empirical
Software Engineering , 24:1109–1154, 2019.
[54] Peter McCullagh. Regression models for ordinal data. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society: Series B , 42(2):109–127, 1980.
[55] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. Reliability and
inter-rater reliability in qualitative research: Norms and guidelines for
CSCW and HCI practice. ACM Hum.-Comp. Inter. , CSCW, nov 2019.
[56] Mary L McHugh. The chi-square test of independence. Biochemia
medica , 23(2):143–149, 2013.
[57] Courtney Miller, Christian Kästner, and Bogdan Vasilescu. "we feel
like we’re winging it: " A study on navigating open-source dependency
abandonment. In Satish Chandra, Kelly Blincoe, and Paolo Tonella,
editors, Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2023 , pages
1281–1293. ACM, 2023.
[58] Curt B Moore, Nancy H McIntyre, and Stephen E Lanivich. ADHD-
related neurodiversity and the entrepreneurial mindset. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice , 45(1):64–91, 2021.
[59] Meredith Ringel Morris, Andrew Begel, and Ben Wiedermann. Un-
derstanding the challenges faced by neurodiverse software engineering
employees: Towards a more inclusive and productive technical work-
force. In ACM SIGACCESS Conference on computers & accessibility ,
pages 173–184, 2015.
[60] Kevin Murphy and Russell A Barkley. Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder adults: comorbidities and adaptive impairments. Comprehensive
psychiatry , 37(6):393–401, 1996.
[61] Emerson Murphy-Hill, Alberto Elizondo, Ambar Murillo, Marian Har-
bach, Bogdan Vasilescu, Delphine Carlson, and Florian Dessloch. Gen-
dermag improves discoverability in the field, especially for women:
An multi-year case study of suggest edit, a code review feature. In
International Conference on Software Engineering , pages 1–12, 2024.
[62] Patricia Elizabeth Newark, Marina Elsässer, and Rolf-Dieter Stieglitz.
Self-esteem, self-efficacy, and resources in adults with ADHD. Journal
of Attention Disorders , 20(3):279–290, 2016.
[63] Kaia Newman, Madeline Endres, Westley Weimer, and Brittany Johnson.
From organizations to individuals: Psychoactive substance use by profes-
sional programmers. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages 665–677. IEEE, 2023.
[64] Oxford English Dictionary. neurodiversity, n., March 2024.
[65] Wendy E Parmet. Discrimination and disability: the challenges of the
ada. Law, Medicine and Healthcare , 18(4):331–344, 1990.
[66] Chris Parnin and Spencer Rugaber. Programmer information needs after
memory failure. In Dirk Beyer, Arie van Deursen, and Michael W.
Godfrey, editors, International Conference on Program Comprehension,
ICPC, 2012 , pages 123–132. IEEE Computer Society, 2012.
[67] Eric Patton. When diagnosis does not always mean disability: The
challenge of employees with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder(ADHD). Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health , 24(3):326–343,
2009.
[68] Sai Teja Peddinti, Keith W Ross, and Justin Cappos. "On the internet,
nobody knows you’re a dog": a twitter case study of anonymity in social
networks. In ACM conference on Online Social Networks , pages 83–94,
2014.
[69] Michelle Peng. The best ai note-taking tools for meetings, Jun 2024.
[70] Kai Petersen and Claes Wohlin. The effect of moving from a plan-driven
to an incremental software development approach with Agile practices:
An industrial case study. Empirical Software Engineering , 15:654–693,
2010.
[71] Arman Syah Putra, Harco Leslie Hendric Spits Warnars, Bahtiar Saleh
Abbas, Agung Trisetyarso, Wayan Suparta, and Chu-Ho Kang. Gam-
ification in the e-learning process for children with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). In Indonesian Association for Pattern
Recognition International Conference (INAPR) , pages 182–185, 2018.
[72] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Comput-
ing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2023.
[73] Kavita Rao and Adam Tanners. Curb cuts in cyberspace: Universal
instructional design for online courses. Journal of Postsecondary
Education and Disability , 24(3):211–229, 2011.
[74] Brittany Reid, Markus Wagner, Marcelo d’Amorim, and Christoph
Treude. Software engineering user study recruitment on prolific: An
experience report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05348 , 2022.
[75] Brian Ripley, Bill Venables, Douglas M Bates, Kurt Hornik, Albrecht
Gebhardt, David Firth, and Maintainer Brian Ripley. Package ‘mass’.
CRAN R , 538:112–115, 2013.
[76] Randall Robbins. The untapped potential of the ADHD employee in the
workplace. Cogent Business & Management , 4(1):1271384, 2017.
[77] Ying Rong, Chang-Jiang Yang, Ye Jin, and Yue Wang. Prevalence
of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in individuals with Autism
Spectrum Disorder: A meta-analysis. Research in Autism Spectrum
Disorders , 83:101759, 2021.
[78] Elias Sarkis. Addressing Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in the
workplace. Postgraduate medicine , 126(5):25–30, 2014.
[79] Benjamin Schlegel and Marco Steenbergen. Package ’brant’. CRAN R ,
2020.
[80] Cliff Scott and Melissa Medaugh. Axial coding. The international ency-
clopedia of communication research methods , 10:9781118901731, 2017.
[81] Jane Ann Sedgwick, Andrew Merwood, and Philip Asherson. The
positive aspects of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: a qualitative
investigation of successful adults with ADHD. ADHD Attention Deficit
and Hyperactivity Disorders , 11(3):241–253, 2019.
[82] Tom Shakespeare et al. The social model of disability. The disability
studies reader , 2(3):197–204, 2006.
[83] Jennifer M Sims. A brief review of the belmont report. Dimensions of
critical care nursing , 29(4):173–174, 2010.
[84] Ha Min Son, Catrina Andaya Calub, Boyang Fan, J Faye Dixon, Shahbaz
Rezaei, Jared Borden, Julie B Schweitzer, and Xin Liu. A quant. analysis
of fidgeting in ADHD and its relation to performance and sustained
attention on a cognitive task. Frontiers in Psychiatry , 15:1394096, 2024.
[85] Clay Spinuzzi. The methodology of participatory design. Technical
communication , 52(2):163–174, 2005.
[86] Stack Overflow. Stack overflow developer survey 2022. https://survey.
stackoverflow.co/2022/, 2022. Accessed: 2024-07-28.
[87] Viktoria Stray and Nils Brede Moe. Understanding coordination in
global software engineering: A mixed-methods study on the use of
meetings and slack. J. Syst. Softw. , 170:110717, 2020.
[88] Antony Tang, Maryam Razavian, Barbara Paech, and Tom-Michael
Hesse. Human aspects in software architecture decision making: a
literature review. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture (ICSA) , pages 107–116. IEEE, 2017.
[89] Sho Tsugawa and Hiroyuki Ohsaki. Negative messages spread rapidly
and widely on social media. In ACM conference on online social
networks , pages 151–160, 2015.
[90] Bogdan Vasilescu, Daryl Posnett, Baishakhi Ray, Mark GJ van den
Brand, Alexander Serebrenik, Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir
Filkov. Gender and tenure diversity in GitHub teams. In ACM conference
on human factors in computing systems , pages 3789–3798, 2015.
[91] Erik G Willcutt. The prevalence of DSM-IV Attention-Deficit / Hyper-
activity Disorder: a meta-analytic review. Neurotherapeutics , 9(3):490–
499, 2012.