Demystifying and Detecting Cryptographic Defects
in Ethereum Smart Contracts
Jiashuo Zhang∗, Yiming Shen†, Jiachi Chen†¶, Jianzhong Su†, Yanlin Wang†,
Ting Chen‡, Jianbo Gao§¶, Zhong Chen∗¶
∗School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
†Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
‡University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
§Beijing Key Laboratory of Security and Privacy in Intelligent Transportation,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
¶Corresponding Authors
zhangjiashuo@pku.edu.cn, seuilping@gmail.com, chenjch86@mail.sysu.edu.cn, sujzh3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
yanlin-wang@outlook.com, brokendragon@uestc.edu.cn, gao@bjtu.edu.cn, zhongchen@pku.edu.cn
Abstract —Ethereum has officially provided a set of system-
level cryptographic APIs to enhance smart contracts with crypto-
graphic capabilities. These APIs have been utilized in over 10%
of Ethereum transactions, motivating developers to implement
various on-chain cryptographic tasks, such as digital signatures.
However, since developers may not always be cryptographic
experts, their ad-hoc and potentially defective implementations
could compromise the theoretical guarantees of cryptography,
leading to real-world security issues. To mitigate this threat, we
conducted the first study aimed at demystifying and detecting
cryptographic defects in smart contracts. Through the analysis of
2,406 real-world security reports, we defined nine types of cryp-
tographic defects in smart contracts with detailed descriptions
and practical detection patterns. Based on this categorization, we
proposed C RYSOL, a fuzzing-based tool to automate the detection
of cryptographic defects in smart contracts. It combines transac-
tion replaying and dynamic taint analysis to extract fine-grained
crypto-related semantics and employs crypto-specific strategies to
guide the test case generation process. Furthermore, we collected
a large-scale dataset containing 25,745 real-world crypto-related
smart contracts and evaluated C RYSOL’s effectiveness on it. The
result demonstrated that C RYSOLachieves an overall precision
of 95.4% and a recall of 91.2%. Notably, C RYSOLrevealed that
5,847 (22.7%) out of 25,745 smart contracts contain at least one
cryptographic defect, highlighting the prevalence of these defects.
Index Terms —Ethereum, smart contracts, defects detection,
cryptography
I. I NTRODUCTION
Cryptographic techniques, with their strong capabilities in
securing data and communication, have demonstrated sig-
nificant potential in enhancing the functionality of smart
contracts [1]–[3]. To prompt on-chain cryptographic practice,
Ethereum has officially introduced a set of system-level cryp-
tographic APIs [4], such as ECRECOVER , to enable basic crypto
operations within smart contracts. These APIs effectively
reduced the gas cost associated with complex cryptographic
operations and prompted diverse on-chain cryptographic tasks
such as digital signature [2] and Merkle proof [5]. Currently,
more than 10% of Ethereum transactions use these crypto
APIs [1], highlighting the significance and prevalence of
cryptographic practices in Ethereum smart contracts.However, since smart contract developers may not necessar-
ily be cryptographic experts, their implementation of crypto-
graphic tasks could be error-prone. Such defective implemen-
tations can compromise the theoretical security guarantees of
cryptography and lead to real-world security issues in prac-
tice [6]–[8]. For example, a security team reported 52 smart
contracts that suffered signature replay attacks [6], illustrating
the prevalence and damage of on-chain cryptographic defects.
Unfortunately, the community still lacks knowledge and
tools to mitigate this threat. A recent empirical study [1]
revealed that 56.3% of smart contract developers face obstacles
in securing their cryptographic implementations, and 68.1% of
developers believe existing security tools need improvement to
support their cryptographic practices. Although many studies
have focused on defects in smart contracts [9]–[12], they
mainly focus on issues arising from general programming
tasks, such as Reentrancy [10] and Integer Overflow [11],
while rarely addressing defects specific to cryptographic prac-
tices. Consequently, the characterization and mitigation of
cryptographic defects remain an open challenge.
To bridge the gap, we conducted the first study focusing on
demystifying and detecting cryptographic defects in Ethereum
smart contracts. To propose the definition and categorization
of common cryptographic defects, we conducted an empirical
study on 2,406 smart contract security reports from real-world
security teams and investigated crypto-specific security issues
they reported. Based on an open-card sorting approach [13],
we introduced the first systematic taxonomy of cryptographic
defects in smart contracts. It includes nine categories of
defects, covering common on-chain cryptographic tasks [1],
including digital signature [14], Merkle proof [5], message
digest [15], and random number generation [16].
Based on our defect definitions, we proposed C RYSOL,
a fuzzing-based approach to detect cryptographic defects in
real-world smart contracts. To the best of our knowledge,
it is the first security technique targeting crypto-specific
defects in contracts. It integrates offline analysis with on-
chain historical data to address the challenges posed byarXiv:2408.04939v1  [cs.CR]  9 Aug 2024complicated cryptographic operations. Specifically, C RYSOL
employs transaction replay and dynamic taint analysis to
initialize the fuzzing context and extract essential crypto-
related semantic information, such as data dependencies of
cryptographic operations. C RYSOLutilizes a set of crypto-
specific strategies to effectively generate test cases and exploit
defects. These strategies guide C RYSOL’s test case generation
with fine-grained semantic information and prevent it from
getting stuck on trivial test cases, i.e., transactions directly
reverted by cryptographic checks. C RYSOLexecutes the test
cases and detects defects based on a set of crypto-specific
oracles. To evaluate C RYSOL’s effectiveness, we collected a
dataset containing 25,745 real-world crypto-related contracts
and ran C RYSOLon it. The results indicated that C RYSOL
achieves an overall precision of 95.4% and a recall of 91.2%.
Moreover, they demonstrated the prevalence of cryptographic
defects in real-world contracts, revealing that 5,847 (22.7%)
out of these 25,745 contracts contain at least one defect.
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
•We conducted the first study on cryptographic defects in
smart contracts. Through the analysis of 2,406 security
reports, we defined and categorized nine types of crypto-
graphic defects, which expands the existing categorization
of smart contract defects [9], [17]. We presented these
defects with detailed descriptions and practical detection
patterns to guide future security solutions.
•We proposed C RYSOL, the first tool to detect crypto-
graphic defects in smart contracts. It extracts fine-grained
cryptographic semantics from on-chain data and employs
crypto-specific strategies to guide the fuzzing process.
By addressing the functional gap of existing security
tools, it has the potential to secure the emerging on-chain
cryptographic practice.
•We collected a large-scale dataset containing 25,745
real-world crypto-related smart contracts and evaluated
CRYSOLon it. C RYSOLrevealed that 5,847 (22.7%) of
these contracts contain at least one cryptographic defect,
with an overall precision of 95.4% and a recall of 91.2%.
•We published the source code of C RYSOL, all anal-
ysis results, and datasets at https://github.com/Jiashuo-
Zhang/CrySol, to provide support to further studies.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)
Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) is the execution environ-
ment for Ethereum smart contracts [4]. It manages the on-
chain states of smart contracts and transforms these states by
iteratively executing instructions known as opcodes [18]. The
opcodes include stack/memory/storage operations, arithmetic
calculations, and other functionalities required by smart con-
tracts. For example, the SLOAD opcode reads a value from the
contract’s storage to the stack, and the SSTORE opcode writes
a stack element to the storage.
Beyond the opcodes, Ethereum introduced several precom-
piled contracts as low-level extensions of EVM [4]. Theyare implemented as built-in system-level contracts, to opti-
mize the computation cost of specific functionalities, such
as crypto operations. User-defined contracts can use the
STATICCALL /CALL /CALLCODE /DELEGATECALL opcode to call
precompiled contracts and execute their functionalities.
B. Cryptographic APIs in EVM
To enable cryptographic operations in smart contracts,
Ethereum introduced nine cryptographic APIs to EVM [1].
These APIs include one opcode ( KECCAK256 ) and eight
precompiled contracts ( ECRECOVER ,SHA256 ,RIPEMD160 ,
MODEXP ,ECADD ,ECMUL ,ECPAIRING ,BLAKE2F ). Specifi-
cally, KECCAK256 ,SHA256 ,RIPEMD160 , and BLAKE2F pro-
vide four hash functions in smart contracts [4], [19], i.e.,
KECCAK256 [20], SHA2-256 [21], RIPEMD-160 [22], and
BLAKE2b [23]. We collectively refer to these four APIs as
hash operations in the remainder of this paper. ECRECOVER [4]
facilitates the on-chain verification of ECDSA signatures
on the secp256k1 elliptic curve [24]. MODEXP [25] en-
ables big integer modular exponentiation. ECADD ,ECMUL ,
andECPAIRING [26], [27] provide elliptic operations of the
altbn128 curve to enable the verification of paring-based
zero-knowledge proofs such as Groth16 [28].
These APIs largely reduce the gas cost of cryptographic
operations and have thus attracted widespread application. In
a recent empirical study [1], Zhang et al. found that 13.8%
of Ethereum transactions have utilized these crypto APIs. In
particular, KECCAK256 ,ECRECOVER ,SHA256 APIs are the top
three commonly used APIs, used by 13.0%, 4.96%, 0.56% of
transactions, respectively.
C. Cryptographic Tasks in Smart Contracts
Utilizing these crypto APIs, developers have implemented
a variety of cryptographic tasks in smart contracts. Zhang
et al. [1] analyzed the source codes of crypto-related smart
contracts and classified common cryptographic tasks in smart
contracts, including digital signatures (used in 39.4% of
crypto-related contracts), vector commitments (24.2%), mes-
sage digests (17.4%), and random number generators (14.8%).
We briefly introduce these tasks as follows:
•digital signatures . Signatures are widely used for on-chain
identity authentication [2], [29]. By combining ECRECOVER
with hash operations, developers can implement signature
verification logic for ECDSA signatures [30].
•vector commitments . Vector commitments are widely used to
enforce on-chain whitelist and other access control policies.
They are typically implemented as Merkle proofs [5].
•message digest . Message digest [15] refers to the direct
use of hash operations. It is commonly used to compute
collision-resistant indexes for dynamic-length contents.
•random number generator . Random number generator [16]
refers to generating pseudo-random numbers based on
crypto operations. It is commonly used for on-chain gaming
and gambling.D. Defects in Smart Contracts
A software defect is an error, flaw, failure, or fault in a
computer program or system that causes it to produce an
incorrect or unexpected result, or to behave in unintended
ways [31]. Several previous studies have documented defects
in smart contracts from different aspects [9], [17], [32]. For
example, Chen et al. [9] defined 20 types of defects in smart
contract by analyzing StackExchange posts and real-world
contracts. These defects impact the security, availability, per-
formance, maintainability, and reusability of smart contracts.
With the ongoing innovation in on-chain applications, such as
the integration with cryptographic techniques, and the ever-
evolving security issues, the understanding and definition of
contract defects are also evolving and expanding [17], [33].
E. Security Reports for Smart Contracts
Due to the prevalence of attacks, integrating security eval-
uations into smart contract development is essential [34].
Many third-party security teams, such as ConsenSys [35] and
Trails of Bits [36], offer security analysis services for smart
contract projects. They inspect the codes of smart contracts,
search for defects, and produce detailed reports for developers.
These security reports, with comprehensive descriptions of
real-world defects, are ideal information sources for defining
smart contract defects.
III. C RYPTOGRAPHIC DEFECTS IN SMART CONTRACTS
In this section, we conducted an empirical study on real-
world security reports to define and categorize common cryp-
tographic defects in Ethereum smart contracts.
A. Data Collection
During this process, we collected security reports from a
wide range of real-world security teams. Specifically, Ether-
scan [37] provides a list of 75 security teams that specialize in
smart contract security. By searching on their official websites
and accounts on social media platforms like Medium [38], we
identified that 31 out of these security teams have publicly
available security reports. We manually collected these secu-
rity reports and obtained a dataset containing 2,406 reports.
B. Data Pre-processing
To filter out security reports that relate to cryptographic
practices, we conducted both keyword-based filtering and
manual filtering on the collected reports. During the keyword-
based filtering, we utilized terms associated with cryptographic
tasks such as “signature” and crypto API names like “ecre-
cover”, as keywords. As a result, we filtered out 893 reports
that contained at least one keyword in their content. However,
due to the multiple meanings of keywords such as “hash”,
keyword-based methods are prone to inaccurate identification.
For example, the term “hash” in several reports actually
refers to the commit hash of the code being audited. We
manually checked these reports to remove those with irrelevant
keywords. Finally, we collected 211 crypto-related reports,
which are available in our online supplementary material [39].C. Data Analysis
We conducted a manual analysis on the collected 211
reports to investigate the categories of cryptographic defects
in Ethereum smart contracts. Due to the exploratory nature
of our study, we did not introduce any pre-defined categories
of defects. Instead, we employed the open card sorting ap-
proach [13], a common approach in software engineering for
organizing information into logical groups, to define categories
of defects. In line with previous studies [1], [9], [40], we
created a card for each report, including detailed descriptions
of the defects in the report and the root causes of them.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the card for a security report [41].
It describes a defect in the BaseVault contract that allows
signature replay attacks. The root cause of this defect is the
lack of protection against reused signatures, so that signatures
in past transactions can be replayed multiple times.
During the card sorting procedure, two authors manually
analyzed these cards to define the categories of cryptographic
defects. For each card, they first examined its root cause
to determine if it could be categorized under an existing
category. If not, they evaluated the defect’s representability and
reproducibility to decide whether to introduce a new category.
For example, defects that were highly specific to the business
logic of a particular contract were not introduced as new
categories. After that, they engaged in discussions to resolve
any disagreements and reached a consensus on the results.
Fig. 1. An example of the cards of security reports.
D. Defects Definition
Through the analysis of security reports, we identified nine
types of cryptographic defects in Ethereum smart contracts,
covering all common on-chain cryptographic practices de-
scribed in Section II-C, i.e.,digital signature ,vector commit-
ment ,message digest and random number generator . These
defects could compromise theoretical security guarantees of-
fered by cryptography and lead to unintended contract behav-
iors in practice. Table I enumerates each type of defect along
with its definition. In the following, we describe these defects
with detailed explanations and illustrative examples.
(1) Single-Contract Signature Replay (SSR). Digital signa-
tures are commonly used in smart contracts for on-chain access
control [2], [29]. Transactions with valid signatures can per-
form sensitive operations in the contracts, such as transferring
tokens. In such scenarios, a signature should be invalidated
once it is verified, to prevent attackers from replaying the same
signature and re-executing sensitive operations. However, with
this defect, the contract does not reject these valid but already
used signatures. Consequently, they may suffer from signatureTABLE I
DEFINITIONS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC DEFECTS IN ETHEREUM SMART CONTRACTS
Cryptographic Defect ID Definition
Single-Contract Signature Replay SSR Do not prevent the same signature from being used multiple times.
Cross-Contract Signature Replay CSR Do not distinguish signatures for this contract from those for other contracts.
Signature Front-Running SF Allow signatures in pending transactions to be front-run and preemptively used.
Signature Malleability SM Lack protection against signature malleability.
Insufficient Signature Verification ISV Do not properly check the result of signature verification.
Merkle Proof Replay MR Do not prevent the same Merkle proof from being used multiple times.
Merkle Proof Front-Running MF Allow Merkle proofs in pending transactions to be front-run and preemptively used.
Hash Collisions With Dynamic-Length Arguments HC Do not prevent collisions when hashing concatenated dynamic-length arguments.
Weak Randomness from Hashing Chain Attributes WR Use the hash of chain attributes as randomness.
1function permit( address owner, uint256 value,
uint256 deadline, uint8 v,bytes32 r,bytes32 s)
external {
2 bytes32 hash = keccak256 (abi.encode (owner, value
, deadline));
3 address signer = ecrecover (hash, v, r, s);
4 require (signer != address (0),"Invalid Signature"
);
5 require (owner == signer, "Invalid Signer");
6 require (block .timestamp < deadline, "Permit
Expired");
7 _approve(owner, msg.sender , value);}
Fig. 2. An example contract with SSR, CSR, and SF defects
replay attacks: anyone who has observed valid signatures in
past on-chain transactions can replay these signatures and pass
the signature verification again.
Example: Fig. 2 shows a defective implementation of the
ERC-20 permit function [29]. Ideally, this function should
allow the msg.sender to get approved to spend tokens after
submitting a valid signature from the token owner (line 7).
However, since this function does not check whether each
signature has been used, it always considers signatures used
by past transactions as valid signatures. Consequently, it
enables the replaying of signatures, allowing msg.sender to
gain repeated approvals for token spending.
(2) Cross-Contract Signature Replay (CSR). This defect
arises when two different contracts have an identical signing
domain, i.e., the structures of their signed messages are exactly
the same. In such cases, a valid signature for contract Awill
also be valid for contract B, enabling cross-contract signature
replay. Compared to the SSR defect mentioned above, this
defect involves a different attack vector: SSR involves replay-
ing historical signatures that previously used by the victim
contract, while this defect involves replaying signatures from
other contracts to the victim contract. Both defects could lead
to unauthorized access to sensitive operations.
Example: Take the permit function in Fig. 2 as an example.
Suppose there are two token contracts, AandB, each imple-
menting the same permit function. The token owner, holding
both tokens AandB, intends to sign a permit for a spender
of token A. However, since the signed messages required by
token AandBhave exactly the same format (line 2-3), the
signature intended solely for token Aalso becomes valid for
token B. Consequently, a malicious spender can replay thesame signature to token Band successfully get approved, even
though this was never intended.
(3) Signature Front-Running (SF). In Ethereum, pending
transactions, i.e., transactions that have been submitted to the
network but not yet confirmed in a block, are publicly accessi-
ble [42]. Therefore, signatures within pending transactions are
susceptible to being captured and preemptively used in a front-
running attack [43], [44]. This defect refers to situations where
an attack transaction with front-run signatures can successfully
pass the verification and lead to unintended contract behaviors.
Example: Consider the permit function in Fig. 2. Normally,
amsg.sender can obtain the approval by submitting a valid
signature. However, in this case, an attacker can intercept the
submitted signatures from pending transactions and initiate
a front-running transaction to use them preemptively. If the
attack succeeds, the new msg.sender (i.e., the attacker), instead
of the original msg.sender , obtains the approval (line 7).
(4) Signature Malleability (SM). The ECDSA sig-
natures supported by ECRECOVER precompiled contracts
are malleable [45]. Specifically, given a valid signature
(v, r, s )for message m, anyone can generate another valid
signature (v′, r, s′)for the same message m[46], [47]. This
defect refers to the lack of protection of signature malleability.
It is recognized to negatively impact the quality and maintain-
ability of smart contracts [30], [47], [48], and can potentially
lead to security issues such as signature replay attacks.
Example: Fig. 3 shows an example in which this defect
can cause signature replay attacks. In this case, the hash of the
signature is used to prevent signature replay attacks (line 2-3).
Normally, after a signature is first verified, it is marked as used
(line 6), and any further attempts to use a used signature are
rejected (line 3). However, due to the signature malleability,
an attacker knowing a used signature can generate a valid
but unused signature for the same message. Since the newly
generated signature has not been marked as used before, it can
pass the check at line 3 and make a transfer again (line 7).
(5) Insufficient Signature Verification (ISV). Unlike stan-
dard signature verification process, which takes both the public
key and the signature as input and indicates the signature’s
validity with a true/false output, ECRECOVER employs the
public key recovery process [49] for signature verification,
which only takes the signature as input and outputs the on-
chain address of the “expected” signer. As a result, when1function transferWithSig( address to, uint256 value,
uint8 v,bytes32 r,bytes32 s)public {
2 bytes32 sigHash = keccak256 (v,r,s);
3 require (!Used[sigHash]);
4 address signer = ecrecover (keccak256 (abi.
encodePacked (to, value, address (this )),v,r,s
));
5 require (signer == owner);
6 Used[sigHash] = true ;
7 transfer (to, value);
8}
Fig. 3. An example contract with the SM defect
encountering an invalid signature, ECRECOVER still returns an
incorrect “expected” signer, instead of reverting the transac-
tion. Additionally, it simply returns zero if the signature is
improperly formed [4]. Therefore, when calling ECRECOVER ,
contracts must check whether the returned “expected” signer
is correct according to the business logic, e.g., by checking if
it matches the token owner’s address. This defect arises when
contracts do not properly verify ECRECOVER ’s return value,
leading to unintended contract behaviors.
Example: Fig. 4 illustrates an example of this defect. The
intended behavior is to check the managers’ signature before
permitting an operation. However, attackers can submit a non-
existent opType and an improperly formed signature to make
ECRECOVER return zero. Since Manager[opType] also defaults
to zero for keys that don’t exist, the attacker can successfully
pass the signature verification (line 2-3) and gain unauthorized
permission (line 4).
1function permitOperation ( address opType, uint256
opID, uint8 v,bytes32 r,bytes32 s)public {
2 address signer = ecrecover (keccak256 (opType,
opID), v, r, s);
3 require (signer == Manager[opType]);
4 permitted[opID]= true ;
5}
Fig. 4. An example contract with the ISV defect
(6) Merkle Proof Replay (MR). Merkle proofs are com-
monly employed to support on-chain whitelists and enable
scenarios such as token airdropping [1]. Given a large set
of users to be authorized, the contract owner can create a
Merkle tree off-chain, distribute its leaves to the users, and
upload the Merkle root in the contract [50]. Then, users can
submit their leaves and the corresponding Merkle proofs to
the contract. The contract will verify the Merkle proof before
allowing users to do sensitive operations, such as minting
NFTs. Similar to signature replay attacks, lacking protection
against Merkle proof replay can cause repeated/unauthorized
access to sensitive operations.
Example: As illustrated in Fig. 5, the contract allows
whitelisted users to mint tokens (line 2) by submitting a valid
Merkle proof (line 3). However, due to this defect, users,
even those not in the whitelist, can replay past Merkle proofs
submitted by whitelisted users and mint tokens.
(7) Merkle Proof Front-Running (MF). This defect is sim-
ilar to the Signature Front-Running defect. It allows attackers
to capture Merkle proofs in the pending transactions and use1function mint( string memory leaf, bytes32 [] calldata
merkleProof) external {
2 if(MerkleProof.verify(merkleProof, merkleRoot,
keccak256 (abi.encodePacked (leaf)))){
3 _mint( msg.sender , 1); }
4}
Fig. 5. An example contract with MR and MF defects.
them preemptively, which could enable unauthorized users to
perform sensitive operations in the contract.
Example: The function in Fig. 5 also has this defect.
Specifically, anyone observing a pending Merkle proof can
launch front-running attacks and preemptively mint tokens to
their accounts.
1function addUsers( address [] calldata admins, address
[] calldata regularUsers, bytes calldata
signature) external {
2 bytes32 hash = keccak256 (abi.encodePacked (admins
, regularUsers));
3 address signer = hash.recover(signature);
4 require (signer == owner);
5 _addUser(admins,regularUsers)
6}
Fig. 6. An example contract with the HC defect.
(8) Hash Collisions With Dynamic-Length Arguments
(HC). Crypto hash operations are expected to be collision-
resistant [51], i.e., it is computationally hard to find two input
aandb,s.t.,a̸=b∧hash (a) =hash (b). However, non-
standard practice when hashing dynamic-length arguments,
i.e., dynamic arrays in Solidity [52], could lead to “collisions”.
Example: Fig. 6 demonstrates this defect. Specifically, the
built-in function abi.encodePacked (line 2) packs all elements
in order regardless of whether they’re dynamic-length. There-
fore, KECCAK256 (abi.encodePacked ([“0xa”, “0xb”], [“0xc”]))
is equal to KECCAK256 (abi.encodePacked ([“0xa”], [“0xb”,
“0xc”])), leading to a collision. Consequently, attackers can
rearrange the addresses in admins and regularUsers arrays,
without changing the hash result (line 2). The signature
verification still passes, but the content of these arrays and
the contract’s behavior (line 5) have been altered.
(9) Weak Randomness from Hashing Chain Attributes
(WR). Randomness is commonly used in scenarios such as
on-chain gaming and gambling [1]. However, since there is
a risk that miners could manipulate chain attributes such as
block.timestamp to their advantage [53], generating random
numbers by hashing chain attributes can compromise the
security of these applications.
Example: Fig. 7 provides an example where this defect can
be exploited to gain profits. By choosing a block.timestamp
that meets the condition (line 4), a malicious miner can win
the gambling game and receive the rewards (line 5).
Defect vs. Vulnerability vs. Bug. We use the term defect
to collectively refer to the issues in cryptographic practices.
Compared to other terms such as vulnerability and bug,
defect has a wider scope [9], [31], thus better representing
these issues. Specifically, vulnerability refers to defects that
can be directly exploited, while excluding other non-standard1function gamble() public payable {
2 require (msg.value == 1 ether );
3 uint8 rand = uint8 (keccak256 (block .timestamp ,
block .number ))
4 if(rand == 0) {
5 msg.sender .transfer (2ether );
6}}
Fig. 7. An example contract with the WR defect.
cryptographic implementations. For example, while Signature
Malleability negatively impacts the quality and maintainability
of the contract, it does not necessarily constitute a vulnerabil-
ity: it can only be directly exploited in certain cases like Fig. 3.
Furthermore, bugpertains to defects caused by coding errors.
However, defects like Single-Contract Signature Replay are
often a result of design flaws, i.e., the absence of a replay
protection scheme, rather than coding errors.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
Our results in Section III demonstrate nine defects of on-
chain cryptographic practices. To provide real-world evidence
of these defects in Ethereum smart contracts and assist de-
velopers in detecting them in practice, we built C RYSOL, an
automated testing tool for Ethereum smart contracts.
A. Design Decisions
CRYSOLis built on fuzzing, a plausible technique to detect
defects in contracts [53], [54]. Compared to techniques like
symbolic execution [55], it can scale better to find defects
with deep program paths and complex computations. However,
when applying fuzzing to crypto-related contracts, the inherent
complexity of cryptography introduces new challenges. In the
following, we introduce these challenges and describe the
design decisions we made to address these challenges.
Properly Initializing the Fuzzing Context. Crypto-
related functions often involve intricate execution contexts. For
example, to successfully call the function in Fig. 5, the storage
variable merkleRoot needs to be properly initialized, and the
transaction should include a valid Merkle proof pertaining to
that specific merkleRoot . Common solutions, such as randomly
initiating the contracts’ states and transactions, may result in
test transactions being trivially reverted by these cryptographic
checks. To overcome this, C RYSOLutilizes real-world con-
tracts’ states and transactions to initialize the execution context
of the fuzzing engine. By integrating offline analysis with on-
chain data, C RYSOLprovides a fuzzing context that is closer
to real-world conditions, thereby improving the effectiveness
and efficiency of the fuzzing process.
Effectively Generating Test Cases. Generating test cases
that can exploit cryptographic defects requires certain guid-
ance. For example, to exploit the SSR defect in Fig. 2, we need
to construct two different transactions with the same signature.
However, random methods could be highly inefficient to
generate such test cases, since they require identifying which
transaction parameters are included in the signed message. To
address this, C RYSOLreplays historical transactions of the
Transaction Sequence Generation
Transaction Data InstantiationTransaction 
Reordering𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+1Transaction 
Insertion𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
Random 
GenerationCrypto-Specific 
Generation
History -Based 
GenerationTransaction 
ParametersTrace AnalysisTest Case
Execution
Check Oracle 
Violation
Defect
ReportDefect Detection
Block 
Environment
Transaction 
SenderContract 
ABITransaction 
ReplayInitialization
Semantic 
Extraction
Seed Pool 
Initialization𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+1 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖′𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖
𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖+1 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖 𝑇𝑇𝑖𝑖′
On-chain
StateHistory
TxnsFig. 8. The workflow of C RYSOL.
contract and conducts dynamic taint analysis to extract crypto-
related semantics, such as data-dependencies of cryptographic
operations. Utilizing these semantics, C RYSOLemploys a suite
of crypto-specific strategies to effectively generate test cases
that trigger potential defects.
B. Overview
Fig. 8 outlines the overall workflow of C RYSOL. Given
a contract to analyze, C RYSOLfirst replays its historical
transactions to extract crypto-related semantics and initialize
the seed pool (Section IV-C). Then, C RYSOLstarts to gen-
erate test cases for the contract to trigger potential defects
(Section IV-D). Specifically, the test case generation process
involves two steps, i.e., generating the transaction sequence,
and instantiating each transaction in the sequence with con-
crete parameter values. Finally, C RYSOLexecutes the test
cases and analyzes the execution traces for defect detection
(Section IV-E).
C. Initialization
During the initialization, C RYSOLreplays historical on-
chain transactions of the contract to collect crypto-related
semantic information and initialize the seed pool for fuzzing.
Transaction Replay. CRYSOLoperates an Ethereum
archive node [56], which retains all historical state informa-
tion since the genesis block. For each transaction, C RYSOL
leverages an off-the-chain execution tool [57] designed for
transaction replay to extract the contract’s pre-state, i.e., the
contract state before the transaction execution. Then, C RYSOL
executes the transaction on this pre-state using an instrumented
EVM, and gathers execution traces for subsequent analysis.
Semantic Extraction. Based on the execution traces,
CRYSOLcollects the following crypto-related semantic infor-
mation to guide the test case generation processes.
•Crypto-related functions . To identify potential execution
paths to trigger cryptographic defects, C RYSOLanalyzes
the execution traces and filters out functions that used
crypto operations. Specifically, for crypto APIs provided
as precompiled contracts, C RYSOLexamines the destina-
tion address of all contract call opcodes ( STATICCALL ,
CALL ,CALLCODE , and DELEGATECALL ) to determine whether
the transaction calls these crypto APIs. For crypto APIs
provided as opcode, i.e.,KECCAK256 , C RYSOLanalyzes
all executed opcodes and checks whether there are cryptocalls to KECCAK256 . After identifying a function that uses
cryptographic operations, C RYSOLrecords all transactions
traces of it for the subsequent data dependency analysis.
•Crypto-related data dependencies . C RYSOLemploys dy-
namic taint analysis to extract data dependencies of
the cryptographic operations. For example, to determine
which transaction parameters may be an ECDSA signa-
ture, C RYSOLmarks slots of the transaction input data as
sources and the arguments of ECRECOVER as sinks. Then,
it simulates taint propagation throughout the transaction’s
execution, checking if the sinks can be reached from the
sources. For slots that can reach ECRECOVER , it identifies to
which parameters they correspond based on the contract’s
ABI and then marks these parameters as signature-related.
Such information is essential for C RYSOLto generate valid
transactions that pass the cryptographic verification.
Seed Pool Initialization. After that, C RYSOLinitializes
the fuzzing seed pool based on historical on-chain data. Specif-
ically, it includes all historical transactions of the contract as
initial seeds. Each seed contains all information required for
executing the transaction: (1) the parameters and sender of the
transaction; (2) the pre-states of related contracts, including the
contract directly called by the external transaction and other
contracts called by internal transactions; and (3) the block
environment, such as the block number and timestamp.
D. Test Case Generation
With the initialized seed pool and extracted semantic in-
formation, C RYSOLbegins to iteratively generate test cases.
Initially, it selects a seed from the seed pool and sets the
contracts’ pre-states and block environment recorded in the
seed as the starting state for executing the generated test cases.
Based on the seed, C RYSOLgenerates the test transaction
sequence and instantiates each transaction with concrete input
data.
Transaction Sequence Generation. CRYSOLsupports
two strategies to generate the transaction sequence, i.e., trans-
action insertion and transaction reordering. When a seed is
chosen, C RYSOLincludes the historical transaction from the
seed into the initial transaction sequence. Then, by strategi-
cally inserting new transactions to the initial sequence and
re-ordering them, C RYSOLgenerates a set of transaction
sequences designed to exploit the defects. For example, to
exploit the SSR defect, C RYSOLinserts a new attack transac-
tion after the original historical transaction, calling the same
function with a replayed signature. To exploit the SF defect,
CRYSOLreorders the attack transaction to appear before the
original transaction, enabling the front-running use of the
signature.
Transaction Data Instantiation. This process is initi-
ated when C RYSOLneeds to insert a new transaction into
the transaction sequence. Specifically, to instantiate the new
transaction, C RYSOLneeds to generate three types of concrete
data, i.e., the transaction parameters, transaction sender, and
the block environment. C RYSOLgenerates these data based
on the following three complementary strategies.•Crypto-Specific Generation. CRYSOLemploys a set of
crypto-specific strategies to generate crypto-related trans-
action parameters. Specifically, C RYSOLanalyzes crypto-
related data dependencies and extracts crypto-related param-
eters that are used as the input of cryptographic operations.
Based on the analysis result, it strategically instantiates these
parameters to exploit cryptographic defects. For example, to
exploit the SSR or SF defect, C RYSOLneeds to construct a
new attack transaction containing the same signature as the
original seed transaction. To do so, it instantiates signature-
related parameters by preserving their values in the original
transactions, i.e., simulating the signature replay, while
using history-based and random strategies to instantiate non-
crypto-related parameters.
•History-Based Generation. Given the security implications
of cryptographic operations, crypto-related functions might
operate within a more subtle context. For example, a
randomly selected transaction sender might fail to call
the crypto-related functions due to the specific permission
structure the contract initialized. To better approximate real-
world contexts, C RYSOLoffers the ability to instantiate
transaction parameters or the transaction sender using values
from all historical transactions calling the same function.
•Random Generation. In line with previous work [53], [54],
[58], C RYSOLinfers parameter types based on the contract
ABI specification [59] and supports random generation
of transaction parameters. Beyond transaction input data,
CRYSOLalso supports randomly generating the transaction
sender and the block environment.
By determining the sequence of transactions and instantiat-
ing each transaction with concrete parameter values, sender,
and block environment, C RYSOLgenerates test cases that can
be concretely executed to exploit potential defects.
E. Defects Detection
In the last phase, C RYSOLexecutes the generated test cases
and analyzes the execution traces for defect detection. For each
test case, C RYSOLinstantiates an instrumented EVM with the
starting states of the test case, and executes the transaction
sequence on it. If the execution violates a pre-defined oracle,
CRYSOLreports the identified defect along with the function
containing the defect. If the transaction involves multiple
contracts, C RYSOLalso specifies the contract where the defect
occurs by analyzing inter-contract calls during the transaction
execution. In the following, we describe the detailed oracles
used by C RYSOLto detect each type of defects.
(1) Single-Contract Signature Replay (SSR). CRYSOL
examines the transaction sequence and checks whether it con-
tains a successful signature replay attack. Specifically, when
a transaction calls ECRECOVER , C RYSOLsearches for any
subsequent transaction in the sequence that calls ECRECOVER
using the same parameters, i.e., replaying the signature. If the
transaction with the replayed signature successfully executes
and makes changes to the contract storage, C RYSOLreports a
SSR defect. Additionally, we found that several token contracts
intended to allow token minters to replay signatures and minttokens until they reach the amount limit per address. To
reduce such false positives, C RYSOLidentifies such protective
patterns by analyzing transaction execution traces.
(2) Cross-Contract Signature Replay (CSR). CRYSOL
records calls to ECRECOVER during the test case execution and
checks whether each signed message includes the address of
the contract that verifies the signature. Specifically, C RYSOL
taints the return value of opcode ADDRESS , which retrieves
the contract’s address. Then, C RYSOLmonitors if the taint
flows into the hash used in ECRECOVER (hash, v, r, s ). If the
signed message does not include the contract’s address, i.e.,
signatures for this contract are not distinguished from those of
other contracts, C RYSOLreports a CSR defect.
(3) Signature Front-Running (SF). CRYSOLexamines the
transaction sequence and checks whether it contains signature
front-running attacks. Specifically, C RYSOLidentifies cases
where, given an original transaction that calls ECRECOVER ,
there exists a preceding attack transaction from a different
sender that calls ECRECOVER with the same parameters. If
so, C RYSOLconducts a differential analysis on the execution
results of the original transaction and attack transaction. It
executes them based on the same start state respectively and
compares the post-states after execution. If the post-states
differ, i.e., the attacker can make unintended changes to the
contracts’ states, C RYSOLreports a SF defect.
(4) Signature Malleability (SM). CRYSOLanalyzes whether
there is protection against signature malleability. Specifi-
cally, when encountering a call to ECRECOVER (hash, v, r, s ),
CRYSOLanalyzes the execution trace and checks whether a
branching opcode ( JUMPI ) is executed, conditioning on the
comparison between sand the constant elliptic curve order
secp 256k1[4]. If not, i.e., there is no protection against the
signature malleability, C RYSOLreports a SM defect.
(5) Insufficient Signature Verification (ISV). CRYSOL
checks if there is a transaction that calls ECRECOVER with
parameters not used in any historical transactions, i.e., the
signature is randomly forged by C RYSOL. If the transaction
containing the forged signature successfully executes and
makes changes to the storage, C RYSOLreports an ISV defect.
(6) Merkle Proof Replay (MR). CRYSOLfirst identifies
the verification process of Merkle proofs based on their oper-
ational characteristics. Specifically, C RYSOLchecks whether
there is a sequence of hash operations during the transaction
execution, where the input of the i-th hash is the concatenation
of the result of the (i-1)-th hash and a proof element provided
as the transaction parameters. Then, similar to the detection of
SSR, when encountering a transaction that verifies a Merkle
proof, C RYSOLsearches for any subsequent transaction that
replays that Merkle proof. If both transactions change the
contract’s storage, C RYSOLreports a MR defect. To reduce
false positives, C RYSOLidentifies the same protective pattern
for token minting as in the SSR defect.
(7) Merkle Proof Front-Running (MF). The approach
CRYSOLuses to detect MF defects is analogous to the
approach for SF defects. Given an original transaction that
verified the Merkle proofs, C RYSOLsearches for any pre-ceding attack transaction that preemptively used the same
Merkle proofs. Then, a differential analysis is conducted on
the execution results of these two transactions. If the preceding
transaction successfully executes and makes different changes
to the contract storage, C RYSOLreports a MF defect.
(8) Hash Collisions With Dynamic-Length Arguments
(HC). CRYSOLconducts dynamic taint analysis on the
input of each hash operation to detect HC defects. First,
it determines which transaction parameters, if any, serve as
input for these hash operations. Then, it checks whether these
parameters are dynamic-length based on the contract’s ABI.
If the hash input contains the concatenation of two dynamic-
length parameters, C RYSOLreports a HC defect.
(9) Weak Randomness from Hashing Chain Attributes
(WR). CRYSOLleverages dynamic taint analysis to check
whether the block attributes can affect hash operations. It first
taints the returns of opcodes that acquire block attributes ( e.g.,
NUMBER andTIMESTAMP ) and monitors whether the taints flow
into hash operations. If there is a hash operation that can be
affected by chain attributes and the hash result determines
a branch ( JUMPI ) or storage operation ( SSTORE ), C RYSOL
reports a WR defect.
V. E VALUATION
The goal of the evaluation is two-fold. Firstly, we utilize
a large-scale dataset containing 25,745 crypto-related smart
contracts to evaluate the effectiveness of C RYSOLin defect
detection. Secondly, by analyzing the results of this large-scale
experiment, we demystify cryptographic defects in the wild
and gain insights into their prevalence and distribution.
A. Evaluation Setup
Research Questions. Specifically, we focus on the fol-
lowing three research questions.
•RQ1. What is C RYSOL’s performance on our large-scale
dataset? Can C RYSOLfind defects with high precision?
•RQ2. How effective of C RYSOLin finding cryptographic
defects in terms of recall?
•RQ3. What is the prevalence and distribution of crypto-
graphic defects in real-world smart contracts?
Dataset. To answer these research questions, we collected
a large-scale dataset containing 25,745 real-world crypto-
related smart contracts. Specifically, using the same method as
previous studies [1], we first replayed 1,704,224,022 historical
Ethereum transactions from block 1 to block 15,500,000 (from
2015.07 to 2022.09) and recorded the contracts that called
crypto APIs. In total, we identified 426,296 crypto-related
contracts during the execution of historical transactions. After
that, we queried Etherscan [60] to collect publicly available
source codes and ABI information of these contracts. As a
result, we found 25,745 crypto-related smart contracts have
available source codes and ABI information. Among these
contracts, 83.6% of smart contracts have more than 10 histori-
cal transactions, suggesting that the majority of smart contracts
in our dataset are engaged in real-world applications, rather
than merely being toy contracts.TABLE II
CRYPTOGRAPHIC DEFECTS DETECTED BY CRYSOL
Defect # Detected # Sampled # TP # FP Precision
SSR 151 59 59 0 100.0%
CSR 2,536 93 89 4 95.7%
SF 274 71 69 2 97.2%
SM 1,803 91 89 2 97.8%
ISV 24 20 17 3 85.0%
MR 122 54 48 6 88.9%
MF 33 25 23 2 92.0%
HC 89 46 43 3 93.5%
WR 2,626 93 87 6 93.5%
To retrieve contracts’ historical transactions and states,
CRYSOLmaintained an Ethereum archive node [56] and
recorded Ethereum on-chain raw states for subsequent anal-
ysis. For each contract in the dataset, C RYSOLfetched its
historical transactions and states to initialize the fuzzing seed
pool. To ensure efficiency, the maximum seed pool size is
set to be 500 transactions, which is considered adequate to
cover common usage patterns of the contracts [12], [61]. All
experiments were conducted on a machine with two Intel
Xeon(R) Platinum 8352V CPUs, 512 GB RAM, and running
Ubuntu 22.04.2 LTS.
Our datasets, experiment outputs, and analysis results are
all available in the supplementary materials [39].
B. RQ1: Detecting Defects in the Large-Scale Dataset
To answer RQ1, we ran C RYSOLon 25,745 smart contracts
and analyzed the results. C RYSOLtook 408.0 hours to analyze
25,745 contracts, resulting in an average execution time of 57.1
seconds per contract. In total, C RYSOLreported that 5,847
(22.7%) contracts contain at least one defect. Table II shows
a breakdown of C RYSOL’s execution results for each defect
type.
Precision. To evaluate the precision of C RYSOLin de-
tecting each type of defects, we manually analyzed the defects
reported by C RYSOLduring the large-scale experiment. In line
with previous studies [40], [62], we randomly sampled a num-
ber of defects for each defect type to make the manual analysis
feasible. The sample size for each defect type was carefully
chosen to achieve a confidence level of 95% and a confidence
interval of 10. The second and third columns of Table II
show the detected and sampled number of contracts with each
defect, respectively. Then, two of the authors independently
labeled these contracts as true positives (TPs) or false positives
(FPs), with the help of the third author to resolve any possible
disagreements. The fourth to sixth columns in Table II present
the number of true positives, false positives, and the precision
rate for each type of defect, respectively. We then computed
CRYSOL’s overall precision as a weighted average of these
precision rates, with the weight being the number of each
defect. As a result, the overall precision of C RYSOLis 95.4%.
False Positives. After inspecting the false positives re-
ported by C RYSOL, we found that they are mainly caused by
the following two factors. The first is non-standard protective
patterns in real-world contracts. For example, for Signature
Malleability , C RYSOLreported a defect based on whetherthere is a condition that checks if the input sforECRECOVER
(hash,v,r,s) is less than secp 256k1n/2. However, we found
that some contracts used a non-standard protective pattern
against signature malleability: they set the first bit of sto 0
before using it as the actual input for ECRECOVER (hash,v,r,s) ,
thereby ensuring that sis less than secp 256k1n/2. The second
is the intended behavior of the contracts. For example, for
Insufficient Signature Verification , CRYSOLchecks whether a
transaction with an invalid signature can successfully execute
and make changes to the contract’s storage. However, we
found that some smart contracts do not revert transactions
when encountering invalid signatures. Instead, they intendedly
record the signature verification results on-chain and continue
to execute. In such cases, the transaction with invalid signa-
tures indeed results in the contract’s storage changes, letting
CRYSOLfalsely report an ISV defect.
C. RQ2: Evaluating CRYSOLon the Annotated Dataset
To answer RQ2, we built an annotated dataset and evaluated
the recall of C RYSOLon it. We have published the annotated
dataset and analysis results in our online supplement materi-
als [39].
Recall. The evaluation of the recall requires a dataset
with annotations of true positives and false negatives. To
establish the ground truth, we first randomly sampled a number
of smart contracts from the large-scale dataset and manually
annotated them. Specifically, in line with previous studies [40],
we randomly sampled 96 out of 25,745 contracts to achieve
a confidence interval of 10 and a confidence level of 95%.
Then, we followed the same labeling process as Section V-B to
manually analyze these sampled contracts. In total, we found
34 defects in these 96 contracts. After comparing these manual
labels and the results given by C RYSOL, we found C RYSOL
reports 31 true positives, 1 false positive, and 3 false negatives
for these contracts, which yields a recall of 91.2%.
False Negatives. In detail, C RYSOLfailed to detect one
SSR, one CSR, and one WR defect in 96 contracts. After
inspecting these false negatives, we found that they are mainly
due to the lack of information to properly initialize the fuzzing
context. For example, while some smart contracts contain
signature verification functionalities, such functions are rarely
actually called. Consequently, C RYSOLobserved limited se-
mantic information, hindering its ability to generate valid
test cases for meaningful exploration. However, automatically
generating valid crypto-related transactions with solely off-line
analysis is challenging. In particular, cryptographic operations
could render common techniques such as concolic testing [63]
ineffective, since analyzing them results in complex symbolic
expressions that cannot be handled by the SMT solver [64],
[65]. Addressing these challenges is beyond the scope of this
paper and is left as potential future work.
D. RQ3: Characterizing Cryptographic Defects in the Wild
While demonstrating the effectiveness of C RYSOL, our
large-scale experiment also provided a first close look at
cryptographic defects in real-world smart contracts.TABLE III
THE STATISTIC METRICS OF DEFECTIVE CONTRACTS
Type Prop.(%) LOC(avg) #Func(avg) #ETH(avg) #Txn(avg)
SSR 0.59% 1369.5 33.8 6.0 8,163
CSR 9.85% 1487.1 30.3 9.3 37,958
SF 1.06% 1466.2 28.5 12.8 76,188
SM 7.00% 1238.4 27.6 5.4 64,906
ISV 0.09% 783.9 26.6 0.1 30,669
MR 0.47% 1747.5 41.9 4.2 1,299
MF 0.13% 1585.1 38.9 5.1 1,544
HC 0.35% 1551.5 29.7 0.8 6,868
WR 10.20% 1352.9 30.7 6.3 3,469
Total 22.71% 1396.8 30.3 7.1 22,930
Prevalence and Distribution of Cryptographic Defects.
The first column of Table III presents the proportion of defec-
tive contracts regarding each defect type. Among nine types of
defects, WR, CSR, and SM are the most common, occurring
in 2,626 (10.20%), 2,536 (9.85%), and 1,803 (7.00%) of the
analyzed smart contracts, respectively. While the remaining
six defect types are less common (appearing in about or
less than 1% of contracts), the total number of contracts
affected by them is still considerable. Such results provide
real-world evidence for the findings of Zhang et al. [1],
which suggest a lack of understanding of crypto-specific
secure practices among smart contract developers. Note that a
contract with cryptographic defects indicates deviations from
best practices in cryptographic implementations. While defects
may not directly lead to security issues, they can undermine
the contract’s maintainability and increase the risk of future
security vulnerabilities. For instance, the CSR defect might
not initially cause security problems when only one contract
verifies the authorizer’s signatures. However, if the system
evolves and multiple contracts start using the same authorizer’s
signatures for managing sensitive operations, this defect can
directly enable cross-contract signature replay attacks. A more
detailed analysis of these cases is provided in our online
supplementary materials [39].
Contracts with Cryptographic Defects. To better un-
derstand cryptographic defects in the wild, we analyzed the
average lines of code, number of external/public functions,
Ether balances, and transaction counts of defective contracts,
and presented them in columns three to six of Table III.
The result shows that contracts with MR and MF defects are
generally more complex than others, likely due to the inherent
complexity of Merkle proofs and their applications, such as
reward distribution. Furthermore, contracts with SSR, CSR,
SF, SM, and ISV defects, are more frequently called by real-
world transactions, indicating a broader influence associated
with signature-related defects.
VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Mitigations for Cryptographic Defects
During the evaluation, we found that cryptographic defects
are commonly caused by the direct use of low-level crypto
APIs without necessary protection. Therefore, in addition to
introducing C RYSOL, we provided possible solutions for eachTABLE IV
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS FOR CRYPTOGRAPHIC DEFECTS
Type Possible Solution
SSR Include a monotonic increasing nonce into the signed message
CSR Include the contract address into the signed message
SF Prevent front-run signatures from causing unintended behaviors
SM Add protection against ECDSA signature malleability
ISV Check the return value of ECRECOVER before sensitive operations
MR Check if the Merkle proof has been used before accepting it
MF Prevent front-run Merkle proofs from causing unintended behaviors
HC Use collision-resistant encoding to hash dynamic-length variables
WR Use verifiable random function (VRF) for randomness
type of defect in Table IV. These solutions are summarized
from the standard practices outlined in official Ethereum
improvement proposals (EIPs) [2], [29] and defect remediation
recommendations in security reports [8], [41], [48], [66].
For example, Fig. 9 shows a fixed version of the defective
contract in Fig. 2. It comes from a standard template [67]
provided by OpenZeppelin [68], which employs the above
solutions to prevent SSR, CSR, and SF defects. It integrates
a nonce in the signed message to prevent SSR defects (line
4). It also includes a domain separator containing the contract
address into the signed message to prevent the CSR defects
(line 5). Furthermore, to address SF defects, it replaces the
address to be approved (line 9 in Fig. 9 and line 7 in Fig. 2)
from msg.sender to the spender specified by the signature (line
4). It ensures that even if an attacker front-runs the signature,
he cannot change the intended contract behavior, i.e.,owner
approving spender for a certain value of tokens.
In the supplementary material [39], we provide more real-
world examples to demonstrate how these solutions are applied
to prevent cryptographic defects in practice.
1function permit( address owner, address spender,
uint256 value, uint256 deadline, uint8 v,bytes32 r
,bytes32 s)public virtual {
2 if(block .timestamp > deadline) {
3 revert ERC2612ExpiredSignature(deadline);}
4 bytes32 structHash = keccak256 (abi.encode (
PERMIT_TYPEHASH, owner, spender, value,
_useNonce(owner), deadline));
5 bytes32 hash = _hashTypedDataV4(structHash);
6 address signer = ECDSA.recover(hash, v, r, s);
7 if(signer != owner) {
8 revert ERC2612InvalidSigner(signer, owner);}
9 _approve(owner, spender, value);
10}
Fig. 9. Fixing defects in Fig. 2
B. Threats to Validity and Limitations
Threats to Validity. In the experiment, we employed
random sampling to evaluate the effectiveness of C RYSOL,
which might introduce potential sampling bias. To reduce the
impact, we carefully selected the sampling ratio and size to
achieve a confidence level of 95% and a confidence interval
of 10, which is considered sufficient in previous studies [1],
[9], [12], [40]. Additionally, we manually labeled true/false
positives and negatives of the sampled contracts, which could
potentially lead to labeling mistakes. To mitigate this threat,we employed a double-check process, conducted by authors
with more than three years of research experience in smart
contract security.
Limitations. Despite C RYSOL’s strengths, it might have
the following potential limitations. First, C RYSOLrelies on
pre-defined oracles to detect defects, which might not cover
newly emerging defects beyond the existing nine categories
of cryptographic defects. However, given that these defined
defects are derived from up to security reports from 31 security
teams and involve all common on-chain cryptographic tasks,
we believe C RYSOLeffectively captures common crypto-
graphic defects in existing smart contracts. Its framework also
allows future studies to easily incorporate new defects. Second,
CRYSOLrelies on on-chain information to guide the fuzzing
process. In scenarios such as analyzing undeployed smart
contracts, such information might not be directly accessible.
However, internal testing conducted before contract deploy-
ment, such as acceptance testing on local testnets, typically
covers the main usage patterns of the contracts. Utilizing these
test transactions, C RYSOLcan extract necessary information
and detect defects before deployment.
VII. R ELATED WORK
A. Defining and Detecting Defects in Smart Contracts
Due to the recurring security incidents, a substantial body of
research has been dedicated to defining and detecting defects
in smart contracts [69]–[71]. Luu et al. [55] took the first close
look at smart contract security and proposed Oyente to detect
four types of defects in smart contracts. Chen et al. [9] defined
20 types of contract defects through the analysis of Stack
Exchange posts and real-world smart contracts and proposed a
tool to detect them [72]. Liu et al. [12] studied access control
bugs in smart contracts and detected them by dynamically
role mining and conformance testing. However, they mainly
studied general programming defects such as Reentrancy [10],
rather than crypto-specific defects we focused on. For example,
Liuet al. [12] focused on defective access control policies,
rather than cryptographic defects that compromise the access
control. Ye et al. [61] introduced a fuzzing tool to detect
state inconsistency bugs, which utilizes contextual information
collected from on-chain transactions to guide the fuzzing
process.
While there is a lack of academic research on cryptographic
defects, several defects we defined have attracted attention
from the industry [6], [17]. To our knowledge, the Smart
Contract Weakness Classification (SWC) list [17] has the most
overlap with our categorization, which includes only four of
nine defects we defined. Specifically, SWC-121 [73] doc-
uments weaknesses caused by single-contract/cross-contract
signature replays, involving SSR and CSR defects. SWC-
133 [74] and SWC-117 [47] are analogous to HC and SM
defects, respectively. While the SWC list documents these
defects, it does not provide practical detect patterns or tools
for their detection.B. Cryptographic Defects in Traditional Software
Cryptographic defects have become a common cause of
security issues in software [75]–[78]. Lazar et al. [79] analyzed
269 crypto-related security incidents in the CVE database and
found 83% of them were caused by cryptographic defects
introduced by developers’ non-standard practices. Egele et
al.[76] summarized six common cryptographic defects in
Android applications and proposed a tool to detect them.
They found that 88% of 11,748 Android applications that
use cryptographic functionalities contain at least one defect.
Hazhirpasand et al. [80] found that 99.8% of 489 Github
projects using Java Cryptography Architecture (JCA) APIs
contain at least one defect.
However, these studies mainly focus on cryptographic de-
fects in traditional software. Our results reveal differences
between cryptographic defects in smart contracts and those in
other well-studied software ( i.e., Java applications), in terms of
both definition and detection. Firstly, due to the differences in
common cryptographic tasks, the definition and categorization
of defects in smart contracts differ inherently. For example,
encryption-related defects are the most common in Java, but
smart contracts rarely implement encryption, hence do not
have these defects. Secondly, the detection methods also differ.
In Java, defects often arise from direct API misuses, such
as passing incorrect parameters to JCA APIs [80], and can
be efficiently detected by static analyzers [78]. However,
detecting smart contract defects like SSR involves analyzing
multiple transactions interacting with a stateful contract, mak-
ing existing detection techniques difficult to apply.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we conducted the first study aimed at un-
derstanding and uncovering cryptographic defects in smart
contracts. Through the analysis of 2,406 security reports, we
proposed the first classification of cryptographic defects in
smart contracts. It encompasses nine distinct defect types and
covers a wide range of cryptographic tasks in smart contracts.
To demonstrate these defects in real-world applications, we
presented C RYSOL, a fuzzing-based tool for cryptographic
defect detection. It collects fine-grained crypto-related seman-
tics based on transaction replaying and dynamic taint analysis
and incorporates crypto-specific fuzzing strategies for test case
generation. The evaluation results indicated that C RYSOLcan
effectively detect real-world cryptographic defects, with an
overall precision of 95.4% and a recall of 91.2%. Furthermore,
CRYSOLrevealed that 5,847 (22.7%) out of 25,745 crypto-
related smart contracts contain at least one cryptographic
defect, demonstrating their prevalence in real-world crypto-
graphic practices.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Wan, T. Chen, J. Gao, and Z. Chen, “When
contracts meets crypto: Exploring developers’ struggles with ethereum
cryptographic apis,” in 46th International Conference on Software En-
gineering (ICSE 24) , 2024.
[2] R. Bloemen, L. Logvinov, and J. Evans, “Eip-712: Typed structured
data hashing and signing,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://eips.
ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-712[3] M. Bell ´es-Mu ˜noz, M. Isabel, J. L. Mu ˜noz-Tapia, A. Rubio, and
J. Baylina, “Circom: A circuit description language for building zero-
knowledge applications,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing , 2022.
[4] G. Wood et al. , “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised trans-
action ledger,” Ethereum project yellow paper , vol. 151, no. 2014, pp.
1–32, 2014.
[5] Ethereum, “Merkle proofs for offline data integrity,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/vi/developers/tutorials/
merkle-proofs-for-offline-data-integrity
[6] Z. Bai, “You may pay more than you can imagine,” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/nkbai/defcon26/tree/master/docs
[7] Immunefi, “Hack analysis: Nomad bridge, august
2022,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/immunefi/
hack-analysis-nomad-bridge-august-2022-5aa63d53814a
[8] ——, “Polygon double-spend bugfix review,”
2021. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/immunefi/
polygon-double-spend-bug-fix-postmortem-2m-bounty-5a1db09db7f1
[9] J. Chen, X. Xia, D. Lo, J. Grundy, X. Luo, and T. Chen, “Defining
smart contract defects on ethereum,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 327–345, 2020.
[10] C. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Cao, Z. Chen, B. Chen, and B. Roscoe, “Reguard:
finding reentrancy bugs in smart contracts,” in Proceedings of the
40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion
Proceeedings , 2018, pp. 65–68.
[11] C. F. Torres, J. Sch ¨utte, and R. State, “Osiris: Hunting for integer bugs in
ethereum smart contracts,” in Proceedings of the 34th annual computer
security applications conference , 2018, pp. 664–676.
[12] Y . Liu, Y . Li, S.-W. Lin, and C. Artho, “Finding permission bugs in smart
contracts with role mining,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2022, pp.
716–727.
[13] J. R. Wood and L. E. Wood, “Card sorting: current practices and
beyond,” Journal of Usability Studies , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2008.
[14] C. Nist, “The digital signature standard,” Communications of the ACM ,
vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 36–40, 1992.
[15] B. Preneel, “Cryptographic hash functions,” European Transactions on
Telecommunications , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 431–448, 1994.
[16] Wikipedia, “List of random number generators,” 2023. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List ofrandom number generators
[17] S. Registry, “Smart contract weakness classification and test cases,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://swcregistry.io/
[18] Ethereum, “Opcodes for the evm,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/opcodes
[19] H. Tjaden, L. Matt, D. Piotr, and H. James, “Eip-152: Add blake2
compression function ‘f‘ precompile,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-152
[20] B. Guido, D. Joan, P. Michal, and G. V . Assche, “The keccak
sha-3 submission,” 2011. [Online]. Available: https://keccak.team/files/
Keccak-submission-3.pdf
[21] W. Penard and T. van Werkhoven, “On the secure hash algorithm family,”
Cryptography in context , pp. 1–18, 2008.
[22] H. Dobbertin, A. Bosselaers, and B. Preneel, “Ripemd-160: A strength-
ened version of ripemd,” in Fast Software Encryption: Third Interna-
tional Workshop Cambridge, UK, February 21–23 1996 Proceedings 3 .
Springer, 1996, pp. 71–82.
[23] J.-P. Aumasson, W. Meier, R. C.-W. Phan, L. Henzen, J.-P. Aumasson,
W. Meier, R. C.-W. Phan, and L. Henzen, “Blake2,” The Hash Function
BLAKE , pp. 165–183, 2014.
[24] D. Johnson, A. Menezes, and S. Vanstone, “The elliptic curve digital
signature algorithm (ecdsa),” International Journal of Information Se-
curity , vol. 1, pp. 36–63, 2001.
[25] V . Buterin, “Eip-198: Big integer modular exponentiation,” 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-198
[26] C. Reitwiessner, “Eip-196: Precompiled contracts for addition and
scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve alt bn128,” 2017. [Online].
Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-196
[27] V . Buterin and C. Reitwiessner, “Eip-197: Precompiled contracts for
optimal ate pairing check on the elliptic curve alt bn128,” 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-197
[28] J. Groth, “On the size of pairing-based non-interactive arguments,”
inAdvances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2016: 35th Annual Interna-
tional Conference on the Theory and Applications of CryptographicTechniques, Vienna, Austria, May 8-12, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 35 .
Springer, 2016, pp. 305–326.
[29] M. Lundfal, “Erc-2612: Permit extension for eip-20 signed approvals,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2612
[30] Openzepplin, “Checking signatures on-chain,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/utilities
[31] W. A. Florac et al. ,Software quality measurement: A framework for
counting problems and defects . Carnegie Mellon University, Software
Engineering Institute, 1992.
[32] H. Chen, M. Pendleton, L. Njilla, and S. Xu, “A survey on ethereum sys-
tems security: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and defenses,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–43, 2020.
[33] J. Chen, M. Huang, Z. Lin, P. Zheng, and Z. Zheng, “To healthier
ethereum: A comprehensive and iterative smart contract weakness enu-
meration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10227 , 2023.
[34] Z. Wan, X. Xia, D. Lo, J. Chen, X. Luo, and X. Yang, “Smart
contract security: a practitioners’ perspective,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1410–1422.
[35] Consensys, “A complete suite of products to create and participate in
web3,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://consensys.io/
[36] T. of Bits, “Trails of bits,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.trailofbits.com/
[37] Etherscan, “Smart contracts audit and security,” 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://etherscan.io/directory/Smart Contracts/Smart
Contracts Audit And Security
[38] Medium, “Medium,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/
[39] CrySol, “Online supplement material,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Jiashuo-Zhang/CrySol
[40] S. Yang, J. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Definition and detection of defects in
nft smart contracts,” in 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis , 2023.
[41] Solidified, “Audit report for loopring on may 21st, 2020.” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/solidified-platform/audits/blob/
master/AuditReport-LoopringHebaoWallet[21.05.2020].pdf
[42] Etherscan, “Ethereum pending transactions,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://etherscan.io/txsPending
[43] P. Daian, S. Goldfeder, T. Kell, Y . Li, X. Zhao, I. Bentov, L. Breidenbach,
and A. Juels, “Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized exchanges,
miner extractable value, and consensus instability,” in 2020 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 910–927.
[44] C. Baum, J. Hsin-yu Chiang, B. David, T. K. Frederiksen, and L. Gentile,
“Sok: Mitigation of front-running in decentralized finance,” in Inter-
national Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security .
Springer, 2022, pp. 250–271.
[45] J. Groth and V . Shoup, “On the security of ecdsa with additive key
derivation and presignatures,” in Annual International Conference on
the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques . Springer,
2022, pp. 365–396.
[46] C. Decker and R. Wattenhofer, “Bitcoin transaction malleability and mt-
gox,” in Computer Security-ESORICS 2014: 19th European Symposium
on Research in Computer Security, Wroclaw, Poland, September 7-11,
2014. Proceedings, Part II 19 . Springer, 2014, pp. 313–326.
[47] S. Registry, “Signature malleability,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://swcregistry.io/docs/SWC-117
[48] Verichains, “Verichains public audit report - thetanarena,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/verichains/public-audit-reports/
blob/main/VerichainsPublicAuditReport-ThetanArena-v1.2.pdf
[49] E. C. D. S. Algorithm, “Public key recovery,” 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic Curve Digital
Signature Algorithm#Public key recovery
[50] E. O. Documentation, “Merkle proofs for offline data integrity,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/es/developers/tutorials/
merkle-proofs-for-offline-data-integrity
[51] M. Bellare and P. Rogaway, “Collision-resistant hashing: Towards mak-
ing uowhfs practical,” in Annual International Cryptology Conference .
Springer, 1997, pp. 470–484.
[52] Ethereuk, “Non-standard packed mode,” 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.23/abi-spec.html#
non-standard-packed-mode
[53] J. Choi, D. Kim, S. Kim, G. Grieco, A. Groce, and S. K. Cha,
“Smartian: Enhancing smart contract fuzzing with static and dynamic
data-flow analyses,” in 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 227–239.[54] T. D. Nguyen, L. H. Pham, J. Sun, Y . Lin, and Q. T. Minh, “sfuzz: An
efficient adaptive fuzzer for solidity smart contracts,” in Proceedings of
the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2020, pp. 778–788.
[55] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, and A. Hobor, “Making smart
contracts smarter,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference
on computer and communications security , 2016, pp. 254–269.
[56] Ethereum, “Ethereum archive node,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/archive-nodes
[57] Y . Kim, S. Jeong, K. Jezek, B. Burgstaller, and B. Scholz, “An off-the-
chain execution environment for scalable testing and profiling of smart
contracts,” in 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
21), 2021, pp. 565–579.
[58] C. Shou, S. Tan, and K. Sen, “Ityfuzz: Snapshot-based fuzzer for smart
contract,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2023, pp. 322–333.
[59] S. Documentation, “Contract abi specification,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html
[60] Etherscan, “The ethereum blockchain explorer,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://etherscan.io/
[61] M. Ye, Y . Nan, Z. Zheng, D. Wu, and H. Li, “Detecting state incon-
sistency bugs in dapps via on-chain transaction replay and fuzzing,” in
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , 2023, pp. 298–309.
[62] L. Liu, L. Wei, W. Zhang, M. Wen, Y . Liu, and S.-C. Cheung, “Charac-
terizing transaction-reverting statements in ethereum smart contracts,” in
2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 630–641.
[63] K. Sen, “Concolic testing,” in Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE/ACM
international conference on Automated software engineering , 2007, pp.
571–572.
[64] R. Corin and F. A. Manzano, “Efficient symbolic execution for analysing
cryptographic protocol implementations,” in International Symposium on
Engineering Secure Software and Systems . Springer, 2011, pp. 58–72.
[65] M. Vanhoef and F. Piessens, “Symbolic execution of security protocol
implementations: Handling cryptographic primitives,” in 12th USENIX
Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 18) , 2018.
[66] Quantstamp, “Pine audit report,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//certificate.quantstamp.com/full/pine.pdf
[67] Openzepplin, “Implementation of the erc-20 permit extension,”
2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/
openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC20/extensions/
ERC20Permit.sol
[68] ——, “The standard for secure blockchain applications,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.openzeppelin.com/
[69] D. He, Z. Deng, Y . Zhang, S. Chan, Y . Cheng, and N. Guizani,
“Smart contract vulnerability analysis and security audit,” IEEE Net-
work , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 276–282, 2020.
[70] Z. Wang, H. Jin, W. Dai, K.-K. R. Choo, and D. Zou, “Ethereum smart
contract security research: survey and future research opportunities,”
Frontiers of Computer Science , vol. 15, pp. 1–18, 2021.
[71] N. Ivanov, C. Li, Q. Yan, Z. Sun, Z. Cao, and X. Luo, “Security
threat mitigation for smart contracts: A comprehensive survey,” ACM
Computing Surveys , 2023.
[72] J. Chen, X. Xia, D. Lo, J. Grundy, X. Luo, and T. Chen, “Defectchecker:
Automated smart contract defect detection by analyzing evm bytecode,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 2189–
2207, 2021.
[73] S. Registry, “Missing protection against signature replay attacks,” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://swcregistry.io/docs/SWC-121
[74] SWC, “Hash collisions with multiple variable length arguments,” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://swcregistry.io/docs/SWC-133
[75] A. S. Ami, N. Cooper, K. Kafle, K. Moran, D. Poshyvanyk, and
A. Nadkarni, “Why crypto-detectors fail: A systematic evaluation of
cryptographic misuse detection techniques,” in 2022 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 614–631.
[76] M. Egele, D. Brumley, Y . Fratantonio, and C. Kruegel, “An empirical
study of cryptographic misuse in android applications,” in Proceedings
of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer & Communications
Security , 2013, pp. 73–84.
[77] A.-K. Wickert, L. Baumg ¨artner, F. Breitfelder, and M. Mezini, “Python
crypto misuses in the wild,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Mea-
surement (ESEM) , 2021, pp. 1–6.[78] Y . Zhang, M. M. A. Kabir, Y . Xiao, D. Yao, and N. Meng, “Automatic
detection of java cryptographic api misuses: Are we there yet?” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 288–303, 2022.
[79] D. Lazar, H. Chen, X. Wang, and N. Zeldovich, “Why does crypto-
graphic software fail? a case study and open problems,” in Proceedings
of 5th Asia-Pacific Workshop on Systems , 2014, pp. 1–7.
[80] M. Hazhirpasand, M. Ghafari, and O. Nierstrasz, “Java cryptography
uses in the wild,” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(ESEM) , 2020, pp. 1–6.