QDiff: Differential Testing of
Quantum Software Stacks
Jiyuan Wang, Qian Zhang, Guoqing Harry Xu, Miryung Kim
University of California, Los Angeles
CA, United States
fwangjiyuan, zhangqian, harryxu, miryungg@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract —Over the past few years, several quantum software
stacks (QSS) have been developed in response to rapid hardware
advances in quantum computing. A QSS includes a quantum
programming language, an optimizing compiler that translates a
quantum algorithm written in a high-level language into quantum
gate instructions, a quantum simulator that emulates these
instructions on a classical device, and a software controller that
sends analog signals to a very expensive quantum hardware based
on quantum circuits. In comparison to traditional compilers
and architecture simulators, QSSes are difﬁcult to tests due to
the probabilistic nature of results, the lack of clear hardware
speciﬁcations, and quantum programming complexity.
This work devises a novel differential testing approach for
QSSes, named QD IFF with three major innovations: (1) We
generate input programs to be tested via semantics-preserving,
source to source transformation to explore program variants.
(2) We speed up differential testing by ﬁltering out quantum
circuits that are not worthwhile to execute on quantum hardware
by analyzing static characteristics such as a circuit depth, 2-
gate operations, gate error rates, and T1 relaxation time. (3)
We design an extensible equivalence checking mechanism via
distribution comparison functions such as Kolmogorov–Smirnov
test and cross entropy.
We evaluate QD IFFwith three widely-used open source QSSes:
Qiskit from IBM, Cirq from Google, and Pyquil from Rigetti. By
running QD IFFon both real hardware and quantum simulators,
we found several critical bugs revealing potential instabilities
in these platforms. QD IFF’s source transformation is effective
in producing semantically equivalent yet not-identical circuits
(i.e., 34% of trials), and its ﬁltering mechanism can speed up
differential testing by 66%.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Quantum computing is an emerging computing paradigm
that promises unique advantages over classical computing.
However, quantum programming is challenging. Quantum
computation logic is expressed in qubits and quantum gates,
and the states of quantum registers are measured probabilis-
tically. Due to the physical properties of quantum mechanics,
qubits and quantum gates are fundamentally different from
classical bits and gate logic. For example, quantum indeter-
minacy dictates that the same quantum program can produce
different results in different executions.
To this end, many quantum software stacks such as Google’s
Cirq [1], Rigetti’s Pyquil [2], and IBM’s Qiskit [3] have
been developed to provide user-friendly high-level languages
for quantum programming, abstracting away the underlying
physical and mathematical intricacies.A quantum software track (QSS) includes (1) APIs and
language constructs to express quantum algorithms, (2) a
compiler that transforms and optimizes a given input quantum
algorithm at the circuit level, and (3) a backend executor that
either simulates the resulting gates on classical devices or
executes directly on quantum hardware. Consider Qiskit [4],
which consists of four components: QiskitTerra that com-
piles and optimizes programs, QiskitAer that supports high-
performance noisy simulations, QiskitIgnis for error cor-
rection, noise characterization, and hardware veriﬁcation, and
QiskitAqua that helps a developer to express a quantum
algorithm or an application. Other QSSes [2] such as Pyquil
have a similar set of components—e.g., Pyquil uses quilc as
a compiler and qvm as a quantum simulator.
As with any compiler framework, a QSS could be error-
prone. Developers and users often report bugs on popular
QSSes [3], [5], [6], and a simple search on StackOverﬂow
with the keyword “quantum error” would bring up over 500
posts on various QSS components, ranging from compiler
settings, simulation, and the actual hardware [7]. These posts
often reveal deeper confusion that developers face due to the
inherent probabilistic nature of quantum measurements—if a
program produces a result that looks different from what is
expected, is it due to a bug or the non-determinism inherent
in quantum programs? Is there divergence beyond expected
noise coming from an input program, a compiler, a simulator,
and/or hardware?
Challenges. There are three technical challenges that make it
difﬁcult to test QSSes.
The ﬁrst challenge is how to generate semantically equiva-
lent programs for testing quantum compilers [8], [9]. Though
existing compiler testing techniques generate equivalent pro-
grams by manipulating code in dead regions or unexecuted
branches [10], a quantum program usually does not have many
unexecuted branches. Therefore, we must design a technique
that can produce a large number of semantically-equivalent
variant circuits that may induce divergence on hardware.
The second challenge is that compilers are not the only
source of bugs in a QSS. For example, in a line of recent
work [11], [12] on veriﬁed quantum compilers, compilers are
guaranteed to be correct with respect to their optimization
and transformation rules. However, the overall correctness of
6922021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
DOI 10.1109/ASE51524.2021.000672021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) | 978-1-6654-0337-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ASE51524.2021.9678792
978-1-6654-0337-5/21/$31.00  ©2021  IEEE
QSSes goes beyond compiler optimization rules. We must
reason about subsequent execution on quantum simulators and
hardware, which are often the major sources of instabilities.
In fact, Rigetti or Cirq’s Github histories indicate that bugs
may come from its various backends due to improper initial-
ization [13], problematic APIs [14], or inappropriate synthesis
options [15].
The third challenge is how to interpret measurements from
quantum simulators or hardware, since quantum measurement
operations by deﬁnition are probabilistic in nature due to
quantum indeterminacy [11]. Therefore, when we execute
logically equivalent program variants, comparing their mea-
surement results is not straightforward, as we must take into
account inherent noise (e.g., hardware gate errors, readout
errors, and decoherence errors) and must determine whether
the observed divergence is signiﬁcant enough to be considered
as a meaningful instability.
This Work. QD IFFis a novel differential testing technique for
QSSes. QD IFFtakes as input a seed quantum program and
reports potential bugs with a pair of witness programs (i.e.,
logically equivalent programs that are supposed to produce
identical behavior) but triggers divergent behavior on the target
QSS (i.e., meaningful instabilities beyond expected noise).
QD IFFovercomes the aforementioned challenges with three
technical innovations below.
First, QD IFFgenerates logically equivalent quantum pro-
grams using a set of equivalent gate transformation rules.
This is based on the insight that each quantum gate can be
represented mathematically as a unitary matrix; a sequence
of gates essentially corresponds to the multiplication of their
unitary matrices, which also yields a unitary matrix. As such,
one sequence of gates is semantically equivalent to another
if the two sequences yield the same unitary matrix. We
leverage seven gate transformation rules to generate different
gate sequences that are guaranteed to yield the same unitary
matrix. These sequences essentially deﬁne logically equivalent
program variants that are supposed to yield identical behavior.
Such variants are then executed on a simulator or hardware
and their measurements are compared.
Second, with multiple logically equivalent variants gener-
ated after optimization, QD IFFselects a subset of those circuits
that are worthwhile to run on a noisy simulator or quantum
hardware. This selection and ﬁltering process is crucial for
both speedup and potential cost saving, because there are
only a very few quantum hardware devices in the world, and
they are extremely expensive resources—D-wave’s quantum
computer is reported to be $15 million in 2017 [16]. IBM
Qiskit allows public hardware access up to 5 qubits, but
a higher number of qubit usage is strictly restricted. Noisy
simulators are extremely compute-intensive to run on classical
computers as well, taking on more than 4 minutes to do
3000 measurements on a simple four-qubit circuit. This noisy
simulation cost becomes extremely unmanageable with the
higher number of qubits.
To achieve speed up, QD IFFanalyzes the static characteristicof logically equivalent circuits such as the circuit depth (i.e.,
moments), the number of 2-qubit gates, the known error
rates of each gate kind, and T1 relaxation time for quantum
hardware. QD IFFobviates the need of executing certain circuits
on hardware or noisy simulators, if the logically equivalent
circuits are incapable of revealing meaningful instabilities in
QSS.
Third, in order to compare executions of logically equivalent
circuits, QD IFFﬁrst identiﬁes how many measurements are
needed for reliable comparison. Based on the literature of
distribution sampling, QD IFFadapts closeness testing in L1
norm [17] to estimate the required number of measurements
given conﬁdence level p= 2=3. Using either a noisy simulator
or directly on hardware, it then performs the required number
of measurements. To compare two sets of measurements,
QD IFFuses distribution comparison methods. Two methods
based on Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test [18], [19] and
Cross Entropy [20], [21] are currently supported. This com-
parison method is easily extensible in QD IFF, as a user can
deﬁne a new statistical comparison method [17] in QD IFF.
Results. We evaluated QD IFFwith the latest versions of three
widely-used QSSes: Qiskit, Cirq, and Pyquil. With six seed
quantum algorithms, QD IFFgenerates 730 variant algorithms
through semantics-modifying mutations. Starting from the
generated algorithms, it generates a total of 14799 program
variants using semantics-preserving source transformations.
This generation process took QD IFF14 hours. With the ﬁltering
mechanism, QD IFFreduces its testing time by 66%. Using
QD IFF, we determined total 6 sources of instabilities. These
include 4 software crash bugs in Pyquil and Cirq simulation,
and 2 potential root causes that may explain 25 out of 29 cases
of divergence beyond expected noise on IBM hardware.
The main contributions of this work include:
We present the ﬁrst differential testing framework for
QSSes. This framework is integrated with three widely
used QSSes from Google, IBM, and Rigetti.
We embody three technical innovations in QD IFFto make
differential testing fast and to increase the chance of
ﬁnding meaningful instabilities beyond the usual expected
noise: (1) auto-generation of logically equivalent variants,
(2) auto-ﬁltering of circuits that are worthwhile to run
on hardware (or a noisy simulator), and (3) pluggable
methods of comparing measurements in terms of statis-
tical distribution. QD IFFobviates the need of invoking
quantum back-ends by 66%. Using QD IFF, we determined
6 sources of instabilities in three widely used QSSes:
4 crash bugs and 2 root causes for divergences beyond
expected noise on IBM hardware.
We provide access to the artifacts of QD IFF at
https://github.com/wjy99-c/QDiff.
II. B ACKGROUND
Quantum Computing. Quantum computing emerges as a
promising technology for many domains where quantum com-
puters have been demonstrated to outperform classical com-
693TABLE I: Different layers that bugs appear
Layers Percentage Example
Compiler (optimizations & settings) 53.9% MergeInteractions() returns different results for the same circuit [22].
Backend (simulators & hardware) 19.7% Simulators change a global random state on Cirq [23].
API and quantum gate 11.8% PhasedXPowGate raised to a symbol power fails the is parameterized protocol [24].
puters by a large margin. For example, Grover’s algorithm [25]
can ﬁnd a given item in an unsorted database with ap
N-times
speedup when running on a quantum computer, compared
to a classical computer. Similar to programs executed on
heterogeneous devices such as FPGAs, a quantum application
is comprised of host code that runs on CPU and quantum code
that runs on quantum hardware. Generally, quantum computers
work as accelerators to execute the compute-intensive parts of
the original application. For example, the Shor algorithm [26]
can achieve an exponential speedup by decomposing integer
factorization into a reduction to be executed on a classical
computer and an order ﬁnding problem to be executed on
quantum hardware.
Quantum Software Stack. Currently, three most widely used
QSSes are Qiskit, Cirq, and Pyquil [27].
Qiskit [3] is an open-source framework developed by
IBM. Qiskit provides a software stack that is easy
to use quantum computers and facilitates quantum
computing research. Qiskit consists of Qiskit Terra
(compiler), Qiskit Aer (several quantum simulators),
Qiskit Ignis (which supports error correction and
noise characterization), and Qiskit Aqua (APIs to help
developers write applications).
Cirq [28] is an open-source Python framework from
Google. It enables a developer to create and simulate
Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) circuits. Cirq
consists of an optimization component to compile and
transform circuits, a simulator component for emulat-
ing quantum computation on classical devices, and other
development libraries for application development.
Pyquil [29] is an open-source Python framework devel-
oped by Rigetti. It builds on Quil, an open quantum
instruction language for near-term quantum computers,
and uses a combined classical/quantum memory model.
PyQuil is the main component of Forest, the overarching
platform for Rigetti’s quantum software. Pyquil consists
of:quilc (compiler), qvm(quantum virtual machine with
several kinds of simulators), and pyquil (a library to
help users write and run quantum applications).
All three QSSes are similar to one another in that each
includes a quantum programming language, an optimizing
compiler that outputs quantum gate instructions, a quantum
simulator that emulates these instructions on a classical device,
and a software controller that executes gate instructions on
quantum hardware.
Quantum Bit. Aquantum bit, or qubit for short, is the basic
unit of quantum computation. Unlike a classical bit that is
either 0or1, a qubit’s state is a probabilistic function of j0iandj1i, represented as:
j i=j0i+j1i;wherejj2+jj2= 1 (1)
The state of a qubit is unknown until a measurement is
completed, resulting in jj2to be 0 andjj2to be 1. Naturally,
the sum of the probabilities (i.e., the modulus squared of
amplitudes) is 1:jj2+jj2= 1.
Quantum Gate. Classical computers use logic gates to trans-
form signals from input wires. For example, a NOT gate, also
known as an inverter, takes a single signal as input and outputs
the opposite value. The quantum gate analogous to NOT is an
Xgate, which transforms a qubit j0i+j1itoj0i+j1i.
AnXgate has the following matrix-based representation:
X=0 1
1 0
(2)
Using a vector to represent the quantum state j0i+j1i,
applying an Xgate has the following effect:
X

=

=0
0
(3)
Other commonly-used quantum gates include H,T,CNOT ,
Z,CZ,S,U1, and U3; a full explanation of these gates is
elsewhere [30].
Since all quantum gates can be represented as matrices,
we can transform a sequence of gates to another logically
equivalent sequence without altering its outcome, as long as
the multiplication of the matrices for gates in each sequence
produces the same result. As an example, a SWAP gate, a two-
qubit gate that swaps the two qubits’ states, is semantically
equivalent to a sequence of three CNOT gates.
SWAP(q 1; q2) =CNOT(q 1; q2)CNOT(q 2; q1)CNOT(q 1; q2)(4)
This observation forms the foundation of QD IFF’s program
variant generation procedure, detailed in Section IV.
Quantum Circuit. A quantum circuit consists of a set of
connected quantum gates. Since quantum gates can be rep-
resented as unitary matrices, a quantum circuit is essentially
the multiplication of the matrices.
Figure 1a shows a program in IBM’s Qiskit [3]. It ﬁrst
registers two qubits and initializes them to j0i. Next, an H
gate sets the ﬁrst qubit into state1p
2j0i+1p
2j1iand an Xgate
ﬂips the second qubit from j0itoj1i. Finally, a measurement is
performed and stored in a classical array. The function returns
this circuit as a function-type value.
Figure 1b shows host code that calls this quantum circuit.
Users can execute this circuit on different backends such as
real quantum hardware or simulators. The circuit is executed
onqasm simulator for a thousand times (shots=1000). Since
the ﬁrst qubit state is1p
2j0i+1p
2j1iand the second qubit state
6941def make_circuit() -> QuantumCircuit:
2 qubit = QuantumRegister(2,"qc")
3 bit = ClassicalRegister(2, "qm")
4 prog = QuantumCircuit(qubit, bit)
5 prog.h(qubit[0])
6 prog.x(qubit[1])
7 for iin range(2):
8 prog.measure(qubit[i], bit[i])
9 return prog
(a)A quantum circuit with an Hgate and an Xgate.
1 prog = make_circuit()
2 backend = BasicAer.get_backend(’qasm_simulator’)
3 info = execute(prog, backend=backend, shots=1000).
result().get_counts()
(b)The host code using the circuit in (a).
Fig. 1: An example Qiskit program.
isj1i, each run produces a result of either j01i orj11i with
the equal probability of 0:5 = (1p
2)2.
T1 relaxation time. In quantum computing, a qubit can retain
data for only a limited amount of time, referred to as relaxation
Time because a qubit in a high-energy state (state j1i) naturally
decays to a low-energy state (state j0i). The time span for this
decay is referred to as T1 Relaxation Time. For a physical
circuit, its measurement results are unreliable if its execution
time is longer than T1.
III. M OTIVATION
To understand real-world QSS bugs, we collected 76 latest
issues reported on Github Pyquil, Cirq, and Qiskit. After
excluding 11 issues related to installation and other tools, we
categorized the remaining 65 issues by the layer where each
issue appears: compilers, backends, and APIs.
Table I summarizes the percentage of the correspond-
ing layer and a representative example. Most bugs appear
at the compiler level—compiler optimizations and settings.
For example, Cirq produces incorrect circuits when using
MergeInteractions() [22]. The second most common
bugs appear at the backend level—simulators and hardware
execution, e.g., the initial state is unexpectedly modiﬁed by
the Cirq simulator in [23]. The other issues are with respect
to the API implementation of high-level gates. For example,
in Cirq, when cirq.PhasedXPowGate is invoked with an
input argument exponent, invoking is_parameterized on
the resulting gate should return true but returns false due
to a bug in cirq.PhasedXPowGate.
The aforementioned bugs are hard to ﬁnd due to quantum
indeterminacy. The following excerpt illustrates a concrete
example of how one google tutorial user is confused whether
a problem is a bug or due to inherent non-determinism.
Cirq’s VQE (Variational-Quantum-Eigensolver) tutorial had a
mistake—the orders of mix layer and cost layer were described
in a wrong order. The tutorial user D(shortened) posted a
question on StackExchange [31] with the embedded code from
Cirq’s VQE tutorial. A Cirq developer C(shortened) noticed
that “The strange thing is the example output shows the output
probabilities varying with gamma (the CZ parameter)”, where
Fig. 2: QD IFFOverview
gamma should not have any effect on the measurement re-
sults.” Dactually believed the disagreement is due to quantum
indeterminacy, until Cexplicitly labeled it as a compiler bug.
Key Takeway. This study of Github issues shows that QSS
bugs are not just traditional compiler bugs and may come
from various sources at different layers: API implementation
of high-level gates, backend simulators, or hardware execution.
This problem of detecting QSS bugs is further complicated by
the probabilistic and noisy nature of quantum indeterminacy.
IV. QD IFFAPPROACH
QD IFFcontains three novel components to detect meaning-
ful instabilities in QSSes. Figure 2 shows program variant
generation using equivalent gate transformation and mutations
(Section IV-A); backend exploration leveraging selective in-
vocation of quantum simulators and hardware (Section IV-B);
and equivalence checking via distribution comparison (Sec-
tion IV-C). Starting from a seed program, QD IFFiterates these
steps until a time limit is reached. Our key insight is that
(1) we can generate semantically equivalent but syntactically
different circuits, and (2) we can speed-up the differential
execution process by ﬁltering out certain circuits, because they
will deﬁnitely lead to unreliable divergence and thus are not
worthwhile to run on hardware or noisy simulators.
A. Program Variant Generation
Prior work [10] ﬁnds that testing compilers with equivalent
programs is highly effective. QD IFFadapts this idea to the
domain of quantum compiler testing by creating logically
equivalent gate sequences. It then checks whether the cor-
responding equivalent circuits produce the same results (in
this case, a similar statistical distribution with some noise)
on quantum simulators or hardware. For this purpose, QD IFF
generates program variants by repeating the two-fold process
ofapplying semantics-preserving gate transformation to each
generated program in each iteration and applying semantics-
modifying mutations to diversify the pool of input programs
in the next iteration.
Equivalent Gate Transformation (EGT). As discussed earlier
695TABLE II: Explored Compiler Conﬁgurations
Framew
ork Options Description
BasicSwap,
LookaheadSwap, Specify
how swaps should be inserted to make the circuit compatible with the
StochasticSwap coupling
map. QD IFFchecks if BasicSwap has the most SWAP gates.
Qiskit Optimization_level=0,1,2,3 Specify
the optimization level—the higher the level, the simpler the resulting circuit.
Q
DIFFchecks if a higher-level optimization generates a more complex circuit.
DropEmptyMoment() Remo
ve empty moments from a circuit. QD IFFchecks empty moments in the circuit.
Cirq MergeInteractions() Mer
ge adjacent gates; QD IFFchecks the applicability of G6 in Table III.
PointOptimizationSummary() User
-deﬁned optimization.
PRAGMA
INITIAL_REWIRING f"NAIVE" Change
the optimization/mapping style
,"GREEDY",
"PARITIAL"g
Pyquil PRAGMA fCOMMUTING_BLOCKS Change
the optimization style for certain part of the code.
,PERSERVE_BLOCKSg
TABLE III: QD IFFgenerates program variants based on EGT
rules G1-G7.
Rule
ID Original Construct Equivalent Construct
CNO
T(q1,q2)
G1 SWAP(q 1,q2) CNOT(q 2,q1)
CNOT(q 1,q2)
G2
H(q1)H(q 1) Merged to Identity Matrix
G3
X(q1) H(q1)S(q 1)S(q 1)H(q 1)
G4
Z(q1) S(q1)S(q 1)
G5
CZ(q 1,q2) H(q2)CNOT(q 1.q2)H(q 2)
G6
CZ(q 1,q2)CZ(q 1,q2) Merged to Identity Matrix
G7
CCNOT(q 1,q2,q3) 6 CNOT gates
with 9 one-qubit gates
in Section II, one quantum gate sequence is semantically
equivalent to another sequence, if they both yield the same
unitary-matrix representation. In fact, complex quantum gates,
without altering the outcome, can be described as a combi-
nation of basic quantum gates. QD IFFleverages seven gate
transformation rules to map complex gates into sequences of
simple gates, as shown in Table III. In G7, a Toffoli gate
(i.e.CCNOT ) can be replaced with 6 CNOT gates and 9
one-qubit gates. To explore the alternative representation of a
given gate sequence, QD IFFﬁnds the applicable transformation
rules by matching the gate names. For an example circuit
S(q2)Z(q1),QD IFFidentiﬁes the complex gate Z(q1), applies
rule G2 to construct gate Z(q1)as a sequence S(q1)S(q1),
and generates a ﬁnal variant S(q2)S(q1)S(q1). As opposed
to an optimizing compiler that applies transformation rules to
reduce the number gates or the total gate depth [3], [11], QD IFF
aims to diversify the pool of input programs through source
to source transformation.
Seed Diversiﬁcation via Mutations. While generation of
logically equivalent programs can ﬁnd bugs through observing
disagreements, they are unlikely to exercise various program-
ming constructs. To diversify the seed input programs and
to explore hard-to-reach corner cases in quantum compilers.
QD IFFborrows the idea of mutation-based fuzz testing [32]
and designs a set of semantics-modifying mutations.
After generating multiple logically equivalent programs
in each iteration, QD IFFcalculates the average distributions
among the equivalent programs as the reference distribution,
then picks the variant that leads to the largest comparison
distance (e.g., K-S distance) from the reference distribution,
and randomly applies one of the following four mutation
operations to the variant in order to generate a new algorithm.This is based on the insight that the program with the most
deviating results has a higher chance to expose unseen behav-
ior [10], [33]. Please note that these mutations do not preserve
semantics; instead, the goal of mutations is to resume the next
round of differential testing with a different algorithm. We start
with four mutation operators listed below, used in quantum
mutant generation [34], [35].
Gate Insertion/ Deletion (M1) inserts/deletes random
quantum gates: e.g., insert prog.x(qubit[1]) ;
Gate Change (M2) changes a quantum gate to another
gate: e.g., from prog.x(qubit[1]) toprog.h(qubit[1]) ;
Gate Swap (M3) swaps two quantum gates;
Qubit Change (M4) changes the qubits: e.g., from
prog.x(qubit[1]) toprog.x(qubit[2]) .
B. Quantum Simulation and Hardware Execution
Compiler Conﬁguration Exploration. QD IFFautomatically
explores different compiler conﬁgurations. In Qiskit, com-
piler settings can be speciﬁed by the arguments passed to
the backends e.g., users can apply optimization level=1
to collapse adjacent gates via light-weight optimization,
while optimization level=3 does heavy-weight optimiza-
tion to resynthesize two-qubit blocks in the circuit. In
Cirq, compiler settings must be speciﬁed using API invo-
cations: e.g., users can write their own optimization with
PointOptimizationSummary(). In Pyquil, compiler set-
tings are speciﬁed using inlined pragmas similar to how
FPGA developers specify high level synthesis options using
pre-processor directives, e.g., a region denoted by PRAGMA
PRESERVE_BLOCK will not be modiﬁed by a compiler. There
are in total 2, 3, and 2 conﬁguration types for Qiskit, Cirq,
and Pyquil respectively, as shown in Table II. When executing
a variant with a speciﬁc compiler setting, QD IFFrecords both
thrown exceptions and program timeouts.
Backend Exploration. Backend exploration runs the same
input program on different backends, shown in Table V. In
terms of real hardware execution, QD IFFuses the free version
of IBM hardware only, because other platforms are currently
proprietary. QD IFFis extensible by specifying a different
backend conﬁguration. Noisy simulators and state-vector sim-
ulators are both included in QD IFF’s backend exploration.
Filtering and Selective Invocation on Hardware. QD IFF
is focused on isolating software defects, not hardware de-
fects. Because hardware imperfections such as decoherence
696TABLE IV: IBM quantum hardware’s gate-level error rates, gate time, and T1 relaxation (decoherence) time.
IBM quantum computer T1 time /s Gate time /ns 2-qubit gate error rate tm2qubit
ibm santiago 155.19 408.89 1.79% 379 5
ibm yorktown 56.81 476.44 2.03% 119 5
ibm 16melbourne 53.37 928.71 3.29% 57 3
ibm belem 74.45 552.89 1.07% 135 11
ibem quito 85.35 353.78 1.03% 241 11
TABLE V: Explored Backends (Simulators and Hardware)
Framew
ork Back
ends Description
statevector_simulator noiseless
sim.
qasm_simulator noiseless
sim.
Qiskit FakeSantiago
FakeYorktown noisy
sim.
FakeMelbourne
ibmq_santiago
ibmq_yorktown quantum
hardware
ibmq_16_melbourne
Simulator noiseless/noisy
sim.
Cirq DensityMatrixSimulator noiseless/noisy
sim.
Aspen-x-yQ-noisy-qvm noisy
sim.
Pyquil WavefunctionSimulator noiseless
sim.
Aspen-x-yQ-qvm,Pyqvm noiseless
sim.
is present, it is important to ﬁlter out circuits that would
invoke errors due to the inherent hardware limitations. With the
above observations, QD IFFﬁlters out unnecessary circuits in
two steps. First, QD IFFexamines the ﬁnal gate sequences after
all compiler optimizations and logical-to-physical mappings,
ﬁltering out exactly identical physical circuits by moment-by-
moment comparison. Second, QD IFFanalyzes the static char-
acteristics of circuits to remove those that certainly produce
unreliable executions (i.e. results dominated by hardware-level
noise such as gate errors and relaxation errors and hence
unreliable), while leaving those that may produce meaningful
divergences using Deﬁnition IV .1.
As discussed in Section II, for a physical circuit, its mea-
surement results are unreliable if its execution time is longer
than T1, implying that the number of circuit moments nm
(the depth of the circuit) in any circuit should not exceed
a threshold tm. Moreover, different kinds of quantum gates
have different inherent error rates. For publicly available IBM
quantum computers, error rates of single-qubit operations are
in the order of 10 3, while error rates of 2-qubit gate oper-
ations are in the order of 10 2. A typical quantum program
contains a signiﬁcant number of 2-qubit gates, whose errors
contribute the most to the overall error rate because such
gates are more error-prone than 1-qubit gates [36]. Taking
this into consideration, d2qubit (the difference in the number
of 2-qubit gates from the original circuit) should not exceed
an application-speciﬁc threshold 2qubit to avoid unreliable
results. Leveraging the above observations, we deﬁne the
worthiness of invoking a quantum circuit.
Deﬁnition IV .1. A circuit is worth invoking on quantum hard-
ware or noisy simulator, if it satisﬁes the following condition:
nm<tmandd2qubit< 2qubit .
The threshold tmis determined empirically by two factors:
(1) IBM computers’ average T1time, and (2) the average
gate execution time for all gates, as listed in Table IV. QD IFFTABLE VI: Cumulative probability of KS test
Measur
ement State Cumulati
ve State
Distrib
ution ‘0’ ‘1’ Pr
obability ‘0’ ‘1’
A1 464
546 EDF A1 0.464
1
A2 500 500 EDF A2 0.500
1
computestmby dividing T1by the average gate execution
time. It then ﬁlters out those whose nmis greater than tm. Take
ibm_16_melbourne as an example: with T1= 53.57s and
the average gate execution time = 928ns ,tmis 53570/928=57.
A circuit whose total number of moments is above 57 is
ﬁltered out for ibm_16_melbourne.
The threshold 2qubit is determined in the following way.
Suppose a user is willing to tolerate an addition error rate of t
for the entire quantum program’s ﬁnal measurements (with 0.1
as the default). Using t, we compute 2qubit as the maximum
number of 2-qubit gates to be added or deleted from the
number of 2-qubit gates in the original circuit. Suppose that
CNOT’s error rate for this IBM computer is 1.07%. If CNOT
is usedd2qubit times in a row additionally, its updated error
rate would be by 1 (1 e)(1 0:0107)d2qubit , whereeis
the original error rate. Since both eand(1 0:0107)d2qubit
are relatively small, we can regard the error rate change as
1 (1 0:0107)d2qubit . Thereforejd2qubit 2qubitjshould be
less thanlog(1 0:0107) (1 t).2qubit is 11 whentis 0.1. The
above thresholds and ﬁltering condition in Deﬁnition IV .1 are
customizable according to hardware’s published error rates,
supported gate types, and T1 relaxation time.
C. Equivalence Checking via Distribution Comparison
Nondeterministic nature of quantum programs makes it
difﬁcult for equivalence checking. Developers usually reason
about the output of a quantum circuit by executing it multiple
times to obtain a distribution. While numerous distribution
comparison methods are well studied in statistics, one conse-
quent yet over-looked question for quantum computing is that
how many measurements do we need for a reliable evaluation
to ensure the relative error between two distributions is
within a given threshold twith conﬁdence p? We design a
novel equivalence checking component, which consists of: (1)
a particular distribution comparison method C, and (2) an
estimation of the required number of measurements for C,
given a threshold tand conﬁdence p.QD IFFis equipped with
K-S test and Cross Entropy, but is also extensible to other
comparison methods by providing a new comparison-speciﬁc
measurement estimation.
K-S Test [18] has been used to check the equality of dis-
tributions by measuring the largest vertical distance between
empirical distribution functions (EDFs) in two steps. First,
6971backend = BasicAer.get_backend(’qasm_simulator’)
2info = execute(prog, backend=backend, shots=1024).result
().get_counts()
Result:f‘0’: 475, ‘1’: 549g
(a)Quantum simulator.
1backend = BasicAer.get_backend(’statevector_simulator’)
2info = execute(prog, backend=backend).result().
get_statevector()
Result: [0.70710678+0.j, 0.70710678+0.j]
(b)State-Vector simulator.
Fig. 3: A quantum circuit in Qiskit with two backends:
quantum simulator and state-vector simulator.
it creates the EDF for a given distribution by calculating
the cumulative probability of different outcome states with
respect to the total number of samples. In Table VI, A1and
A2are two state distributions for 1000 samples. A1has 464
samples in state ‘0’ while 546 samples in state ‘1’. Thus, the
consequent EDF A1indicates that the cumulative probability
ofA1samples in state ‘0’ and state ‘1’ are 0.464 (464/1000)
and 1 ((464+546)/1000) respectively. Next, K-S test calculates
the largest distance Dof EDFs for each state, and uses such
distance to quantify the difference of the original distributions
under comparison. In Table VI, the largest distance is 0.06
(j0:464 0:500j) for state ‘0’.
QD IFFevaluates this K-S distance with a user-deﬁned
thresholdt. If the K-S distance of two results is less than
t,QD IFFregards them as similar results. QD IFFprovides a
statistical guarantee on this comparison by estimating the
required number of samples. For two distributions d1andd2
overmoutcome states, prior work [17] theoretically ensures
that, withn= 
(m1=2t 2)samples, a sample-optimal tester
can check if the relative error of L1distance is within a
thresholdtwhen using a default conﬁdence level of p=2/3.
QD IFFestimatesnusing Equation 5. This estimated number is
directly applicable to QD IFFbecause K-S distance is bounded
byL1distance [18]. In other words, Equation 5 calculates
the number of measurements required, parameterized with
respect top. We empirically set pas 2/3, as it is a commonly
used default in quantum volume measurement [37], [38],
bioinformatics, and other statistics comparison.
n=A1p1 pm1=2t 2(5)
whereAis a platform-related constant and mis the number
of qubit states. In Figure 3, 2828 measurement samples are
needed, when we empirically set t= 0:1,p= 2=3, and A=
12for Qiskit. In our evaluation, we empirically measure the
constantAfor each platform by repeatedly running the same
programs and compare the results.
Cross Entropy measures the difference between distributions
via the total entropy. It represents the average number of bits
needed to encode data coming from an underlying distribution
q1when we use an estimated target distribution q2.H(q1;q2) = maxX
x=0q1(x) logq2(x) (6)
Prior work ensures that, with n= 
(m2=3t 4=3)samples,
the expected cross entropy of two similar distributions over
moutcome states can be bounded with t[17], [39].tis the
difference from H(q1;q1). Similar to K-S test, QD IFFestimates
the number of required samples to reliably satisfy this bound,
as shown in Equation 7.
n=A1p1 pm2=3t 4=3(7)
For Figure 3, we need 420 measurements with t= 0:1,
p= 2=3, and A= 7 for Qiskit. This measurement trials
are different from K-S test, because we are using different
distance metrics.
Comparison with Reference Distribution. After generating
a group of equivalent programs and ﬁltering out worthless
circuits, QD IFFexecutes the remaining circuits and calculates
the average distribution from their results. QD IFFwill regard
this average distribution as the reference distribution. With the
distribution comparison methods (eg. K-S Test, Cross-entropy,
etc), QD IFFcompares this reference distribution with each
result distribution and reports divergence when the distance
is larger than the threshold t.
Reporting Divergence Explanation. QD IFFreports the poten-
tial source of the divergence in program P:
1) IfPﬁnds divergence when using different backends
while keeping a frontend’s options unchanged, QD IFF
reports this as a potential backend source;
2) IfPﬁnds divergence when using a speciﬁc backend
while varying a frontend’s options, QD IFFreports this as
a potential frontend source;
3) Otherwise, QD IFFreports this as other sources, such as a
potential bug in the API gate implementation.
V. E VALUATION
We evaluate following research questions:
RQ1 How many syntactically different programs can be
generated by QD IFF’s mutation and equivalent gate
transformation?
RQ2 How much speedup can we achieve via ﬁltering and
obviating the need of invoking a quantum simulator or
hardware?
RQ3 What has QD IFFfound via differential testing of the
widely-used QSSes?
Benchmarks. QD IFFstarts differential testing with ﬁve well
known quantum algorithms as seed programs [25], [26],
[40]–[42] (Deutsch-Jozsa, Berstein-Vazira, VQE–Variational-
Quantum-Eigensolver, Grover, and QAOA–Quantum Approx-
imate Optimization Algorithm) and one additional program X
Gate listed in Table VII. We do not use the relatively large
algorithms like Shor’s [26] because IBM’s public access can
support up to 16 qubits only. Large algorithms also require
698P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P60100200300
4695121 129171 168#
Variants#
Variants created via mutations
02;0004;000
9212;1032;487
2;0213;7213;546
#
Circuits#
Total number of circuits
(a)T
otal circuits and variants originating from each seed algorithm
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P60%50%100%
19%31% 28% 30%37%42%%
circuits worthwhile to run%
Circuits worthwhile to run
0100200300
2183 7294242 233
T
ime saving (hours)T
ime saving (hours)
(b)The
percentage of circuits that are worth running
Fig
. 4:Statistics of QD IFF-generated circuits.
many moments and 2-qubit gates, often producing unreliable
results on quantum hardware.
Experimental Environment. We evaluate QD IFFwith three
widely-used QSSes: Pyquil 2.19.0 with Quilc 1.19.0, Qiksit
0.21.0, and Cirq 0.9.0. We run the circuits on ﬁve differ-
ent hardware versions based on their availability, including
ibmq_santiago, ibmq_yorktown, ibmq_16_melbourne,
ibmq_belem. and ibmq_quito. The details of hardware can
be found on IBM’s quantum computing website [3]. We use
K-S test with t= 0:1 as the distribution comparison method.
A. RQ1 Variant Generation via S2S transformation
As shown in Figure 4a, for all six seed algorithms together,
QD IFFgenerates 730 program variants through semantics-
modifying mutations and generates the total of 14799 circuits
with equivalent gate transformation to each generated variant.
This total circuit generation process takes around 14 hours.
Take P2 Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm as an example. 95 dif-
ferent program variants are generated through semantics-
modifying mutations. For each variant program, QD IFFgen-
erates 20 logically equivalent circuits. For P2, the total gen-
eration for 2103 circuits takes around 2 hours, while the rest
of differential execution via simulation or hardware execution
takes around 2 days. This implies that the bottleneck of testing
is not about input program generation but the execution of
the generated programs, which justiﬁes our approach to select
which circuits are worthwhile to run.
B. RQ2 Speed Up
As shown in Figure 4b, after ﬁltering, only 19%-42% of
the generated circuits are retained for differential execution on
quantum hardware, leading to a 66% reductions in quantum
hardware or noisy simulator invocations. QD IFFﬁnishes the
entire testing process within around 17 days by leveraging
its circuit selection process, which means QD IFFwould have
saved additional 30 days of testing time by ﬁltering.
Take QAOA as an example, when running on IBM quantum
hardware, the experiment would take around 7 minutes toP1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P601;0002;000
175652 6966061;3771;489#
Generated Circuits#
Total circuits
02040
13 2 3812
#
Divergences on HW#
Circuits producing divergences
Fig
. 5:Circuits producing divergences on IBM hardware
1qc = get_qc(’Aspen-0-3Q-
A-qvm’)
2result_rm = qc.
run_and_measure(p)
(a)run_and_measure mea-
sures all 16 qubits in device
Aspen-0 when a simulator al-
locates 3 qubits, resulting in an
exception.1p = Program(X(0), X(1).
controlled(0))
2qvm = PyQVM(n_qubits=2)
3qvm.execute(p)
(b)Controlled X gate raises an
error when 2 qubits are allo-
cated for simulation.
Fig. 6: Bugs in Pyquil found by QD IFF.
wait in line on average (as launching a quantum job uses a
shared web service for a few IBM computers in the world)
and 10 seconds to execute on hardware. If users run all 3546
circuits, the total clock time would be 17 days. With ﬁltering,
QD IFFremoves 68% circuits that are not worthwhile to run
and ﬁnishes the execution in 7 days.
C. RQ3: What has QD IFFfound?
From the 730 sets of semantically equivalent circuits, QD IFF
found 33 differing outcomes out of 730. 4 out of 33 are
crashes in simulators. The remaining 29 cases are divergence
beyond expected noise on IBM hardware. By inspecting all 33
cases carefully, we determined total 6 sources of instabilities: 4
simulator crashes and 2 potential root causes that may explain
25 out of 29 cases of divergence on IBM hardware. For the
remaining 4 divergence cases, we could not easily determine
their underlying root causes.
1) Crash bugs in simulators: QD IFFreports four crashes
during differential testing with both noiseless and noisy simu-
lators. All divergences involve clear failure signals. All are due
to bugs in compiler or simulator implementations, summarized
in Table VIII. 2 out of 4 crashes were already reported by
developers [43], [44] and 2 out of 4 crashes were conﬁrmed
by developers, when we ﬁled crash reports [45], [46].
Compiler option error: Given an arbitrary program in Cirq,
when the compiler option clear_span is set to a negative
number or clear_qubits is set to an unregistered qubit,
the execution does not terminate. Cirq does not check the
boundary values of compiler options and attempts to reset non-
existing qubits. This bug was detected during explorations of
compiler settings. When these compiler options are set to the
aforementioned values, QD IFFnotices that the execution does
not ﬁnish in a reasonable time, indicating a potential inﬁnite
loop. QD IFFfound this bug on the 74thiteration with P3.
Backend registers a wrong number of qubits: QD IFFfound
that Pyquil’s measurement crashed on Aspen-0-xQ-A-qvm.
699TABLE VII: Seed subject programs
ID
Program # of Qubits Moments 2-qubit gate Description Iteration Number Measurement trial with t= 0:1
P1
X gate 1 1 0 one-qubitXgate 46 20002828
P2 Deutsch-Jozsa 4 39 33 check if a function is balanced 95 52937998
P3 Bernstein-Vazira 4 41 32 ﬁnd a and b for f(x) = ax+b 121 52937998
P4 Grover 5 84 53 ﬁnd a unique input in a database 129 800011312
P5 VQE 4 36 28 approximate the lowest energy level 171 52937998
P6 QAOA 5 29 19 QAOA algorithm 168 800011312
TABLE VIII: Bugs found by QD IFFwhen executing generated
programs with simulation only
Platf
orm Bugs
Description Sour
ce of Bugs
Cir
q Program
runs endlessly with some compiler settings Compiler
Setting
pyquilSimulator
register wrong number of qubits Simulator
Backends
Crashes
on control gates on certain backends Gate
implementation
Simulator
stuck into a bad state Simulator
Backends
In Pyquil, users can specify the quantum simulator to have the
same topology as a real 16 qubit device Aspen-0-16Q-A by
setting the backend to be Aspen-0-16Q-A-qvm (16Q refers
to using 16 qubits in simulation). However, QD IFFfound that
when a user allocates to use 3 qubits in simulation (line 1
in Figure 6a) but attempts to conduct measurements at line 2
using run_and_measure, Pyquil simulator crashes due to a
wrong number of allocated qubits. This bug was found with
QD IFF’s backend exploration. Another user reported the same
issue on Pyquil’s Github [43].
Simulator is stuck into a bad state: Pyquil’s simulator raises
an exception when taking an empty circuit as input. Afterward,
all subsequent invocations to the simulator crash even when
the input circuit is valid and not empty. QD IFFdetects this
bug by mutating an input program to an empty program
and executing it on both pyqvm simulator and state-vector
simulator. While the state-vector simulator runs this empty
circuit normally, pyqvm throws an exception. Then, QD IFF
generates an arbitrary non-empty program. In the next few
iterations, QD IFFﬁnds this bug because pyqvm crashes, while
the state-vector simulator does not.
Wrong type of the controlled gate: Figure 6b shows a
scenario where Pyquil crashed when a control Xgate was
used on pyqvm with 2 qubit allocation. The exception message
shows “ValueError: cannot reshape array of size 4 into shape
(2,2,2,2)”. A control Xgate should be a 2-qubit gate (which is
44 matrix), but the gate was represented as 1 4 bypyqvm,
which is a bug. This bug was found in the 15thiteration with
P1 as a seed.
2) Divergences on real hardware: Figure 5 reports the
total numbers of circuits executed on quantum hardware and
those that exhibit behavioral divergence. The rate of latter is
relatively low (0.3%-0.8%), which demonstrates the robustness
of the quantum software and hardware we tested—this is
not surprising since such software and hardware has been
widely used and continuously improved for a number of years.
On the other hand, these results also highlight the need of
a systematic testing framework such as QD IFFfor quantum
developers—since quantum bugs are rare and hard-to-detect,
developers should test their programs/tools exhaustively with
aQD IFF-like approach before releasing them.l0–#qc0
...R
z(3:54)p
X X
...l1–#qc1 R
z(5pi=2)
l2–#qc3 X X
l3–#qc4
(a)”Di
vergent” circuits
l0–#qc0
...R
z(3:54)p
X X
...l1–#qc3 R
z(5pi=2) X X
l2–#qc1 X
l3–#qc4 X
(b)”Good”
circuits
Fig
. 7:Divergence on IBM ibmq_yorktown: no operation on
qc4 for a long time.
l0–#qc3p
XR
z(pi=2) X
...l1–#qc2p
XR
z(3pi=2) X
l2–#qc1p
XR
z(2:68)
l3–#qc0p
XR
z(pi=2)
(a)Di
vergent circuits (CX between physical qubits 2 and 3)
l0–#qc2p
XR
z(3pi=2)
...l1–#qc1p
XR
z(pi=2) X
l2–#qc0p
XR
z(2:68)
l3–#qc3p
XR
z(pi=2)
(b)”Good”
circuits (CX between physical qubits 1 and 2)
Fig
. 8:Divergence detected on IBM hardware: bad connection
between qc 2 and qc 3.
For 29 divergence cases on IBM hardware, we manually
inspected the corresponding circuits. We then determined 2
root causes that may explain 25 out of 29 cases. For the
remaining 4 cases, we could not easily determine underlying
root causes. We discuss each root cause with examples in this
subsection.
Divergence due to 2 qubit gate errors We concluded that 1, 2,
6, and 7 divergences in P1, P3, P5, and P6 respectively—55%
of all divergences detected on hardware in total—can be
explained by placing many 2 qubit gates between so called
couplers qubits. IBM released the reliability of connection
between each qubit pair on their hardware [3]. For example,
in hardware santiago, mapping CX between physical qubits
f2, 3g is less reliable than mapping CX between qubitsf1,
2g[3]. We found 16 out of 29 divergences could have the same
underlying cause of using CX between known, unreliable
700qubit connections. These errors could be reduced through
improved mapping to 2-qubit gates or using other strategies
such as randomized compilation [47], [48].
Consider the two equivalent circuits shown in Figure 8,
generated from P6 QAOA. These two circuits generated di-
vergent measurements on santiago, although both circuits
have nearly the same moments and the same number of 2-
qubit gates. This is because the CX error rate of physical
qubits 2 and 3 is much higher than qubits 1 and 2 (77%
higher according to published information from IBM [3]).
It appears that Qiskit’s logical to physical qubit mapping
procedure does not always avoid the use of CX on qubits
2 and 3 in their compilation and qubit allocation steps. Thus,
Figure 8a produces divergence from Figure 8b.
Divergence due to qubit dephasing & decoherence: 9 of 29
divergences—2, 3, 2, and 2 divergences in P2, P4, P5, and
P6—could have the same underlying cause of qubit dephasing
& decoherence. Qubits that remain idle for long periods tend
to dephase and decohere [49]. Figure 7 shows a pair of
circuits with a similar depth and a similar number of 2-
qubit gates. However, when run on hardware ibm_belem,
the pair produces divergences beyond expected noise. We
speculate that, when no operation is applied to physical qubit
4 for 18 moments, it may increase dephasing and decoherence
possibilities. This can by ﬁxed by adding two successive Pauli
Y gates [30] on idle qubits during the compilation phase [49].
Others: For other 4 divergence, we could not easily determine
underlying root causes. Because the circuit moments and
the number of CX gate are roughly the same with their
equivalent groups, stochastic errors in hardware can mostly be
ruled out. The problem could be low-level quantum control
software bugs that emerge from different combinations of
gates, resulting in different control / coherent errors introduced
at the pulse level.
D. Threats to Validity
Lack of Error Correction: The number of divergences on
quantum hardware found by QD IFFwould depend on the
reliability of hardware and its error correction capability. If
it were to run on an error-corrected quantum hardware, which
does not exist yet, it may report fewer divergences and it would
be easier to disambiguate whether divergences are caused by
software-level defects as opposed to hardware-level defects.
Similarly, 2-qubit gate errors depend on which qubit con-
nections that the gates are applied to, Therefore, it may be
necessary to adjust the divergence threshold tbased on the
empirical 2 qubit error rates for each connection and how
many times the 2 qubit gates are used on that connection. Such
impact of 2 qubit error rates must be investigated further.
Time Out: In fuzz testing, longer experimentation periods tend
to expose more errors or new program execution paths [50].
The total time taken for all our experiments was limited to
seven days.
Number of Qubits: The maximum number of qubits that
we used for our experiment was 5 qubits, because the onlypublicly available hardware limits public access up to 16
qubits and the waiting time tends to increase signiﬁcantly, as
you request more qubits. Running experiments on Google’s
sycamore processor with 53 qubits and 1000+ 2q gates may
produce different results [51].
VI. R ELATED WORK
Compiler and Framework Testing. Random differential test-
ing (RDT) [52], [53] is a widely-used technique that compiles
the same input program with two or more compilers that
implement the same speciﬁcation. Equivalence modulo inputs
(EMI) [10] is such an example that tests compilers by gener-
ating equivalent variants. Many random program generators
are used for compiler testing [54]. Csmith [55] randomly
generates C programs and checks for inconsistent behaviors
via differential testing. Quest [56] focuses on argument passing
and value returning, while testing with randomly generated
programs. Different from Csimth-like tools, refactoring-based
testing systematically modiﬁes input programs with refactor-
ings, as opposed to random program generation. Orion [10]
adapts EMI to test GCC and LLVM compilers. Christopher
et al. [33] combine random differential testing and EMI-based
testing to test OpenCL compilers. Orison [57] uses a guided
mutation strategy for the same purpose.
Such classical compiler testing is not directly applicable to
quantum software stacks due to the three challenges: (1) how
to generate variants, (2) how to test simulators and hardware
together with compilers, and (3) how to interpret quantum
measurements for differential testing.
Quantum Testing and Veriﬁcation. Zhao [58] introduces
a quantum software life cycle and lists the challenges and
opportunities we face. Ying et al. [59] formally reason about
quantum circuits by representing qubits and gates using
matrix-valued Boolean expressions, and verify them using a
combination of classical logical reasoning and complex matrix
operations. Huang et al. [60] introduce quantum program
assertions, allowing programmers to decide if a quantum
state matches its expected value. They deﬁne a logic to
provides-robustness to characterize the possible distance
between an ideal program and an erroneous one. Proq [61]
is a runtime assertion framework for testing and debug-
ging quantum programs. It transforms hardware constraints
to executable versions for measurement-restricted quantum
computers. QPMC [62] applies classical model checking on
quantum programs based on Quantum Markov Chain. Ali et
al. [35] propose a new testing metric called quantum input
output coverage, a test generation strategy, and two new test
oracles for testing quantum programs. Two test oracles include
wrong output oracle that checks whether a wrong output
has been returned, and output probability oracle that checks
whether the quantum program returns an expected output with
its corresponding expected probability. However, their work
targets at quantum program testing and the measurement they
used might not be sufﬁcient enough. While all these techniques
ﬁnd errors in quantum programs, QD IFFaims to ﬁnd errors in
quantum software stacks.
701Veriﬁed quantum compilers guarantee gate transformation
and circuit optimization is correct by construction. CertiQ [12]
is a veriﬁed Qiskit compiler by introducing a calculus of quan-
tum circuit equivalence to check the correctness of compiler
transformation. VOQC [11] provides a veriﬁed optimizer for
quantum circuits by adapting CompCert [63] to the quantum
setting. Smith and Thornton [64] present a compiler with built-
in translation validation via QMDD equivalence checking. As
discussed in Section I, these tools ensure correctness in quan-
tum gate optimizations. However, QD IFFis a complimentary
technique based on testing and its scope includes both quantum
backends and frontends.
Differential Testing. Differential testing [52] has been used
to test large software systems and to ﬁnd bugs in various
domains such as SSL/TLS [65], [66], machine learning appli-
cations [67], JVM [68], and clones [69], etc. Mucerts [70] ap-
plies differential testing to check the correctness of certiﬁcate
validation in SSL/TLS. It uses a stochastic sampling algorithm
to drive its input generation while tracking the program
coverage. DLFuzz [67] does fuzz testing of Deep Learning
systems to expose incorrect behaviors. Chen et al. [68] perform
differential testing of JVM with input generated from Markov
Chain Monte Carlo sampling with domain-speciﬁc mutations
with the knowledge of Java class ﬁle formats.
Mutation-Based Fuzz Testing. Fuzz testing mutates the seed
inputs through a fuzzer to maximize a speciﬁc guidance
metric, such as branch coverage. It has been shown to be
highly effective in revealing a diverse set of bugs, including
correctness bugs [71]–[73], security vulnerabilities [74]–[76],
and performance bugs [77], [78]. For example, AFL [32]
mutates a seed input to discover previously unseen coverage
proﬁles. MemLock [77] employs both coverage and memory
consumption metrics to ﬁnd abnormal memory behavior.
Instead of ﬂipping several bits or bytes in each muta-
tion, several techniques support domain-speciﬁc mutations.
SDF [79] uses seed properties to guide mutation in web-
browser fuzz testing. BigFuzz [80] designs mutations for
dataﬂow-based big data applications. QD IFFis similar to this
line of work by adapting mutation testing to a new domain.
However, different from traditional fuzzing, QD IFFre-invents
the notion of a test oracle by re-designing a quantum measure-
ment comparison method in a noisy, probabilistic domain.
VII. C ONCLUSION
Quantum computing has emerged to be a promising com-
puting paradigm with remarkable advantages over classical
computing. QD IFFis the ﬁrst to reinvent differential testing
for quantum software stacks. It adapts the notion of equiva-
lence checking to the quantum domain, redesigns underlying
program generation and mutation methods, and optimizes
differential testing to reduce compute-intensive simulation or
expensive hardware invocation. It is effective in generating
variants, reduce 66% unnecessary quantum hardware or noisy
simulator invocations, and uses divergence to isolate errors
in both the higher and lower levels of the quantum software
stack.VIII. A CKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable feedback. We thank Alan Ho for his kind help
in selective invocation and distribution comparison, and for
proofreading the draft. This work is supported in part by
National Science Foundations via grants CNS-1703598, CNS-
1763172, CNS-1907352, CNS-2007737, CNS-2006437, CNS-
2106838, CNS-2128653, CHS-1956322 CCF-1764077, CCF-
1723773, ONR grant N00014-18-1-2037, and Intel CAPA
grant.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. A. team and collaborators, “Cirq,” Oct. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4062499
[2] R. S. Smith, M. J. Curtis, and W. J. Zeng, “A practical quantum
instruction set architecture,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03355, 2016.
[3] G. Aleksandrowicz, T. Alexander, P. Barkoutsos, L. Bello, Y . Ben-
Haim, D. Bucher, F. Cabrera-Hern ´andez, J. Carballo-Franquis, A. Chen,
C. Chen et al., “Qiskit: An open-source framework for quantum com-
puting,” Accessed on: Mar, vol. 16, 2019.
[4] ——, “Qiskit: An open-source framework for quantum computing,”
Accessed on: Mar, vol. 16, 2019.
[5] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues, 2020.
[6] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues, 2020.
[7] https://stackoverﬂow.com/search?q=quantum++error, April,20 2021.
[8] M. Amy, D. Maslov, and M. Mosca, “Polynomial-time t-depth optimiza-
tion of clifford+ t circuits via matroid partitioning,” IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 33,
no. 10, pp. 1476–1489, 2014.
[9] Y . Nam, N. J. Ross, Y . Su, A. M. Childs, and D. Maslov, “Automated
optimization of large quantum circuits with continuous parameters,” npj
Quantum Information, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[10] V . Le, M. Afshari, and Z. Su, “Compiler validation via equivalence
modulo inputs,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 216–226,
2014.
[11] K. Hietala, R. Rand, S.-H. Hung, X. Wu, and M. Hicks, “A veriﬁed op-
timizer for quantum circuits,” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages, vol. 5, no. POPL, pp. 1–29, 2021.
[12] Y . Shi, X. Li, R. Tao, A. Javadi-Abhari, A. W. Cross, F. T. Chong, and
R. Gu, “Contract-based veriﬁcation of a realistic quantum compiler,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08963, 2019.
[13] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues/1034, 2020.
[14] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues/1002, 2020.
[15] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues/2553, 2020.
[16] https://www.cio.com/article/3161031/d-waves-quantum-computer-runs-
a-staggering-2000-qubits.html, 2017.
[17] S.-O. Chan, I. Diakonikolas, P. Valiant, and G. Valiant, “Optimal
algorithms for testing closeness of discrete distributions,” in Proceedings
of the twenty-ﬁfth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms.
SIAM, 2014, pp. 1193–1203.
[18] A. Kolmogorov, “Sulla determinazione empirica di una lgge di dis-
tribuzione,” Inst. Ital. Attuari, Giorn., vol. 4, pp. 83–91, 1933.
[19] N. V . Smirnov, “On the estimation of the discrepancy between empirical
curves of distribution for two independent samples,” Bull. Math. Univ.
Moscou, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 3–14, 1939.
[20] I. Good, “Some terminology and notation in information theory,” Pro-
ceedings of the IEE-Part C: Monographs, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 200–204,
1956.
[21] J. Shore and R. Johnson, “Axiomatic derivation of the principle of
maximum entropy and the principle of minimum cross-entropy,” IEEE
Transactions on information theory, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 26–37, 1980.
[22] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues/673, 2020.
[23] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues/2240, 2019.
[24] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues/1713, 2019.
[25] L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database
search,” in Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing, 1996, pp. 212–219.
[26] P. W. Shor, “Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms
and factoring,” in Proceedings 35th annual symposium on foundations
of computer science. Ieee, 1994, pp. 124–134.
702[27] R. LaRose, “Overview and comparison of gate level quantum software
platforms,” Quantum, vol. 3, p. 130, 2019.
[28] (2019) Cirq: A python framework for creating, editing, and invoking
noisy intermediate scale quantum (nisq) circuits. [Online]. Available:
https:/github.com/quantumlib/Cirq
[29] R. Computing, “Pyquil documentation,” URL http://pyquil. readthedocs.
io/en/latest, 2019.
[30] M. A. Nielsen and I. Chuang, “Quantum computation and quantum
information,” 2002.
[31] https://quantumcomputing.stackexchange.com/questions/8694/is-there-
a-mistake-in-the-vqe-ansatz-in-cirqs-tutorial, 2019.
[32] “American fuzz loop,” http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/aﬂ/, 2020.
[33] C. Lidbury, A. Lascu, N. Chong, and A. F. Donaldson, “Many-core
compiler fuzzing,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 65–76,
2015.
[34] E. Mendiluze, S. Ali, P. Arcaini, and T. Yue, “Muskit: A mutation
analysis tool for quantum software testing.”
[35] S. Ali, P. Arcaini, X. Wang, and T. Yue, “Assessing the effectiveness
of input and output coverage criteria for testing quantum programs,”
in2021 14th IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation and
Validation (ICST). IEEE, 2021, pp. 13–23.
[36] S. S. Tannu and M. K. Qureshi, “Not all qubits are created equal: a
case for variability-aware policies for nisq-era quantum computers,” in
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Archi-
tectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
2019, pp. 987–999.
[37] S. Aaronson and L. Chen, “Complexity-theoretic foundations of quan-
tum supremacy experiments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.05903, 2016.
[38] A. W. Cross, L. S. Bishop, S. Sheldon, P. D. Nation, and J. M.
Gambetta, “Validating quantum computers using randomized model
circuits,” Physical Review A, vol. 100, no. 3, p. 032328, 2019.
[39] Y . Shi, M. Wang, W. Shi, J.-H. Lee, H. Kang, and H. Jiang, “Accurate
and efﬁcient estimation of small p-values with the cross-entropy method:
applications in genomic data analysis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35, no. 14,
pp. 2441–2448, 2019.
[40] E. Bernstein and U. Vazirani, “Quantum complexity theory,” SIAM
Journal on computing, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1411–1473, 1997.
[41] J. R. McClean, J. Romero, R. Babbush, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, “The
theory of variational hybrid quantum-classical algorithms,” New Journal
of Physics, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 023023, 2016.
[42] D. Deutsch and R. Jozsa, “Rapid solution of problems by quantum
computation,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A:
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, vol. 439, no. 1907, pp. 553–558,
1992.
[43] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues/1050, 2019.
[44] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues/1034, Nov,20 2020.
[45] https://github.com/quantumlib/Cirq/issues/3907, Nov,20 2020.
[46] https://github.com/rigetti/pyquil/issues/1259, Nov,20 2020.
[47] J. J. Wallman and J. Emerson, “Noise tailoring for scalable quantum
computation via randomized compiling,” Physical Review A, vol. 94,
no. 5, p. 052325, 2016.
[48] A. Hashim, R. K. Naik, A. Morvan, J.-L. Ville, B. Mitchell, J. M.
Kreikebaum, M. Davis, E. Smith, C. Iancu, K. P. O’Brien et al.,
“Randomized compiling for scalable quantum computing on a noisy
superconducting quantum processor,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00215,
2020.
[49] https://quantumai.google/cirq/google/best practiceskeep qubits busy,
2021.
[50] G. Klees, A. Ruef, B. Cooper, S. Wei, and M. Hicks, “Evaluating
fuzz testing,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’18. New York,
NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 2123–2138.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243804
[51] X. Mi, P. Roushan, C. Quintana, S. Mandra, J. Marshall, C. Neill,
F. Arute, K. Arya, J. Atalaya, R. Babbush, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends,
A. Bengtsson, S. Boixo, A. Bourassa, M. Broughton, B. B. Buckley,
D. A. Buell, B. Burkett, N. Bushnell, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, R. Collins,
W. Courtney, S. Demura, A. R. Derk, A. Dunsworth, D. Eppens,
C. Erickson, E. Farhi, A. G. Fowler, B. Foxen, C. Gidney, M. Giustina,
J. A. Gross, M. P. Harrigan, S. D. Harrington, J. Hilton, A. Ho, S. Hong,
T. Huang, W. J. Huggins, L. B. Ioffe, S. V . Isakov, E. Jeffrey, Z. Jiang,
C. Jones, D. Kafri, J. Kelly, S. Kim, A. Kitaev, P. V . Klimov, A. N.
Korotkov, F. Kostritsa, D. Landhuis, P. Laptev, E. Lucero, O. Martin,
J. R. McClean, T. McCourt, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, K. C. Miao,M. Mohseni, W. Mruczkiewicz, J. Mutus, O. Naaman, M. Neeley,
M. Newman, M. Y . Niu, T. E. O’Brien, A. Opremcak, E. Ostby, B. Pato,
A. Petukhov, N. Redd, N. C. Rubin, D. Sank, K. J. Satzinger, V . Shvarts,
D. Strain, M. Szalay, M. D. Trevithick, B. Villalonga, T. White, Z. J. Yao,
P. Yeh, A. Zalcman, H. Neven, I. Aleiner, K. Kechedzhi, V . Smelyanskiy,
and Y . Chen, “Information scrambling in computationally complex
quantum circuits,” 2021.
[52] W. M. McKeeman, “Differential testing for software,” Digital Technical
Journal, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 100–107, 1998.
[53] Y . Tang, Z. Ren, W. Kong, and H. Jiang, “Compiler testing: a systematic
literature analysis,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
1–20, 2020.
[54] J. Chen, W. Hu, D. Hao, Y . Xiong, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Xie, “An
empirical comparison of compiler testing techniques,” in Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2016, pp.
180–190.
[55] X. Yang, Y . Chen, E. Eide, and J. Regehr, “Finding and understanding
bugs in c compilers,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN
conference on Programming language design and implementation, 2011,
pp. 283–294.
[56] C. Lindig, “Random testing of c calling conventions,” in Proceedings
of the sixth international symposium on Automated analysis-driven
debugging, 2005, pp. 3–12.
[57] V . Le, C. Sun, and Z. Su, “Finding deep compiler bugs via guided
stochastic program mutation,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 50, no. 10,
pp. 386–399, 2015.
[58] J. Zhao, “Quantum software engineering: Landscapes and horizons,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07047, 2020.
[59] M. Ying and Z. Ji, “Symbolic veriﬁcation of quantum circuits,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.03032, 2020.
[60] Y . Huang and M. Martonosi, “Statistical assertions for validating patterns
and ﬁnding bugs in quantum programs,” in Proceedings of the 46th
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2019, pp. 541–553.
[61] G. Li, L. Zhou, N. Yu, Y . Ding, M. Ying, and Y . Xie, “Proq: Projection-
based runtime assertions for debugging on a quantum computer,” 2020.
[62] Y . Feng, E. M. Hahn, A. Turrini, and L. Zhang, “Qpmc: A model checker
for quantum programs and protocols,” in International Symposium on
Formal Methods. Springer, 2015, pp. 265–272.
[63] X. Leroy, S. Blazy, D. K ¨astner, B. Schommer, M. Pister, and C. Fer-
dinand, “Compcert-a formally veriﬁed optimizing compiler,” in ERTS
2016: Embedded Real Time Software and Systems, 8th European
Congress, 2016.
[64] K. N. Smith and M. A. Thornton, “A quantum computational compiler
and design tool for technology-speciﬁc targets,” in Proceedings of the
46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2019, pp. 579–
588.
[65] C. Brubaker, S. Jana, B. Ray, S. Khurshid, and V . Shmatikov, “Using
frankencerts for automated adversarial testing of certiﬁcate validation
in ssl/tls implementations,” in 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy. IEEE, 2014, pp. 114–129.
[66] T. Petsios, A. Tang, S. Stolfo, A. D. Keromytis, and S. Jana, “Nezha:
Efﬁcient domain-independent differential testing,” in 2017 IEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2017, pp. 615–632.
[67] J. Guo, Y . Jiang, Y . Zhao, Q. Chen, and J. Sun, “Dlfuzz: Differential
fuzzing testing of deep learning systems,” in Proceedings of the 2018
26th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2018, pp.
739–743.
[68] Y . Chen, T. Su, C. Sun, Z. Su, and J. Zhao, “Coverage-directed
differential testing of jvm implementations,” in proceedings of the 37th
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, 2016, pp. 85–99.
[69] T. Zhang and M. Kim, “Automated transplantation and differential
testing for clones,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2017, pp. 665–676.
[70] C. Chen, C. Tian, Z. Duan, and L. Zhao, “Rfc-directed differential testing
of certiﬁcate validation in ssl/tls implementations,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM
40th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
2018, pp. 859–870.
[71] D. Babi ´c, S. Bucur, Y . Chen, F. Ivan ˇci´c, T. King, M. Kusano,
C. Lemieux, L. Szekeres, and W. Wang, “Fudge: fuzz driver generation
at scale,” in Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2019, pp. 975–985.
703[72] J. Park, M. Kim, B. Ray, and D.-H. Bae, “An empirical study of
supplementary bug ﬁxes,” in 2012 9th IEEE Working Conference on
Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2012, pp. 40–49.
[73] Q. Zhang, J. Wang, and M. Kim, “Heterofuzz: Fuzz testing to de-
tect platform dependent divergence for heterogeneous applications,” in
Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering, ser. ESEC/FSE 2021, 2021, p. 242–254.
[74] J. De Ruiter and E. Poll, “Protocol state fuzzing of fTLSg implemen-
tations,” in 24thfUSENIXg Security Symposium ( fUSENIXg Security
15), 2015, pp. 193–206.
[75] T. Brennan, S. Saha, and T. Bultan, “Jvm fuzzing for jit-induced side-
channel detection,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2020, pp. 1011–1023.
[76] S. Gan, C. Zhang, X. Qin, X. Tu, K. Li, Z. Pei, and Z. Chen, “Collaﬂ:
Path sensitive fuzzing,” in 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security andPrivacy (SP). IEEE, 2018, pp. 679–696.
[77] C. Wen, H. Wang, Y . Li, S. Qin, Y . Liu, Z. Xu, H. Chen, X. Xie,
G. Pu, and T. Liu, “Memlock: Memory usage guided fuzzing,” in 42nd
International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, 2020.
[78] C. Lemieux, R. Padhye, K. Sen, and D. Song, “Perffuzz: Automatically
generating pathological inputs,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIG-
SOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, 2018,
pp. 254–265.
[79] Y .-D. Lin, F.-Z. Liao, S.-K. Huang, and Y .-C. Lai, “Browser fuzzing by
scheduled mutation and generation of document object models,” in 2015
International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology (ICCST).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[80] Q. Zhang, J. Wang, M. A. Gulzar, R. Padhye, and M. Kim, “Bigfuzz:
Efﬁcient fuzz testing for data analytics using framework abstraction,” in
2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE), 2020, pp. 722–733.
704