Traceability Transformed: Generating more
Accurate Links with Pre-Trained BERT Models
Jinfeng Lin, Yalin Liu, Qingkai Zeng, Meng Jiang, Jane Cleland-Huang
Computer Science And Engineering
University Of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN, USA
jlin6, yliu26, qzeng, mjiang2, janehuang@nd.edu
Abstract —Software traceability establishes and leverages asso-
ciations between diverse development artifacts. Researchers have
proposed the use of deep learning trace models to link natural
language artifacts, such as requirements and issue descriptions,
to source code; however, their effectiveness has been restricted by
availability of labeled data and efﬁciency at runtime. In this study,
we propose a novel framework called Trace BERT (T-BERT) to
generate trace links between source code and natural language
artifacts. To address data sparsity, we leverage a three-step
training strategy to enable trace models to transfer knowledge
from a closely related Software Engineering challenge, which
has a rich dataset, to produce trace links with much higher
accuracy than has previously been achieved. We then apply the
T-BERT framework to recover links between issues and commits
in Open Source Projects. We comparatively evaluated accuracy
and efﬁciency of three BERT architectures. Results show that
a Single-BERT architecture generated the most accurate links,
while a Siamese-BERT architecture produced comparable results
with signiﬁcantly less execution time. Furthermore, by learning
and transferring knowledge, all three models in the framework
outperform classical IR trace models. On the three evaluated
real-word OSS projects, the best T-BERT stably outperformed
the VSM model with average improvements of 60.31% measured
using Mean Average Precision (MAP). RNN severely underper-
formed on these projects due to insufﬁcient training data, while
T-BERT overcame this problem by using pretrained language
models and transfer learning.
Index Terms—Software traceability, deep learning, language
models
I. I NTRODUCTION
Software and systems traceability, is the ability to create and
maintain relations between software artifacts and to leverage
the resulting network of links to support queries about the
product and its development process. Traceability is deemed
essential in safety-critical systems where it is prescribed by
certifying bodies such as the USA Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration (FAA), USA Food and Drug Administration (FAA) [1].
When present, trace links support diverse software engineering
activities such as impact analysis, compliance validation, and
safety assurance. Unfortunately, in practice, the cost and effort
of manually creating and maintaining trace links can be
inhibitive, and therefore trace links are typically incomplete
and inaccurate [2]. As a result, traceability data is often not
trusted by developers and is often greatly underutilized.
Software artifacts, such as requirements, design deﬁnitions,
code, and test cases all include natural language text, andtherefore over the past decades, researchers have explored
a wide variety of automated approaches for generating and
evolving links automatically. Techniques have included prob-
abilistic techniques [3], the Vector Space Model (VSM), [4],
Latent Semantic Indexing [5], [6], Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) [7], [8], AI swarm techniques [9], recurrent neural
networks [10] to integrate semantics, heuristic approaches
[11]–[13], combinations of techniques [7], [14], [15], and
the use of decision trees and support vector machines [16]
to integrate temporal dependencies and other process-related
information into the tracing task. Despite all of these efforts,
the accuracy of generated trace links has been unacceptably
low, and therefore industry has been reticent to integrate
automated tracing solutions into their development life-cycles.
The primary impedance is a semantic one as most existing
techniques rely upon word matching – either direct matches
(e.g., VSM), topic-based matches (e.g., using LSI or LDA), or
indirect matches based on building a domain-speciﬁc ontology
to bridge the terminology gap [17]. Results have been mixed,
especially when applied to industrial-sized datasets, where
acceptable recall levels above 90% can often only be achieved
at extremely low levels of precision [18].
One of the primary reasons that automated approaches
have underperformed is the semantic gap that often exists
between related artifacts [10]. Techniques that are unable to
reason about semantic associations and bridge this gap fail to
establish accurate and relatively complete trace links. Recent
work has proposed deep learning (DL) techniques [19], [20]
for traceability, but without providing effective solutions. For
example, Guo et al. [10] proposed an architecture based on a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) , and evaluated two types
of RNN tracing models (LSTM [21] and GRU [22]) for
generating links between subsystem requirements and design
deﬁnitions against a small dataset from an industrial project.
While their results showed that accuracy improved as the size
of the training set increased, their approach was not trained on
large training sets, and therefore was not shown to generalize
across larger or more diverse projects. We include both LSTM
and GRU approaches for comparison purposes and refer to
them collectively as TraceNN (TNN) in this paper.
Two primary factors impede the advancement of DL trace-
ability solutions. The ﬁrst is the sparsity of training data,
given that DL techniques require large volumes of train-3242021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00040
ing data. Manually created trace links (i.e., golden answer
sets) available in individual software projects are usually not
sufﬁcient for training a DL model. The second impedance
is the practicality of applying multi-layer neural networks
in a large industrial project as training and utilizing deep
neural networks is signiﬁcantly slower than more traditional
information retrieval or machine learning techniques.
Fig. 1: An example commit message and code change set,
where green lines have been added and red ones removed. The
commit was tagged by the committer to the depicted issue.
The work reported in this paper addresses these two critical
impedances in order to deliver fast and accurate automated
traceability solutions for solving industrial problems. More
speciﬁcally, our proposed Language Model (LM) approach to
traceability is designed to (1) deliver accurate and therefore
more trustworthy trace links, (2) be applicable for projects
with limited training data, and (3) scale-up to support large
industrial projects with low time complexity. Our approach
leverages BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) as its underlying language models. BERT,
which was introduced by Google in 2018 [23], has delivered
marked improvements in diverse NLP tasks, primarily because
its bidirectional approach provides deeper contextual infor-
mation than single-direction language models. In this paper,
we explore the use of BERT in the traceability domain –
introducing what we refer to as Trace BERT (T-BERT).
T-BERT is a framework for training a BERT-based re-
lationship classiﬁer to generate trace links. Three types of
relation classiﬁcation architectures are particularly well suited
for traceability. These are the single, twin and, siamese archi-
tectures, which we describe in more depth later in the paper.
We compare the effectiveness of these three architectures for
generating trace links between Natural Language Artifacts
(NLAs) and Programming Language Artifacts (PLAs). NLAs
are artifacts such as feature requests, bug reports, require-
ments, and design deﬁnitions, which are written primarily
using natural language but may also include code snippets. In
contrast, PLAs are primarily programming language artifacts,
such as code ﬁles, code snippets, function deﬁnitions, and code
change sets, which also contain natural language commentsand descriptors. We evaluated T-BERT by generating trace
links from issues to code (represented by change sets), which
we refer to as a NLA-PLA traceability challenge.
The remainder of this paper is laid out as follows. Sec. II
outlines the concrete research questions we address in this
paper. Sec. III and Sec. IV provide a detailed description
of our approach for achieving NLA-PLA traceability, while
Sec. V describes the experiments we conducted to evaluate the
effectiveness of our approach. Based on the results obtained
from these experiments, we derive answers for our research
questions in Sec. VI. Finally, Sec. VII to Sec. IX discuss
related work, threats to validity, and conclusions.
II. P ROBLEM STATEMENT
Researchers have addressed the data sparsity problem and
the performance issues of training large models through the
use of pre-trained DL models for various NLP problems .
This approach divides the training stage into pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning phases. In the pre-training phase, DL models are
constructed using a huge amount of unlabeled data and self-
supervised training tasks. Then in the ﬁne-tuning phase, the
models are trained on smaller, labeled datasets in order to
perform more specialized ‘downstream’ tasks. The underlying
notion is that knowledge learned from pre-training a model
on a larger and more generalized dataset can be effectively
transferred to the downstream tasks which have limited labels
for supervised training. Furthermore, a pre-trained model
provides a better starting point for model optimization than
a randomly seeded one. It therefore reduces the likelihood
of local optimization traps and improves overall performance.
Fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a smaller dataset takes
signiﬁcantly less time than training a deep learning model
from scratch. While pre-training a general model is extremely
expensive, the pre-training phase only needs to be performed
once and can then be reused for various downstream tasks.
BERT-based language models make use of transformers
[24] to learn contextual information from corpora in the
pre-training stage and then transfer learned knowledge to
downstream NLP tasks, such as question answering, document
classiﬁcation, and sentiment recognition [23], [25]. To our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that has applied BERT or
other transformer-based methods to the software traceability
task. We pose a series of research questions to evaluate
whether T-BERT can effectively address the traceability prob-
lem. Our ﬁrst question is deﬁned as follows:
RQ1: Given three variants of T-BERT models, based on single,
twin, and siamese BERT relation classiﬁers, which is the best
architecture for addressing NLA-PLA traceability with respect
to both accuracy and efﬁciency?
In addition to investigating the DL model architecture, we
also explore different training techniques for improving model
accuracy. As discussed by Guo et al. [10], the DL trace
model may hit a ‘performance glass ceiling‘ and converge
at relatively low accuracy. We therefore deﬁne our second
research question as:
325RQ2: Which training technique improves accuracy without
suffering from the previously observed glass ceiling ?
Gururangan et al., in their study of Domain-Adaptive Pre-
Training (DAPT), claim that a second phase of pre-training
using a domain corpus leads to performance gains. This
ﬁnding motivated us to explore the third and most important
research question:
RQ3: Can T-BERT transfer knowledge from a resource-rich
retrieval task to enhance the accuracy and performance of the
downstream NLA-PLA tracing challenge?
Feng et al. [26] demonstrated that a BERT Language
Model, pre-trained using large numbers of function deﬁnitions,
can effectively address the downstream code search problem.
In that study, researchers provided doc-strings (i.e., python
comments) as user queries, and leveraged a BERT model to
retrieve related functions. Since doc-strings and functions are
always paired in the code base, ample training data for the
code search problem is available. Our RQ3 explores whether
the code search problem can be leveraged as a training task
to improve T-BERT for the software traceability challenge.
Because this step occurs between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning,
we refer to it as intermediate-training
III. A PPROACH
Trace retrieval algorithms dynamically generate trace links
between artifacts [27], for example, by linking a source artifact
(e.g., a python ﬁle) to a target artifact (e.g., an issue or re-
quirement). The traceability algorithm computes the relevance
between pairs of source and target artifacts and proposes the
most related pairs as trace links. In this section, we ﬁrst
introduce the fundamental architecture of the BERT-based
model and its variances, and then introduce T-BERT with three
speciﬁc relation classiﬁers that are well suited for addressing
this traceability problem.
A. Introduction to BERT and Language Models
A language model represents a probability distribution over
a word sequence [28], which with proper training can ef-
fectively capture the semantics of individual words based on
their surrounding context. Given the importance of general
context, DL models built upon pre-trained language models
usually achieve better results than those trained on task-
speciﬁc datasets directly. The architecture of the BERT-based
model is based on transformers, in which each layer in the
model is a transformer layer. The transformer layers allow the
BERT model to focus on terms at any position in a sentence,
and training a BERT model is accomplished through a novel
technique called Masked Language Modeling (MLM). In a
MLM training task, BERT randomly masks the words in the
input text and then optimizes itself to predict the masked
terms based on the contextual information. In this pre-training
step, a massive amount of corpora are fed to the BERT-based
model, and the resulting model is leveraged to address different
downstream tasks by ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc datasets. A
distinctive feature of BERT is its uniﬁed architecture across
Fig. 2: A three step workﬂow applies T-BERT to NLA-
PLA traceability. 1) Pre-training data are functions collected
from Github projects 2) A BERT is trained as a language
model for code with these functions and composed with a
relation classiﬁer as the T-BERT model 3) Functions are split
as speciﬁcations and doc-strings and used as intermediate-
training data 4) T-BERT model is intermediate-trained using
code search data 5) OSS datasets are collected from Github
repo 6) T-BERT model is ﬁne-tuned as a trace model using
transferred knowledge
different tasks [23], as the architecture for LM pre-training
and task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning are almost identical, with only the
last layer of the model customized according to the targeted
downstream tasks. This layer is usually referred to as a task
header in a BERT-based model.
B. BERT For Software Traceability
The solution we propose represents a three-fold procedure
of pre-training, intermediate-training and ﬁne-tuning, as sum-
marized in Fig. 2. In the pre-training phase, a dedicated
language model is trained on source code and then utilized
to construct the T-BERT models. In the intermediate-training
phase, T-BERT is then trained to address the code search
problem. In this phase, we provide adequate labeled training
examples to T-BERT and expect it to learn general NL-PL
classiﬁcation knowledge that can ultimately be transferred to
the traceability challenge. Finally, in the ﬁne-tuning phase, the
intermediate-trained T-BERT model is applied to the issue-
commit tracing challenge in real-world open-source projects.
C. T-BERT Architectures
The three variants of the T-BERT architecture that we inves-
tigate for software traceability have previously been applied to
similar text-based problems. These variants are:
TWIN: The Twin BERT architecture is shown in Fig. 3a.
It leverages two BERT models to encode the NL and PL
artifacts separately. The two artifacts are then transformed
into two independent hidden state matrices, in which tokens
are represented by ﬁxed length vectors. We applied a pooling
technique on these hidden state matrices to formulate feature
vectors representing the artifacts. Finally, we concatenated
these two feature vectors for classiﬁcation tasks.
326SIAMESE: The siamese BERT architecture is shown in
Fig. 3b. It is a hybrid of the single and twin architecture. It
only uses one BERT model; however, instead of creating a
concatenated token sequence for an NL-PL pair like single
BERT, it passes each artifact sequentially to the BERT model
and creates separate hidden state matrices for each of the two
artifact types (i.e., NL and PL). The generated two hidden
state matrices are then pooled and concatenated to produce a
joint feature vector as in the Twin BERT architecture. This
joint feature vector is then sent to classiﬁcation headers to
accomplish the prediction task.
Both Siamese and Twin T-BERT architectures concatenate
artifact feature vectors to create a joint feature vector. Nils
et al. [29] explored the impact of different concatenation
approaches for the siamese BERT architecture and showed
that given two pooled feature vectors uandv, siamese BERT
with a joint feature vector (u;v; ju vj) achieved the best
performance on a sentence classiﬁcation task. We therefore
apply this type of concatenation method to fuse the NL and
PL feature vectors to create a joint feature vector.
SINGLE: The single BERT architecture is shown in Fig. 3c.
NL and PL text are annotated with special tokens and then
concatenated into a single sequence. For example, token
[CLS]/[SEP] is used to annotate the start/end of a sentence. A
sentence S with tokens s1;s2;s3;::sN, and a piece of code C
with tokens c1;c2;c3;::cNwill be transformed into an input
format of [CLS ]s1;s2;s3;::sN;[SEP ]c1;c2;c3;::cN[SEP ].
The annotated and concatenated sequence is fed to the single
BERT to generate a single hidden state matrix. A subsequent
pooling layer then reduces the dimension of the matrix to
create a fused feature vector, which is a counterpart of the joint
feature vector in SIAMESE and TWIN. This feature vector is
used by the classiﬁcation header, to predict whether the input
NL-PL pair is related or not.
IV. M ODEL TRAINING
In this section, we describe the training strategies used
for pre-training, intermediate-training , and ﬁne-tuning phases.
The dataset supporting pre-training and intermediate-training
phases is provided by Hamel et al. [30] from their study of the
code search problem. It includes function deﬁnitions and their
associated doc-strings scraped from numerous Github projects,
and includes Go, Java, JavaScript, PHP, Python, and Ruby
programming languages.
The dataset used in the ﬁne-tuning phase was retrieved from
OSS by our team. We extracted issues and commits through
Github’s APIs and mined ground-truth trace links from the
commit messages. We show the data format in Fig. 1, and
explain details of the data collection process in Sec. V-A.
In this study we selected Python as our target language for
both training and evaluation due to the large number of active
projects; however, our approach is not language dependent.
Given sufﬁcient time, the same post-training process could be
applied to other programming languages.A. Three Step Training
Pre-training Code Language Model: In the pre-training
step, we leveraged the BERT model to learn the word distri-
bution among NL and PL documents, and refer to this BERT
model as ‘code BERT’ to distinguish it from the plain BERT
model that handles only NL text. In the plain BERT model,
masked LM (MLM) tasks were used to pre-train BERT as a
language model. As previously explained, in MLM tasks, 15%
of tokens are selected and masked, and then BERT is trained to
recover the masked tokens based on their surrounding context.
Given that pre-training a language model is very expensive,
three commercial organizations have released their own pre-
trained code BERT models (Hugging Face [31], CodistAI [32],
and Microsoft [26]), all of which were trained on the Code-
SearchNet dataset. Of these, we leverage Microsoft’s model
(referred to as MS-CodeBert) as our source code language
model directly for T-BERT relation classiﬁcation models de-
picted in Fig. 3, as it has been shown to deliver improved
language comprehension for diverse downstream software
engineering tasks. These improvements in MS-CodeBert can
be attributed to its ‘Replaced Token Detection’ training tasks,
which have been shown to be a more effective way of training
LMs [33]. This training task replaces a small portion of tokens
in the corpus with random tokens and then requires the BERT
model to identify which tokens have been replaced.
Intermediate-training: For intermediate-training we trained
T-BERT models to perform the code search problem, as this
problem is inherently similar to the NLA-PLA traceability
challenge. In both cases, we used T-BERT to retrieve related
source code based on a NL description of code functionality.
The CodeSearchNet dataset1provides a benchmark for the
code search problem, as each function in the dataset is
paired with a doc-string. For Python, the dataset includes
824,342 functions for training, 46,213 functions for develop-
ment and 22,176 functions for testing. This dataset is ideal
for intermediate-training purposes because 1) it is large in
size, therefore the T-BERT model has adequate labeled data
to learn general rules for identifying NL-PL relevance, 2) the
relationships between doc-string and function are deﬁnitive,
meaning that there is minimal noise in the ground truth,
and 3) the function deﬁnitions use only part of the python
grammar which makes this task easier to handle than NLA-
PLA traceability.
We formulated the intermediate-training as a binary classiﬁ-
cation task in which T-BERT was asked to identify whether a
given doc string properly describes its paired function or not.
The loss function used in this intermediate-training step was
Cross Entropy Loss, and Adam Optimizer [34] was used to
update the parameters and optimize for the loss function.
The code search problem creates an unbalanced distribution
of positive and negative docstring-to-code pairs, we therefore
created a balanced training dataset with an equal number of
positive and negative samples. Guo et al. [10] adopted a dy-
namic under-sampling strategy to avoid inﬂating training data
1CodeSearchNet dataset https://github.com/github/CodeSearchNet
327(a) TWIN
(b) SIAMESE
(c) SINGLE
Fig. 3: The architectures of the three T-BERT models proposed
and evaluated in our experiments.size while continually exposing the model to previously unseen
negative samples. We adopted a similar technique to construct
our training samples. In each epoch, a balanced training set
was constructed by including all function and doc-string pairs
from CodeSearchNet dataset, as well as a randomly selected
equal number of non-related pairs. We updated the training
set at the beginning of each epoch, so that the T-BERT model
could learn from previously unseen negative examples. We
refer to this training strategy as Dynamic Random Negative
Sampling (DRNS), and compare it to other training strategies
described in Sec. IV-B.
Fine-tuning: In ﬁne-tuning, we utilized a similar training
technique to that discussed in the previous step, but addressed
the traceability challenge of tracing issues to code commits
using real world OSS datasets. Although the input data is
formatted differently to the intermediate-training format, T-
BERT uses the same architecture for both tasks. As shown in
Fig. 1, the issues are comprised of a short issue summary and
a long issue description while the commit is composed of a
commit message and code change set. For each type of artifact,
we concatenated the text to formulate input sequences for the
T-BERT model (i.e., issue summary + issue description and
then commit message + code change set.) In contrast to the
intermediate-training step, the dataset utilized in this step is
limited and fuzzy. As reported by Rath et al., link sets mined
from OSS projects are unlikely to be complete and entirely
accurate as engineers may forget to tag issues, or may commit
multiple changes against multiple tags. [16]. Furthermore the
number of links in the project-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning phase is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the number of function to doc-string
pairs used in post-training. As reported in Table. I, we have
approximately six hundred true links for ﬁne-tuning compared
to 824,342 pairs of function and doc-string. Furthermore, the
code change set in commits has a more ﬂexible and complex
format than the short and succinct function deﬁnitions.
B. Negative Sampling
Guo et al., observed a glass ceiling in terms of achieved
trace link performance in which the accuracy of their neural
trace model increased as the training epoch increased at the
beginning, however, it then reached a peak value and started to
decline with further training [10]. Our hypothesis of this phe-
nomenon is as follows. At earlier stages of training, the trace
model can effectively learn rules for distinguishing positive
and negative examples, and the neural trace model was easily
able to rule out many unrelated examples (i.e., cases where
the source and target artifacts have little common vocabulary).
Since those types of negative examples constitute the majority
of negative examples, the random negative sampling strategy
experiences few challenging examples and therefore starts
overﬁtting based on n ¨aive rules, because these n ¨aive rules are
applicable for the majority of simple cases. This overﬁtting
causes accuracy to decline after a few training epochs.
Our approach adds high quality negative samples to alleviate
this problem through our proposed Online Negative Sampling
(ONS) as an alternative to Dynamic Random Negative Sam-
328pling (DRNS). The principle idea of ONS is that, instead of
creating a training dataset at the beginning of each epoch, the
trace model will generate negative examples dynamically at
the batch level. For illustrative purposes imagine we want to
create a batch of size 8 containing 4 positive links. If we have
4 NL artifacts and 4 PL artifacts (i.e., a total of 16 candidate
links), we include the 4 positive links, and then select 4 nega-
tive links from the 12 candidates in order to create a balanced
batch. By evaluating these negative links and ranking them
by predicted score, we can identify the false links which are
more likely to be mistakenly classiﬁed. Then by incorporating
the top-scoring negative examples into the training set, we
improve the quality of negative examples and avoid early over-
ﬁtting. This approach is inspired by applications in the Face
Recognition domain, where face recognition models need to
distinguish between people with similar appearances [35]. This
negative example mining strategy is usually combined with
Triplet Loss [36] in the contrastive learning [37] framework.
Here we adopt it for our classiﬁcation and combine it with the
widely used Cross Entropy Loss.
V. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Data Collection
In this study, we train T-BERT and evaluate it against two
types of datasets. The ﬁrst dataset is CodeSearchNet which is
publicly available [30]. It includes functions and their associ-
ated doc-strings for six different programming languages. As
previously stated, we focused on python functions.
The other datasets2we leveraged were mined from three
OSS projects in Github and included Pgcli, Flask and Keras
as described in Table. I. We selected these projects because
they are popular, actively maintained Python projects, with
developers actively tagging commits with issue IDs. We re-
trieved issues and their discussions as the source artifacts and
commits as target artifacts. For each issue, we included both
the short issue summary and the longer issue description. We
automatically removed stack traces from issue discussions if
highlighted as Code block in markdown, as we wanted to train
our approach to perform the harder job of generating links
between issues and code without the more explicit information
provided by stack traces. For each commit, we included the
commit message and change set. However, we removed very
small commits (with less than 5 LOC) from our target artifact
set. Finally, due to the Github API rate limit, we retrieved a
maximum of 5000 issues for each project.
After retrieving commits and issues we mined a ‘golden link
set’ from the commit messages by using issue tags embedded
into commit messages added by committers. In addition, we
leveraged pull requests, as an accepted pull request automati-
cally creates both an issue and commit in the OSS project, and
connects them through an issue ID embedded into the commit
message. Tags were mined using regular expressions in order
to build a link set connecting issues and commits. One risk
of mining links from commit message is that the link set may
2OSS dataset https://zenodo.org/record/4511291#.YB3tjyj0mbgbe incomplete. Liu et al. partially addressed this problem by
pruning the dataset and only retaining artifacts appearing in
links set [38]. We adopted this process to construct our dataset
and report results in Table I
TABLE I: The size of software project leveraged in traceability
experiment. We applied the cleaning procedures, described in
Sec. V-A, to clean artifacts and links.Commits Issues Links Type
Pgclioriginal 2191 1197 645 database
command line cleaned 531 522 530
Flaskoriginal 4011 3711 1159web frameworkcleaned 752 739 753
Kerasoriginal 5348 4810 9375 neural-network
library cleaned 551 550 551
B. Experiment Setup
We conducted our experiment on Supermicro SYS-7048GR-
TR SuperServer with Dual Twelve-core 2.2GHz Intel Xeon
processors and 128GB RAM. We utilized 1 NVIDIA GeForce
GTX 1080 Ti GPU with 10 GB memory to train and evaluate
our model. The T-BERT model was implemented with Py-
Torch V .1.6.0 and HuggingFace Transformer library V .2.8.0.
We trained models for 8 and 400 epoch in intermediate-
training and ﬁne-tuning. For each task, we use a batch size of 8
and a batch accumulation step of 8. We set the initial learning
rate as 1E-05 and applied a linear scheduler to control the
learning rate at run time. Regarding the model selection, we
split the dataset into training (train), development (dev), and
test sets. We trained the model using the training dataset and
tested its performance on the dev dataset. We then selected
the best performing model based on the dev dataset and
created an output model. We ﬁnally evaluated and compared
the performance of output models on the test dataset. In the
intermediate-training stage the dataset was already split by
the data provider. In the ﬁne-tuning stage, we split the dataset
into ten folds, of which eight were used for training, one for
development, and one for testing.
C. Evaluation Metrics
The metrics for our experiments include F-scores, Mean
Average Precision (MAP@3), Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR),
and Precision@K.
F-scores: F-scores are composite metrics calculated from
precision and recall, and are frequently used to evaluate
traceability results. The F-1 score assigns equal weights to
precision and recall, while the F-2 score favors recall over
precision. Although both precision and recall are important, F-
2 is usually preferred for evaluating trace results where recall
is considered more important than precision. We report the best
F-scores in our experiments by enumerating the thresholds.
F=(1 +2)precisionrecall 2precisionrecall(1)
329Mean Average Precision: MAP evaluates the ranking of
relevant artifacts over retrieved ones. Each source artifact is
regarded as a query Q for retrieving artifacts. After ranking
the retrieved target artifacts, an Average Precision (AveP or
AP) score is obtained based on the position of all relevant
target artifacts in the ranking. The Mean of AveP scores is
then computed to return the MAP. In our study, we apply
a stricter metric known as MAP@3, in which only artifacts
ranked in the top 3 positions contribute to AveP score. The
formula for this metric is shown in following, k represents
the total relevant target artifacts in a query and rankirefer
to the ranking a target artifact :
AveP @3 =Pk
iX
k; X=(
P@i; ifranki<= 3
0; otherwise(2)
MAP @3 =PQ
jAvePj@3
Q(3)
Mean Reciprocal Rank: MRR is another measurement
of the result ranking. In each query, the ﬁrst related target
artifact with a rank of N, will provide a Reciprocal Rank of
1/N. MRR accumulates by averaging the Reciprocal Rank for
all the queries Q. This focuses on the ﬁrst effective results
for a query, while ignoring the overall ranking. This is the
standard metric used for the CodeSearchNet benchmark. While
MAP is more typical for trace retrieval tasks, we include this
metric to compare our intermediate-trained model against the
approaches in other studies for code search problem.
MRR =1
QQX
ji=1j1
1stRanki(4)
Precision@K: Precision@K evaluates how many related
artifacts are retrieved and ranked in the top K. The formula
for this metric is shown in Eq. 5. We provide results with K
values of 1 to 3. A trace model with high Precision@K means
users are more likely to ﬁnd at least one related target artifact
in the top K results.
Precision@K =PQ
ijReli@Kj
jRelj(5)
As we can see, MRR and Precision@K ignore recall and fo-
cus on evaluating whether the search result can ﬁnd interesting
results for a user. They are ideal for the code search problem
but not for traceability where recall is particularly important.
Therefore, we apply only F-score and MAP@3 to evaluate
traceability results.As the majority of our queries have fewer
than three correct links, a perfect MAP@3 score represents
close to 100% recall.
VI. R ESULTS ANDDISCUSSION
We report performance results of T-BERT models for the
code search problem and the NLAs-PLAs traceability problem,
and address the RQs deﬁned in Sec. I.A. Evaluating the Code Search Problem
Our ﬁrst evaluation explores how well T-BERT models
perform when datasets have adequate labeled examples. We
trained T-BERT models for the three architectures introduced
in Sec. III-C, using the training part of the CodeSearchNet
dataset. For the T-BERT models which are trained with ONS
technique, we add a star sign after the model names to
distinguish them from the T- BERT model trained with DRNS.
For example, SINGLE* refers to the model with single BERT
architecture and trained with online negative sampling. The
performance of these six types of models are reported in
Table. II. In addition, we compare T-BERT models against
three classical tracing techniques of VSM, LDA, LSI and also
a deep learning trace model, TraceNN [10] for this dataset.
Other researchers such as Hamel et al. [30] and Feng [26]
leveraged the same dataset to conduct code search study, and
so we select the methods which achieved the best MRR scores
in their study as a comparison to T-BERT, and created our
evaluation dataset for CodeSearchNet in the same way. For
each doc-string, we combined the related function with 999
unrelated ones, and charged the retrieval models with ﬁnding
the correct function among one thousand candidates. However,
the SINGLE models were not able to efﬁciently process the
entire dataset, and so in this case we evaluated only 100 out of
the total 22,176 queries. The comparison of MRR scores are
shown in Table. II. To observe the learning process for each
TABLE II: Evaluation of T-BERT models on the CodeSearch-
Net Challenge datasetF1 F2 MAP MRR Pr@1 Pr@2 Pr@3
TWIN 0.497 0.563 0.735 0.756 0.646 0.787 0.842
SIAMESE 0.604 0.668 0.814 0.825 0.729 0.866 0.915
SINGLE 0.482 0.572 0.825 0.839 0.730 0.900 0.930
TWIN* 0.559 0.626 0.794 0.809 0.712 0.846 0.890
SIAMESE* 0.594 0.655 0.817 0.829 0.738 0.866 0.910
SINGLE* 0.612 0.678 0.837 0.851 0.750 0.910 0.930
VSM 0.219 0.255 0.314 0.351 0.251 0.341 0.397
LDA 0.005 0.010 0.012 0.021 0.008 0.013 0..017
LSI 0.003 0.007 0.014 0.025 0.009 0.015 0.020
TNN-LSTM 0.179 0.245 0.351 0.400 0.269 0.386 0.457
TNN-BiGRU 0.221 0.29 0.392 0.438 0.304 0.432 0.504
JV-biRNN *0.321
JV-SelfAtt *0.692
MSC *0.860
JV=Joint Vector [30]; MSC=MS-CodeBERT [26]; TNN = TraceNN [10];
*Previously reported results against same CodeSearch-Net challenge dataset.
TABLE III: Training and testing time for T-BERT models on
code search problem. The test time is recorded for a test set
with 100 queries.
Strategy TWIN SIAMESE SINGLE
Train(hr) DRNS 156h 138h 164h
Test(sec) DRNS 3254s 3264s 183357s
Train(hr) ONS 146h 142h 283h
Test(sec) ONS 3211s 3265s 193667s
model, we visualized the learning curve in Fig .4 for the ﬁrst
33035,000 steps of optimizations. We evaluate the performance
of each model at intervals of 1000 steps during the training
by applying the intermediate model against small testing sets
composed of 200 development examples.
B. Evaluate NLA-PLA Traceability
We then evaluated the T-BERT models on the NLA-PLA
Traceability problem. As previously described, we used 8 folds
of trace links for training, 1 fold for developing and 1 fold for
testing. To explore our RQ3, we conducted a controlled exper-
iment, in which we trained two groups of T-BERT models. In
the ﬁrst group, we continued training the T-BERT model which
had been intermediate-trained in our previous experiment. In
the second group, we trained the T-BERT models without
applying transferred knowledge learned from intermediate-
training . When we conducted model training, we applied the
same training dataset and ONS techniques to the two groups.
To maintain consistency of abbreviations, we name the models
in the ﬁrst group, for example, as SINGLE*+T; and the models
in the second group as SINGLE*. The result of this experiment
are shown in Table. IV, while the learning curve for the T-
BERT models showing the ﬁne-tuning to traceability tasks is
shown in Fig. 5. We show only the learning curve for Pgcli
data due to space constraints.
C. RQ2: How does ONS alleviate the glass ceiling problem?
In this section, we discuss how the effectiveness of ONS
for T-BERT models alleviates the glass ceiling problem. This
question helps us to identify the best approach for training
T-BERT models. To answer this question we apply both ONS
and DRNS to the same T-BERT architecture to create test and
control groups. Fig. 4 shows the learning curve of T-BERT
models on CodeSearchNet dataset during training. The orange
lines represent the models trained with ONS while blue lines
represent those trained with DRNS. We ﬁnd that for TWIN
and SINGLE model, the orange line is always above the blue
line, meaning that ONS can accelerate the learning for T-
BERT models but also let it converge at a higher value. While
for SIAMESE we ﬁnd the orange line is above blue line in
the early steps, but soon converges at a similar level. This
result indicates ONS beneﬁts the T-BERT model training by
introducing harder negative examples. The evaluation results
shown in the ﬁrst six rows of Table. II also support this ﬁnding,
as the TWIN* and SINGLE* models (line 4,6) achieve better
results than T-BERT models (line 1,3) from the perspectives of
all metrics. SIAMESE* (line 5) and SIAMESE (line 2) have a
very close result where the difference of all metrics are within
0.5% except F2 score (1.3%).
We report the training time for DRNS and ONS in Table III.
ONS introduces initial overheads in constructing each batch,
but then has fewer candidates to evaluate and sort. In contrast,
DRNS has no upfront construction costs, but must sample data
from a large list, creating a performance bottleneck. The use
of ONS only signiﬁcantly increased training time except for
the SINGLE model which is particularly slow on evaluation.We conclude that ONS delivers better accuracy than DRNS,
and only increases training times for models (e.g., SINGLE)
which have slow evaluation processes.
D. RQ1: Which T-BERT architecture is better?
This RQ focuses on comparing the accuracy and efﬁciency
of T-BERT when used for trace retrieval tasks. Performance
comparisons were conducted on T-BERT* models, as we have
shown in RQ2 that T-BERT* models returned better accuracy
than T-BERT ones. To answer this question, we further divided
our questions into three sub RQs as following.
RQ1.1: Are T-BERT models capable of resolving the
CodeSearchNet and NLA-PLA traceability problem?
Table. II shows that SINGLE*, TWIN*, and SIAMESE*
(line 4-6) can achieve F scores around 0.6 and MAP scores
around 0.8. The Precision@3 score for the three models are
around 0.9 which means T-BERT* models can return related
functions in around 9 of 10 user queries. And in 75% to 80%
of cases the correct answer deﬁnition is ranked at the ﬁrst
position. This result shows that all three models are effective
for the CodeSearchNet challenge. Among these three models,
SINGLE* achieves the best performance with respect to all
metrics. However, the gap between these three models is small,
and all three models clearly outperform the base line created
by the three IR models of VSM, LSI, and LDA.
In Table. IV, the ﬁrst three rows show that T-BERT* models
applied to the traceability challenge and trained without the
beneﬁt of transfer knowledge are ranked in the same way
as for the code search problem. However, the performance
gap between these three models increases. This suggests that
the size of training data has different impacts on the three
types of architecture. Since, TWIN* model includes two inner
BERT models, the parameters in this architecture are doubled,
and it therefore requires more training examples to tune the
models. Nevertheless, all T-BERT* models achieved achieve
better results than the IR model baselines. Especially in Keras
dataset, SIAMESE* and SINGLE* (line2 and 3) have an F
score above 0.95 and MAP of 0.99 indicating that T-BERT
can provide perfect tracing results in some scenarios.
RQ1.2: Which T-BERT model most effectively addresses
the two problems of data sparsity and performance ?
We need to take both accuracy and efﬁciency into con-
sideration when selecting a model for use in production.
As discussed in RQ1.1, the SINGLE* model achieves best
performance; however, it is very slow for processing large
scale datasets. As shown in Table. III, TWIN and SIAMESE
need around 3000 seconds to evaluate 100 queries while
SINGLE needs around 20000 seconds. We estimate that it will
take around 6000 hours for SINGLE to evaluate the whole
CodeSearchNet test with our current experiment setup. But
for TWIN and SIAMESE, it took us only around 20 hours
to evaluate the whole test set in practise. In the traceability
challenge, the test set is relatively tiny. Taking Pgcli for
example, it contains 2704 candidate links compose of 52
source artifact and 52 target artifacts. TWIN and SIAMESE
both take around 160 seconds to ﬁnish the task while the
331TABLE IV: Evaluation of models on NLAs-PLAs traceability
Pgcli Flask Keras
F1 F2 MAP F1 F2 MAP F1 F2 MAP
TWIN* 0.450 0.491 0.574 0.524 0.577 0.683 0.450 0.491 0.574
SIAMESE* 0.621 0.654 0.728 0.681 0.731 0.801 0.962 0.962 0.990
SINGLE* 0.707 0.745 0.785 0.841 0.873 0.952 0.931 0.925 0.971
TWIN* T 0.686 0.709 0.766 0.750 0.781 0.869 0.953 0.970 0.978
SIAMESE* T 0.729 0.748 0.779 0.820 0.830 0.920 0.971 0.977 0.990
SINGLE* T 0.730 0.789 0.859 0.884 0.862 0.92 0.972 0.989 0.990
VSM 0.376 0.424 0.506 0.509 0.474 0.540 0.532 0.512 0.703
LDA 0.121 0.226 0.208 0.182 0.241 0.227 0.290 0.367 0.333
LSI 0.085 0.145 0.147 0.127 0.164 0.142 0.072 0.126 0.109
TNN-LSTM 0.138 0.179 0.128 0.106 0.126 0.080 0.053 0.087 0.034
TNN-BiGRU 0.062 0.116 0.006 0.066 0.100 0.044 0.063 0.119 0.073
T=Transfer learning, TNN = TraceNN [10];
(a) TWIN
 (b) SIAMESE
 (c) SINGLE
Fig. 4: The learning curve for T-BERT and T-BERT* models on code search challenge. This ﬁgure shows the MAP scores
(Y-Axis) over the ﬁrst 35K (X-Axis) Adam optimization steps.
SINGLE model takes around one hour. SIAMESE and TWIN
architectures accelerate the process by decoupling the feature
vector creation steps. In the SINGLE architecture, NL and
PL document pairs are fed to BERT to create a joint feature
vectors. This step is extremely expensive and creates the main
performance bottleneck for the SINGLE model. Assuming we
have N source and N target artifacts. SINGLE has a time
complexity of O(N2K)for creating feature vectors for all
the candidate links, where K refer to the time consumed by
the BERT model to convert an input token sequence into a
feature vector. TWIN and SIAMESE only need O(NK)
to convert artifacts into feature vectors and then O(N2)
time to concatenate the feature vectors together. The time
complexity of TWIN and SIAMESE is one order of magnitude
lower than the SINGLE model thus more scalable to projects
with massive artifacts. We argue that SIAMESE is the most
appropriate model for addressing NLA-PLA traceability taking
both accuracy and efﬁciency into consideration, because it
can achieve an accuracy close to the SINGLE architecture
for the traceability challenge while maintaining the low time
complexity of the TWIN architecture. However, in cases where
accuracy is the primary concern, e.g. traceability for safety
TABLE V: Model performance on Pgcli dataset for NLA-PLA.
TWIN* SIAMESE* SINGLE*
Train(hr) 12h 12h 13h
Test(sec) 170s 163s 5395scritical projects, users should adopt SINGLE model supported
by high-performance hardware.
RQ1.3: How do T-BERT models compare to other ap-
proaches ?
For the CodeSearchNet challenge, we compared the perfor-
mance of T-BERT models to Joint Vector Embedding (JVE)
and MS-CodeBERT. JVE’s architecture is similar to TWIN,
and leverages two encoders to create feature vectors for a
classiﬁcation network. Previous studies have reported 60% as
the highest MRR achieved by JVE on the same dataset, which
is lower than T-BERT models. MS-CodeBERT, provided by
Microsoft, used the same architecture as SINGLE in our ex-
periment. However, MS-CodeBERT was trained with a batch
size of 256 on a cluster with 16 Tesla GPU, and no special
techniques were applied during training. Our machine only
allows one small batch due to memory limitations, but SIN-
GLE* model’s MRR results were only 0.9% lower than MS-
CodeBERT, indicating that our training techniques partially
alleviate limitations introduced by less powerful hardware.
TNN [10] is an RNN based trace model proposed by Guo
et al. and designed for generating NLA-NLA links. We recon-
structed the model according to the authors’ speciﬁcations and
applied it to our NLA-PLA problem for comparison purposes.
TNN utilizes Word2Vec embedding to transform tokens into
vectors. It uses two alternate RNN networks, LSTM or Bi-
directional GRU (BiGRU) to generate semantic representations
of NLA and PLA, and feeds these semantic hidden states to the
integration layer to generate a new hidden state representing
332Fig. 5: Learning curve of T-BERT* models on Pgcli dataset
for NLA-PLA trace challenge. This ﬁgure shows the MAP
scores (Y-Axix) over 5k Adam optimization steps (X-Axis)
the correlations between the NLA and PLA from which
links are generated. Our embedding layer was constructed by
unsupervised training of a skip-gram Word2Vec model using
artifacts from the three OSS reported in Table I. We evaluated
both LSTM and BiGRU for the RNN layer in this study. TNN
results are shown at the bottom of Table. IV, and show that it
underperformed all BERT models and VSM on all three OSS
projects. We provide an illustrated example in Fig. 6, showing
T-BERT and VSM results for a commit-issue pair, tagged by
the committer as related.
Guo et al., reported improvements over the VSM model
for their NLA-NLA dataset, we were unable to replicate
these for our NLA-PLA problem. An inspection of the TNN
learning curve indicated that TNN effectively reduced the
loss and improved the link prediction accuracy for all three
training datasets in training dataset, but converged early in the
validation datasets and then decreased in accuracy - indicating
an overﬁtting problem. There are several possible explanations
for these results. First, the dataset used by Guo et al., contained
1,387 positive links versus our 530-739 links, which could be
insufﬁcient for RNN training. Second, programming languages
have an open vocabulary in which new terms can be created
as variable and function names, and TNN may therefore need
a larger training set to generate NLA-PLA links versus NLA-
NLA ones. Our hypotheses are supported by the observation
that TNN does not overﬁt when applied to the CodeSearchNet
where larger numbers of training examples are provided. T-
BERT models leverage transferred knowledge from pretrained
language models and adjacent problems to reduce the require-
ments of the training dataset size, and are therefore able to
handle tracing challenges which can not easily be addressed
by classical Deep Learning trace models. This characteristic
makes T-BERT more practical for industrial applications.
E. RQ3: To what extent can T-BERT leverage transfer knowl-
edge from code search to software traceability
Table IV the T-BERT model trained with and without
transferred knowledge from the post-pretrained model. Theresults show that intermediate-training T-BERT models on the
code search task can signiﬁcantly improve their performance
on the traceability problem. Taking SIAMESE on Pgcli for
example, the F2 score increased from 0.654 to 0.748, while the
MAP score increased from 0.728 to 0.779. Similar results are
observed for the other datasets with different T-BERT models.
This suggests that the knowledge learned from text to structure
code (function deﬁnition) can be effectively transferred to
cases where 1) code formats are more fuzzy and 2) training
data has limited labels. Intermediate-training improvements
Fig. 6: In this example, a link is tagged by developers, retrieved
by the T-BERT model (with a high score o 0.965 due to
semantic similarity and context) and missed by VSM, because
the key terms ’request‘ and ’json‘ are common terms.
were observed to different extents across the three architecture
types. As shown in Fig. 5, the blue line (SINGLE) converged
at a very early stage, showing that SINGLE needed only
relatively few epochs on the smaller task-speciﬁc dataset
to localize its transferred knowledge. SIAMESE converged
slower, while TWIN converged slowest of all, indicating that
each architecture has a different capacity for transferring
knowledge.
VII. R ELATED WORK
Our study constructs T-BERT models using three different
architectures, all of which have previously been used to
address related problems in other domains. Lu et al. leveraged
a TWIN-like model, named TwinBERT, as a search engine to
deliver ads alongside organic search results [39]. They used
reinforcement training techniques and found that TwinBERT
could return results with high accuracy and low latency.
Reimers et al. proposed a SIAMESE architecture to address
problems such as Semantic Textual Similarity [29]. They
trained their model to determine whether two sentences were
related through contradiction or entailment, and utilized SNLI
[40] and the Multi-Genre NLI [41] dataset for training and
evaluation. Their results showed that SIAMESE BERT could
achieve a high Spearman Rank Correlation score around 0.76.
They also found that use of averaging pooling was more
effective than max pooling and ﬁrst token (the [CLS] token)
pooling; and that concatenating source and target hidden
states as (u;v;ku vk)achieved best results. We adopted
333these ﬁndings when we built T-BERT models for this study.
However, no study has yet been conducted comparing the
TWIN, SIAMESE and SINGLE architectures.
To address the NLA-PLA challenge, we adopted the code
search problem as our intermediate solution. Several studies
have addressed the code search problem using a recurrent
neural network (RNN). We have already made comparisons to
the work by Feng et al. [26] and Huian et al. [30] in Table. II;
however, in another study, Gu et al. [42] converted method
speciﬁcations into API call sequences and then processed the
sequence with RNN. They reported achieving 0.6 MRR in a
test set with 100 queries. However, we can not directly adapt
this method to the traceability challenge, because, unlike API
calls, the statements in code change sets are not structured.
A related domain for addressing NLA-PLA is source code
embedding. By converting both source code and documents
into distributed representations, the relevance between these
two type of artifacts can be effectively calculated through
distance metrics such as Cosine and Euclidean Distance.
Code2Vec [43] belong to this type of approach. T-BERT
models can adapt to this type of training by integrating Cosine
Embedding Loss in the classiﬁcation header. We leave this
exploration for future work.
VIII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
There are several threats to validity in this study. First,
Our current experiments have only been conducted on Python
projects, and results could differ when applied to other
programming languages. Also, due to time constraints we
ﬁne-tuned and evaluated the T-BERT model performance on
only three OSS projects, which may not be enough to draw
generalized conclusions. Second, we construct our experiment
datasets from OSS projects by mining the issues and commits
whose IDs are explicitly marked as related by project main-
tainers. Although, this is a conventional way of leveraging
OSS projects for traceability, true links may be missed. For
example, a bug report may have hidden dependencies on
several other issues such as a feature request or other bug
report even though a commit addressing the parent bug report
is not marked as ‘related’. We alleviate the impact of this
phenomena by adopting the data processing suggested by
Liu et.al. [38]. Another important threat is that while the
SINGLE architecture, trained for code search problem, does
not outperform CodeBERT, further improvements could be
achieved using hyper parameter optimization. Our experiments
were limited by hardware availability for conducting excessive
hyper parameter tuning. However, the performance compar-
ison across T-BERT models should still be valid because
all experiments were conducted with the same parameters.
Finally, due to processing time constraints, we evaluated the
SINGLE model on 100 queries whilst using the entire testing
set for the other models (in Table. II). Although not reported
we also evaluated TWIN and SIAMESE on 100 queries and
observed that they achieved almost identical results to those
obtained from the whole test set indicating that 100 queries
was a reasonable sample size for the SINGLE model.IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study has explored several different BERT architectures
for generating trace links between natural language artifacts
and programming language artifacts. Our experimental re-
sults showed that the SINGLE architecture achieved the best
accuracy but at long execution times, whilst the SIAMESE
architecture achieved similar accuracy with faster execution
times. Second, we showed that ONS training (based on
negative sampling) improved both performance and model
convergence speed without incurring signiﬁcant performance
overheads when compared to DRNS. Third, we found that T-
BERT was able to effectively transfer knowledge learned from
the code search problem to NLA-PLA traceability, meaning
that intermediate-trained T-BERT models can be effectively
applied to software engineering projects with limited training
examples, alleviating the data sparsity problem for deep neural
trace models. Regarding the training time, we showed that the
same intermediate-trained T-BERT can be applied for OSS
projects in three different domains. By avoiding the need for
intermediate training on each individual project, our approach
was able to efﬁciently adapt to new domains. In conclusion,
our results show that T-BERT generates trace links at far
higher degrees of accuracy than existing information retrieval
and RNN techniques – bringing us closer to achieving the
vision of practical and trustworthy traceability.
To support replication and reproducibility, we have provided
links throughout this paper to the datasets that we used and we
provide a complete implementation of T-BERT and execution
instructions on github3.
In future work we will evaluate our approach across more
diverse project domains and programming languages, and will
explore its application to more diverse types of software
artifacts such as requirements, design, and test cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded under US National
Science Foundation Grant SHF:1901059.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Rierson, Developing Safety-Critical Software: A Practical Guide for
Aviation Software and DO-178C Compliance. CRC Press, 2013.
[2] A. Mahmoud, N. Niu, and S. Xu, “A semantic relatedness approach for
traceability link recovery,” in 2012 20th IEEE international conference
on program comprehension (ICPC). IEEE, 2012, pp. 183–192.
[3] G. Antoniol, G. Canfora, G. Casazza, A. De Lucia, and E. Merlo,
“Recovering traceability links between code and documentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 970–983,
2002.
[4] J. Huffman Hayes, A. Dekhtyar, and S. K. Sundaram, “Advancing can-
didate link generation for requirements tracing: The study of methods,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–19,
2006.
[5] A. De Lucia, F. Fasano, R. Oliveto, and G. Tortora, “Enhancing an
artefact management system with traceability recovery features,” in 20th
IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM), 2004,
pp. 306–315.
3T-BERT source code https://github.com/jinfenglin/TraceBERT
334[6] P. Rempel, P. M ¨ader, and T. Kuschke, “Towards feature-aware retrieval
of reﬁnement traces,” in 7th International Workshop on Traceability
in Emerging Forms of Software Engineering, TEFSE 2013, 19
May, 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA, N. Niu and P. M ¨ader, Eds.
IEEE Computer Society, 2013, pp. 100–104. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEFSE.2013.6620163
[7] A. Dekhtyar, J. H. Hayes, S. K. Sundaram, E. A. Holbrook, and
O. Dekhtyar, “Technique integration for requirements assessment,”
in15th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference,
RE 2007, October 15-19th, 2007, New Delhi, India. IEEE
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 141–150. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2007.17
[8] H. U. Asuncion, A. U. Asuncion, and R. N. Taylor, “Software
traceability with topic modeling,” in Proceedings of the 32nd
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume
1, ICSE 2010, Cape Town, South Africa, 1-8 May 2010, J. Kramer,
J. Bishop, P. T. Devanbu, and S. Uchitel, Eds. ACM, 2010, pp. 95–104.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1806799.1806817
[9] H. Sultanov, J. Huffman Hayes, and W.-K. Kong, “Application of swarm
techniques to requirements tracing,” Requirements Engineering , vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 209–226, 2011.
[10] J. Guo, J. Cheng, and J. Cleland-Huang, “Semantically enhanced soft-
ware traceability using deep learning techniques,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM
39th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
2017, pp. 3–14.
[11] G. Spanoudakis, A. Zisman, E. P ´erez-Mi ˜nana, and P. Krause, “Rule-
based generation of requirements traceability relations,” Journal of
Systems and Software, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 105–127, 2004.
[12] J. Guo, J. Cleland-Huang, and B. Berenbach, “Foundations for an expert
system in domain-speciﬁc traceability,” in 21st IEEE International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2013, pp. 42–51.
[13] J. Cleland-Huang, P. M ¨ader, M. Mirakhorli, and S. Amornborvornwong,
“Breaking the big-bang practice of traceability: Pushing timely trace
recommendations to project stakeholders,” in 2012 20th IEEE
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), Chicago, IL,
USA, September 24-28, 2012, M. P. E. Heimdahl and P. Sawyer,
Eds. IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp. 231–240. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2012.6345809
[14] S. Lohar, S. Amornborvornwong, A. Zisman, and J. Cleland-Huang,
“Improving trace accuracy through data-driven conﬁguration and compo-
sition of tracing features,” in Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting
on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, 2013, pp. 378–388.
[15] M. Gethers, R. Oliveto, D. Poshyvanyk, and A. De Lucia, “On inte-
grating orthogonal information retrieval methods to improve traceability
link recovery,” in 27th IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance (ICSM), 2011, pp. 133–142.
[16] M. Rath, J. Rendall, J. L. Guo, J. Cleland-Huang, and P. M ¨ader,
“Traceability in the wild: automatically augmenting incomplete trace
links,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software
Engineering, 2018, pp. 834–845.
[17] Y . Liu, J. Lin, Q. Zeng, M. Jiang, and J. Cleland-Huang, “Towards
semantically guided traceability,” in International Conference on Re-
quirements Engineering, vol. 2020, 2020.
[18] S. Lohar, S. Amornborvornwong, A. Zisman, and J. Cleland-Huang,
“Improving trace accuracy through data-driven conﬁguration and com-
position of tracing features,” in 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2013, pp. 378–388.
[19] M. Borg, C. Englund, and B. Duran, “Traceability and deep learning-
safety-critical systems with traces ending in deep neural networks,” In
Proc. of the Grand Challenges of Traceability: The Next Ten Years, pp.
48–49, 2017.
[20] Y . Zhao, T. S. Zaman, T. Yu, and J. H. Hayes, “Using deep learning
to improve the accuracy of requirements to code traceability,” Grand
Challenges of Traceability: The Next Ten Years, p. 22, 2017.
[21] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.[22] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
[23] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[24] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[25] J. Liu, Y . Lin, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Xqa: A cross-lingual open-domain
question answering dataset,” in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 2358–2368.
[26] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou, B. Qin,
T. Liu, D. Jiang et al., “Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming
and natural languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155, 2020.
[27] J. Cleland-Huang, O. C. Gotel, J. Huffman Hayes, P. M ¨ader, and
A. Zisman, “Software traceability: trends and future directions,” in
Proceedings of the on Future of Software Engineering. ACM, 2014,
pp. 55–69.
[28] Wikipedia, “Language model — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia,”
2020, [Online; accessed 22-July-2020]. [Online]. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languagemodel Bidirectional
[29] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
[30] H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,
“CodeSearchNet Challenge: Evaluating the State of Semantic Code
Search,” arXiv:1909.09436 [cs, stat], Sep. 2019, arXiv: 1909.09436.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09436
[31] [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/huggingface/CodeBERTa-
small-v1
[32] [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/codistai/codeBERT-small-v2
[33] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V . Le, and C. D. Manning, “Electra: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.10555, 2020.
[34] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[35] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “Facenet: A uniﬁed embed-
ding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 815–
823.
[36] Wikipedia contributors, “Triplet loss,” 202-, [Online; accessed 22-Aug-
2020]. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triplet loss
[37] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple frame-
work for contrastive learning of visual representations,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.05709, 2020.
[38] Y . Liu, J. Lin, and J. Cleland-Huang, “Traceability support for multi-
lingual software projects,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16940, 2020.
[39] W. Lu, J. Jiao, and R. Zhang, “Twinbert: Distilling knowledge to
twin-structured bert models for efﬁcient retrieval,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.06275, 2020.
[40] S. R. Bowman, G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning, “A large an-
notated corpus for learning natural language inference,” in Proceedings
of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015.
[41] A. Williams, N. Nangia, and S. Bowman, “A broad-coverage challenge
corpus for sentence understanding through inference,” in Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp.
1112–1122. [Online]. Available: http://aclweb.org/anthology/N18-1101
[42] X. Gu, H. Zhang, and S. Kim, “Deep code search,” in Proceedings
of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE
2018, Gothenburg, Sweden, May 27 - June 03, 2018, M. Chaudron,
I. Crnkovic, M. Chechik, and M. Harman, Eds. ACM, 2018, pp.
933–944. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180167
[43] U. Alon, M. Zilberstein, O. Levy, and E. Yahav, “code2vec: Learning
distributed representations of code,” Proceedings of the ACM on Pro-
gramming Languages, vol. 3, no. POPL, pp. 1–29, 2019.
335