Onboarding vs. Diversity, Productivity, and Quality
– Empirical Study of the OpenStack Ecosystem
Armstrong Foundjem†, Ellis E. Eghan‡, Bram Adams†
MCIS Laboratory — (†Queen’s University,‡Polytechnique Montr ´eal, Canada)
{a.foundjem, bram.adams }@queensu.ca, ellis.eghan@polymtl.ca
Abstract —Despite the growing success of open-source soft-
ware ecosystems (SECOs), their sustainability depends on the
recruitment and involvement of ever-larger contributors. Assuch, onboarding, i.e., the socio-technical adaptation of newcontributors to a SECO, forms a signiﬁcant aspect of a SECO’sgrowth that requires substantial resources. Unfortunately, despitetheoretical models and initial user studies to examine the potentialbeneﬁts of onboarding, little is known about the process ofSECO onboarding, nor about the socio-technical beneﬁts anddrawbacks of contributors’ onboarding experience in a SECO. Toaddress these, we ﬁrst carry out an observational study of 72 newcontributors during an OpenStack onboarding event to providea catalog of teaching content, teaching strategies, onboardingchallenges, and expected beneﬁts. Next, we empirically validatethe extent to which diversity, productivity, and quality beneﬁtsare achieved by mining code changes, reviews, and contributors’issues with(out) OpenStack onboarding experience. Among otherﬁndings, our study shows a signiﬁcant correlation with increasinggender diversity (65% for both females and non-binary contribu-tors) and patch acceptance rates (13.5%). Onboarding also has asigniﬁcant negative correlation with the time until a contributor’sﬁrst commit and bug-proneness of contributions.
Index T erms—Onboarding, Mentoring, Collaboration, contrib-
utors, knowledge-transfer, Software ecosystems, Open source.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Substantial research conducted by both the academic and
industrial sectors over the past two decades has attributed
most of the success of open-source software (OSS) projectsand ecosystems (SECOs) to the strong involvement of con-tributors, both volunteers and paid employees of involvedcompanies [1]–[4]. Apart from attracting and retaining tal-ented contributors, another major challenge faced by softwareprojects and SECOs is the practical training of new contrib-utors [5], [6], speciﬁcally, the onboarding experience of newcontributors.
Despite sharing similar goals, SECO-level onboarding pro-
grams differ from onboarding programs of individual projectssince a SECO is not just the sum of its parts but also “aset of independent and interrelated OSS projects workingtogether for a common objective” [1]. On the one hand,individual projects use different workﬂows and technologies(requiring different skill-sets) and have independent sets offeatures and release roadmap. On the other hand, projects haveto collaborate with other projects that they depend on. Suchcross-project coordination implies the need for onboardingto cover inter-disciplinary processes and tools, compared tothe more domain-speciﬁc training individual projects provide.SECOs have to ensure that, despite differences in roadmaps,all of their projects can be integrated at set times and canachieve major SECO milestones such as a joint SECO release(e.g., Eclipse, OpenStack, Linux distributions).
Thus, SECO-level onboarding programs should enable new
contributors to learn and master both the general SECOprocesses and concepts and the speciﬁc workﬂows and toolsof the individual SECO project(s) in which they want tobe active contributors. Several existing works have exploredonboarding as an event within proprietary and open-sourcesoftware communities [6]–[9]. However, these studies focus onindividual projects. Only a few studies have investigated thebeneﬁts and drawbacks of contributors’ (one-time) onboardingevent in large organizations [10], [11]. Thus, little is known yetabout the beneﬁts and drawbacks of contributors onboardingin the context of SECOs.
Therefore, we aim at reducing the gap in current litera-
ture regarding understanding the process and impact
1of
onboarding in/on open-source SECOs by conducting an
empirical study of the OpenStack SECO. We choose theOpenStack SECO among other contenders such as GNOME,the Apache foundation, Eclipse, CRAN, or the Linux kernelbecause it is one of the world’s fastest-growing open-sourcesoftware ecosystems [12]. OpenStack has over 100K commu-nity members distributed across 182 countries, managed by aconsortium of about 693 supporting companies, and organizestwo major onboarding events yearly in different geographicallocations.
First, we follow a mixed-method research approach by ﬁrst
performing a direct observational study of 72 new contributorsto identify the activities performed during a two-day Open-Stack onboarding event and identify any perceived challengesand beneﬁts of SECO onboarding. Next, we conduct a quanti-tative study of the submitted code changes, code reviews, andissues of 1,281 contributors of the OpenStack ecosystem tomeasure the correlation between onboarding experience andcontributor diversity, productivity, and contribution quality.
Our ﬁndings show that the OpenStack SECO uses a wide va-
riety of content and strategies to train new contributors duringSECO-level onboarding, trying to address 13 challenges in-volved in SECO onboarding. We also identiﬁed eight beneﬁtsexpected by SECO onboarding stakeholders. Our quantitativevalidation of three of these expected beneﬁts shows thatparticipating in onboarding correlates with (amongst others):
1) 65% more gender diversity (both female and non-binary);2) a median of 14% less buggy code contributions;3) a median increase of 61% in the average code churn;
1Any usage of the words “impact” or “inﬂuence” refers to the correlation
sense of these terms, and does not imply causality.
10332021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00097
4) a median 45% (35%) shorter time to get code contribu-
tions accepted for female (other) contributors;
5) a 35% (10%/4.5%) longer average retention rate for
female (male/non-binary) contributors in the SECO;
6) a median 13.5% higher pull request acceptance rate.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. The SECO Onboarding Process
Given that SECOs constitute a complex set of inter-
dependent project/cross-project teams working together for
a common goal [1], a SECO’s onboarding program is a“continuous” process that usually has two phases [13]: (i)top-level training, and (ii) (more traditional) project-speciﬁc
training [8], [10], [14].
First, the top-level training introduces new contributors to
the SECO’s overall complexities, such as its organization,
overall workﬂow, SECO-wide tools, processes, etc. Such ac-tivities also provide networking opportunities between new-comers and mentors across the SECO’s sub-projects. Then,newcomers move to (sub-)project-speciﬁc training, under the
guidance of a personal mentor, to learn the ins and outs ofa speciﬁc sub-project in the SECO. The expected outcome of
the overall SECO onboarding process is that new contributorscan make their ﬁrst accepted contribution.
For example, the OpenStack SECO has a dedicated Open-
Stack Upstream Institute (OUI) [15] responsible for organizing
its onboarding process. OUI is necessary since OpenStack
ranks among the largest open-source collaborative commu-
nities globally with a codebase size of over 20M LOC and
produces a new SECO release every six months [16]. Due
to its vast diversity in projects (with over 2,000 project/sub-
project, technical standards, and social norms), new contribu-tors may experience difﬁculties understanding the roadmap ofOpenStack, which can signiﬁcantly slow down contributions
to the codebase.
The OUI organizes the OpenStack onboarding process in
two phases — a two-day physical top-level training event,
followed by several months of one-to-one online mentoring.
The physical event serves to share knowledge on the cross-project processes (planning and dependencies) and tools suchas ZUUL (for CI/CD) and Storyboard (for issues tracking)
designed to coordinate SECO-level activities. Likewise, the
online mentoring phase focuses on processes and tools speciﬁcto sub-projects, as well as each project’s own work culture.Since OpenStack SECO is distributed across different geo-locations, the OUI has to balance the in-person top-level
training event’s location and time to be equally accessible
across new contributors.
B. Related Work
Prior studies mostly focused on the project-speciﬁc on-
boarding phase.
Sharma et al. [8] explored the relationship between suc-
cessful (short-term) onboarding results and job satisfaction
(contributors’ intention to either leave or remain active withan organization). Their results suggest that job satisfactionis directly related to both onboarding success and turnover
intention. However, they found no relationship in workplacequality. Our study identiﬁed eight beneﬁts of onboarding at theSECO level and found that contributors who did onboardingstay longer in the SECO than those who did not.
Fagerholm et al. [10] explored onboarding in a pilot pro-
gram organized and sponsored by Facebook (under the Educa-tion Modernization Program for OSS projects) in collaborationwith universities across the globe. A study conducted with
120 students showed that participants who were deliberately
mentored during the entire onboarding process were more
motivated and committed than their counterparts who did notfollow the onboarding process. Our study also shows thatcontributors who did onboarding were self-motivated and more
productive than those who did not do onboarding.
Viviani et al. [14] took a different approach and focused on
onboarding in smaller companies that follow a fast software
release cycle. They observed a stronger bond among devel-
opers, mainly due to close mentoring relationships betweencore reviewers and younger developers. Contrarily, our studyfocuses on large and complex SECO. However, we also found
new contributors collaborating with mentors (expert-novice
collaboration) and expert-expert and novice-novice collabora-
tion.
Britto et al. [17] adopt a model to measure the state of
onboarding in software organizations. Steinmacher et al. [18]qualitatively study systematic literature reviews and responses
from various practitioners (including an interview study)across several OSS projects to understand the obstacles newdevelopers in an ecosystem from actively contributing to
projects. In our research, we found 13 challenges associated
with SECO onboarding.
Using the GitHub ecosystem as a case study, Casalnuovo et
al. [11] investigate the effects of socialization on a developer
joining a new project, a process which the authors refer to as
onboarding. They analyze the information of 1,255 developerscontributing to a total of 58,092 GitHub projects. Their anal-ysis shows that both the social and technical factors of prior
connections and experiences that developers established with
experienced team members of a new project have a lastingeffect that substantially affects these new members’ produc-tivity. Our work found that contributors who participated inthe mentoring program were more productive than those whodid not participate.
Labuschagne et al. [19] studied the impact of the onboarding
program at Mozilla and found that onboarding does not relate
to contributor retention. They did not control for prior expe-
rience or self-motivation of contributors. At the same time,we show that self-motivation and commitment are challengesSECOs should manage. The onboarding program correlates to
a high retention rate, productivity, quality, and diversity.
On the other hand, Zhang et al. [2] studied how companies
collaborate within OpenStack by measuring productivity at the
release level (while we focus on the release before OpenStackintroduces onboarding). Even though their work is not directly
related to onboarding at the SECO-level, it, however, explores
1034contributors’ paid and volunteered productivity, which, in
our case, refers to project-level mentoring for onboarding
contributors.
Given that related work has focused mostly on project-
speciﬁc onboarding, this paper ﬁrst studies in detail the top-level SECO onboarding phase through an observational study.
Onboarded SECOs’ participants can start contributing to the
codebase after obtaining both the (i) top-level and (ii) project-
speciﬁc know-how. Thus, we quantitatively study the correla-tion between their later contributions (in terms of productivity,code quality, and diversity) and the overall onboarding process
that they followed.
III. O
BSERV ATIONAL STUDY OF TOP-LEVEL SECO
ONBOARDING PHASE
A. Study Design
To understand how a regular, top-level onboarding training
is organized in a SECO, we conducted an observational study
of 72 new contributors at an OpenStack onboarding event heldin Berlin, Germany, on November 11-12, 2018.
In particular, we aim at investigating the following prelim-
inary research questions:
–PRQ
1: What (and how) are the topics taught during a
SECO onboarding event?
–PRQ 2: What are the challenges involved with organizing
and sustaining a SECO onboarding program?
–PRQ 3: What are the beneﬁts of a SECO onboarding
program?
We describe this observational study’s design and present
the results of the PRQ 1below. Meanwhile, we will discuss the
results of PRQ 2and PRQ 3in section IV.
Participant Selection. Participants for our observational
study consist of the pre-registered individuals who completedthe two-days onboarding event in Berlin. All participantssigned a non-disclosure agreement (consent form) with Open-
Stack, willfully granting OpenStack the permission to record
and document all activities during the entire onboarding event.
These participants command good programming skills in
at least Python, have formal college/university education inComputer Science or a related ﬁeld, and no prior experience
with OpenStack or similar SECO. Their average age was 25± 5
years, and they exhibited a high demographic diversity in terms
of continents and gender (male, female, and non-binary). Weobtained this conﬁdential demographic information data either
from the participants themselves before the observation studystarted or from the OpenStack D&I working group’s private
records of contributors’ identities [20], to which we obtainedaccess.
Study Procedure. The observational study involved 72
participants (P1, ..., P72) and 13 mentors (M1, ..., M12),
including the observer (OB1; ﬁrst author).
At any given instance, each of the 12 tables has six
participants and a mentor, with at least one mentor leading atask or an exercise. Participants are encouraged to choose their
seats and team members freely. Besides the high-quality audio-visual equipment that OpenStack provided, OB1 also usedﬁeld notes to document mentors’ and participants’ activities
during the entire onboarding event.
To understand the participants’ various activities, OB1 used
an observational approach with a low degree of interactionwith participants but a high Hawthorne effect [21]: all the72 participants were aware that they were under observation.Moreover, as mentors assign new tasks to participants, OB1would randomly ask a participant to describe the actions takenduring the task using the think-aloud protocol on 24 (2x12)randomly selected participants of the 12 tables.
Qualitative Data analysis The ﬁrst author initially tran-
scribed audio-visual recordings and ﬁeld notes of all the 72
participants. The ﬁrst and second author used a combina-
tion of inductive and deductive coding at sentence/paragraphlevel [22]–[25] to analyze the transcribed text to ﬁnd patterns
and themes relevant to the three PRQs. These themes are
further grouped/regrouped to form a hierarchical structure
known as an afﬁnity diagram [26], which enables us to
visualize how concepts of high-level themes are emerging from
basic low-level codes/labels.
Inductive Coding With no pre-conceived themes/patterns,
the ﬁrst and second authors independently apply inductive cod-
ing on 15% of the transcriptions in the ﬁrst iteration to createan initial coding scheme. At the end of this iteration, the coders
had 66 and 200 codes, respectively. After several discussions
and three more iterations of coding, more informative codesemerged, and we merged low-level codes. Both authors agree
on a set of 128 codes and a three-level hierarchical structureof code categories.
Deductive Coding In this step, two coders independently
apply the existing codes (from the inductive coding step)
on the entire transcribed text to identify code examples.
Then, calculate the inter-rater reliability (IRR) score usingthe Cohen kappa coefﬁcient [27]. We perform three iterations
of deductive coding and achieved IIR scores of 51%, 62.6%,and a ﬁnal score of 100%. These iterations involved mergingﬁve existing codes, renaming or moving codes to ﬁt different
categories, and splitting up some code categories. The result
of our coding is available online [28], and we present the ﬁnal
abstraction of high-level codes in the afﬁnity diagram in Fig. 1.
B. PRQ
1: What (and how) are the topics taught during a
SECO onboarding event?
We grouped the teaching contents (TC) under THeoretical
material (TH), Hands-on content (HO), and the strategies used
to implement both the TH and HO, see (Fig. 1). Our online
repository [28] contains a detailed set of activities and tasksthat participants performed. Using the observational study’stranscripts and notes, we could also determine the relative
weight of the three groups of TC based on the allocation of
time and resources to their corresponding content.
Mentors dedicate 40% of the training materials to TH,
which aims to establish a solid foundation for understanding
the OpenStack community and the major concepts involvedin making open-source contributions to the SECO. Examples
of TH contents are knowledge on community
1035Fig. 1. Materials taught during onboarding and their observed impacts on individual mentees (I), the SECO (E), and companies in the SECO (C).
concerns, mission and guiding principles,
andcontribution workflow, but also more personal
skills like active communication skills (why it
is crucial to develop this skill, and later on, practice onthese skills) and rational/analytical reasoning;
participants are encouraged through puzzles (training
archives) [15] to develop critical thinking abilities [29].
An essential part of this training material focuses on the
speciﬁcs and differences of SECO-level (SECO process
and tools concepts) and project-level (project
level (PL) process and tools concepts)
communities and workﬂows. For example, the need to
synchronize each project’s release cycle with that of the
SECO, stimulate cross-project collaboration, and deal with
different workﬂows and tools (e.g., Storyboard issue trackerat SECO-level vs. Launchpad in several individual projects).
Participants reacted to the THdifferently: “I am now getting
more conﬁdent with my understanding of Zuul and rechecks,
especially when M6
explained the concepts a few minutes
ago; that was a great explanation!”(P51). Yet, another
participant appreciates the mentors’ efforts: “I think a load of
materials has been too overwhelming, but the mentors makeit look too easy for me to follow the concepts.”(P29)
Mentors dedicate 60% of the training materials to HO,
which involves hands-on training (50%) and deep-dives into
challenging (hackathon) tasks (10%).
The HO component provides participants with a walk-
through of typical real-world scenarios and tasks that Open-
Stack contributors face regularly. The HO component startswith the necessary steps of creating accounts with the Open-
Stack foundation, Gerrit (code review tool), storyboard (issuetracker), mailing-list, and IRC channels (for communication).
Mentors also guide participants to install and conﬁgure their
(virtual) working environment, which comprises a Virtual-
Box with possibly a Ubuntu image pre-installed, a copy ofthe OpenStack development environment (aka DevStack on
Sandbox), issue trackers such as Launchpad and Storyboard,the code review environment (Gerrit), and git. Moreover, the
OpenStack Sandbox environment (repository) provides virtualservers for testing OpenStack projects/functionalities in an iso-lated environment. Also, mentors ask participants to perform
tasks of varying difﬁculties covering technical areas. Such
as documentation, implementing new features, tracking issues(using storyboard/Launchpad), reviewing source code, bestpractices on commit messages and code quality, and CI/CD.
OB1 asked a participant to think aloud while performing a HO
task: “ I want to run several unit test cases and an integration
test. I use the ‘tox framework’ to run unit testing, so I call the‘tox’ command on my terminal [ typing ...] ”(P7)
Mentors use a variety of teaching strategies that facili-
tate collaboration and competitiveness among participantsthroughout the training sessions (Fig. 1) . These strategies
enhance participants’ understanding of the teaching content by
making the sessions interactive. The most observed strategiesinclude the following:
Ice-breaker and breakout session
. Training ses-
sions begin with an introductory activity by both mentors and
participants to create an atmosphere of familiarity that facili-tates collaboration among participants (novice-novice collab-
oration) and mentors (novice-expert collaboration). Breakoutsessions during the event further strengthen this collaboration.
Expert-novice feedback
. Mentors usually use this
1036strategy to teach practical skills that require a “trial-and-error”
approach. Therefore, they allow participants to make several
attempts, while the mentors keep providing constructive feed-back until the participants arrive at the answer.
Teaching by demonstration
. Mentors often demon-
strate how things work while explaining the underlying con-
cepts; this approach enriches participants with conﬁdence
towards the mentors and the ecosystem.
Reward harvesting . Mentors use reward strategies to
motivate participants to be competitive and work in a group
while completing challenging exercises within an allocatedtime frame. The ﬁrst participant to ﬁgure out the best solution
to a task within that time-frame is rewarded with a token, a
swag, or a sticker. This strategy required participants to applycritical and analytical thinking.
Novice-novice collaboration
. Mentors encourage
participants to work in small groups of two people at each
table and discuss their problems/solutions table-wise.
Participants were mostly positive regarding the strategies,
which mentors used. P48 said: “I like the hands-on sec-
tion most and, of course, the sticker prizes.”, besides, other
participants appreciated different strategies differently: “Thetestimony on mentoring was great! I love it.”(P15) Meanwhile,
P31 congratulates the strategy and know-how of the mentors:
“Mentors were great inspirations and knew their stuff well.”
Also, mentors use real-life scenarios to explain difﬁcult con-cepts: “I admired the explanations of different projects andhow they form an ecosystem.”(P1)
IV . P
ERCEIVED CHALLENGES AND BENEFITS OF SECO
ONBOARDING
Based on the observed onboarding activities shown in
Figure 1, 13 challenges and 8 beneﬁts emerged. During ourobservation, 3/13 challenges and 5/8 beneﬁts encountered
substantially more and deeper discussions than others, leading
to signiﬁcantly more words in the transcriptions of the audio-
visual recordings. Below, we discuss in detail these threechallenges (PRQ
2) and ﬁve beneﬁts (PRQ 3).
A. PRQ 2: What are the challenges involved with organizing
and sustaining a SECO onboarding program?
Challenge 1: Vast expertise needed for SECOs
Onboarding at the SECO-level has several challenges
beyond the project-level onboarding. In particular, since
a SECO is not just the union of hundreds of smallerprojects but involves the collaboration of hundreds of cross-
project teams with diverse interacting technologies (see the
cross-project dependencies challenge). Given that
the onboarding participants do not know the different SECO
projects, the initial onboarding event cannot make any assump-tions. It should target the overall SECO contribution process.
To cover a wide variety of topics and tools (see PRQ
1), this
also implies that mentors should have polyvalent skill-sets toguide the participants: “Be prepared with the ‘deep dives’ exer-cise. Usually, participants have very different levels of knowl-
edge and skill-set,”(M2) (which in turn impacts mentorshipsustainability. Furthermore, there should be ongoingcommunication between the SECO-level onboarding process
and the onboarding process within individual projects ofthe SECO (see mentorship within companies), for
example, to update learning materials to project-
level developments.
Challenge 2: Self-motivation and commitment
It is challenging for SECO to identify individual bar-
riers against self-motivation/commitment. Therefore, active
participation in an onboarding experience is tantamount to asuccessful outcome, hence every stakeholder should be fullyinvolved and committed. “Successful mentoring requires active
commitment both from the mentor and the mentee.”(M9), also,
another mentor advocates “People learn in different waysat different speeds, which means a commitment to active
mentoring requires more than a handful of quick IRC chats.”(M7) This challenge has direct links to the adapting with
diverse learning needs challenge.
Challenge 3: Mentorship sustainability
SECOs and companies face challenges ﬁnding available
mentors to guide mentees. This is partly because of challenge
1 above, and partly because mentoring requires substantialeffort to prepare and keep material up-to-date. Constrained
companies may prefer to prioritize their experts’ time on tasksthat will bring more ﬁnancial proﬁt to the company, at the
detriment of supporting mentees. At the observed onboardingevent, participants were briefed that “ If there aren’t enough
mentors on every table, . . . ﬂoat around the room checking inon people, especially during exercises.” (M1)
B. PRQ
3: What are the beneﬁts of a SECO onboarding
program?
Beneﬁt 1: Mentoring Enhances Diversity .
Gender diversity (GD): out of the 72 participants at the
observed onboarding event, 17 (23.6%) declared themselvesas female, 23 (31.94%) as non-binary, and 32 (44.44%) as
male. Moreover, for corporate diversity (CD), we found
evidence of different companies involved with OpenStack andsponsoring events, and hiring both Cat-2 and Cat-3 contribu-
tors. We also observed that mentors and participants had di-verse technical skill-sets that cut across different project/cross-project teams. Such, technical diversity (TD) brings value
to the SECO since it “drives cross-project teams forward
through more mixed reviews, contributions, and viewpoints.By expanding that diversity, we’re able to develop a variety
of opinions for the open infrastructure project as a whole,ultimately”. (M9)
Beneﬁt 2: Mentoring Enhances productivity
.
During onboarding, mentors assign real-life exercises and
tasks to participants, such as creating patch sets, ﬁxing bugs,
testing and CI/CD (Zuul), and submitting new features anddocumentation. All 72 participants actively participated inthe coding activities and successfully submitted acceptablecommits. This not only trains the participants in the ﬁeld,
but also encourages them to adopt a collaborative workﬂow
1037(often by themselves), both with other participants (novice-
novice) and with mentors (experts-novice). OB1 observed how“mentors were pairing participants to work on exercises, i.e.,
P33 and P35 seated on table/group 10, were exchanging ideasconstantly throughout this exercise. ” Moreover, M11 asked
participants to: “run different test cases in each project that
you cloned. ‘If you need help, mentors are seated on yourtables, and they will assist you in running the test cases. ’”
Beneﬁt 3: Enhances SECO QA / best practices
.
Mentors presented various techniques and best practicesrelated to quality assurance (e.g., test-driven development,
CI/CD, code reviews) and asked participants to practice those
skills. Also, mentors presented a couple of bad and good
examples of code that respect OpenStack standards. Some of
these best practices include writing good commit messages
and proper code documentation. M9“shows a couple of bad
examples of commits that reviewers rejected because they
violated the best practices, which OpenStack enforces.”Beneﬁt 4: Overcoming imposter syndrome effect
.
New contributors to an ecosystem often feel overwhelmedand inadequate, preventing them from collaborating freelywith the other contributors in the ecosystem perceived ashaving more talent [30]. Thus, it is important for SECOs to
take measures to ensure that they help participants to identify
and start ﬁghting/eliminating the imposter syndrome [31],
[32]. “ As a new developer fresh out of college, coming into
any new team can be very intimidating. Everyone around youknows so much more than you, and you feel that you’re animposter with so much to learn . . . ”(P1). The onboarding
program is aware of the effects of the imposter syndrome
and sensitizes participants to overcome those, especially by
letting mentors and past mentees share their experiences.
Beneﬁt 5: Evolution of Ecosystem
As mentors transfer skills to mentees, they produce a largerpool of talent and enable the perpetual growth of the SECO
(growth-and-maturity). In turn, previous mentees return to the
onboarding program as mentors to help encourage participants
to grow within the SECO: “M7 mentored me during my last
year of college, and I have been very fortunate to work with*them* and continue being *their* mentee. . . . mentoring
helps manage immature skill sets required to grow into a
senior engineering role in the future.”(M3).
V. Q
UANTITATIVE VALIDATION OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS
In this section, we empirically evaluate the extent to which
onboarding can achieve the three major perceived beneﬁts
identiﬁed in PRQ3. We could quantify and measure these
three beneﬁts by studying 84 months of historical contributions(code changes, issue reports, and code reviews) in the Open-Stack SECO. Indeed, we measure Diversity
2, Productivity,
and Quality. Speciﬁcally, we investigate these three researchquestions:
– RQ1: Does onboarding correlate with SECO diversity?
2To measure Gender diversity at OpenStack, contributors’ identity is not
publicly available for conﬁdentiality purposes.
Fig. 2. Timeline of stratiﬁed categories used in our study. Cat-1 is our control
group, while Cat-2 and Cat-3 are the experimental groups. Each group uses
data of seven OpenStack releases (42 months).
– RQ2: Does onboarding correlate with new contributors’
productivity?
– RQ3: Does onboarding correlate with new contributors’
code quality?
A. Study Design
Categorization of Contributors. OpenStack’s onboarding
program is publicly advertised, with free training events (travel
support is available) taking place in different countries. Hence,
anyone is encouraged to do onboarding, not just people whocould afford the travel expenses. Therefore, to measure the
impact of onboarding on the OpenStack SECO, we consideredthree categories of contributors in our study (see Fig. 2).The ﬁrst category (Cat-1) constitutes contributors who joinedOpenStack before onboarding events were introduced and
could not beneﬁt from any ofﬁcial onboarding. The second
category (Cat-2) comprises new contributors who did notparticipate in any onboarding event, even though the onboard-ing program did exist when joining OpenStack. Finally, the
third category (Cat-3) are contributors who participated in the
onboarding program.
Each of the three categories plays an essential role in
our study. In particular, for each RQ and metric, we ﬁrstcompare the distribution of the metric values between Cat-2 and Cat-3. If signiﬁcant differences exist, we perform asecond comparison between Cat-1 and Cat-2 to control for
any confounding factors such as changes in the development
process that were put in place simultaneously when OpenStack
introduced the onboarding program. Only if no signiﬁcant
changes exist between Cat-1 and Cat-2 (both of whom consist
of contributors who did not do onboarding) can we correlate
the differences between Cat-2 and Cat-3 with the introductionof onboarding.
Data Collection. Given the three categories of contributors
(Cat-1, Cat-2, and Cat-3), we ﬁrst use the clustered random
sampling technique [33] to randomly select Cat-3 ﬁrst-time
contributors who joined through the OUI onboarding program
from different geographic areas, reﬂecting the distributed
nature of SECOs in our sample. This yielded 427 Cat-3 par-ticipants across seven OpenStack releases, from Juno to Pike(Fig. 5). Then, we used random sampling to select an equal
number of individuals in Cat-1/2. For those two categories,
we made sure to exclude any OpenStack contributor who
1038later on (after making contributions) decided to participate in
onboarding (720 exclusions).
Finally, we mapped the 1,281 (3x427) selected contributors
across all three categories to their activities in the follow-
ing OpenStack repositories: Gerrit (code review system), git,and Launchpad/Storyboard (issues trackers). Based on this
integrated information, we extract contributors’ activities re-lated to commits/patch-sets, bugs reported, reviews, blueprints,
declared gender, and afﬁliation for each category’s studiedperiod. All experimental data and relevant materials are hostedonline [28] for replication or third-party reuse.
Metrics and statistical tests. We adapt existing metrics
from the CHAOSS project [34], Meyer et al. [35] and
Jansen [36] (see Table I) to measure the extent to which
expected beneﬁts of onboarding are achieved at OpenStack.
Our study analyzes these metrics at the individual contrib-
utors’ level, then aggregates them to the SECO-level, split
across the three categories of contributors. Some metrics are
general, while others (like Technical and Corporate diversity)are SECO-speciﬁc. Note that there is only a weak Pearson cor-
relation of 0.324 between Effort and TFC, i.e., they measure
different phenomena.
We then analyze and compare contributor activities among
the three categories using several statistical tests. We usesurvival analysis [37] to measure the amount of time it takesfor an event, such as making the ﬁrst commit, to occur. A(non-parametric) log-rank test is further used to compare the
survival curves of multiple groups. If ρ<α (0.001) , the tested
survival curves are non-overlapping.
For other metrics, we use the Kruskal-Wallis H-test (KW-
H) [38] to compare metric distributions of the three contrib-
utor categories at once. In case of a statistically signiﬁcantdifference (ρ<α (0.01)), a Dunn (posthoc) test [39] is
used to identify which of the three categories has a different
distribution of metric values. As such, Dunn evaluates Cat-1
vs. Cat-2, Cat-1 vs. Cat-3, and Cat-2 vs. Cat-3. Finally, wemeasure the effect size (Cliff’s delta) [40], which quantiﬁesthe effect of signiﬁcant differences. As explained earlier, we
expect that if onboarding correlates with a change in, say, aproductivity metric, then Cat-1 (the control group) and Cat-
2 (treatment group) should have no statistically signiﬁcantdifference. In contrast, there should be a statistically signiﬁcant
difference between Cat-3 and Cat-2 (and, hence, Cat-1).
B. RQ1: Does onboarding correlate with SECO diversity?
This RQ aims to understand the correlation between on-
boarding and (i) gender representation (gender diversity)
within the OpenStack SECO, (ii) the distinct skill sets of
contributors (technical diversity), and (iii) the degree to which
different corporations/organizations contribute code or sponsorevents (corporate diversity).
1) Gender Diversity: We observed a statistically signiﬁ-
cant increase of 65%, with large (L) effect sizes, in termsof contributors declared as either female or non-binary
within Cat-3 (compared with Cat-2), at the expense of
contributors who reported male gender [20]. Fig. 3a showsTABLE I
CONTRIBUTOR -LEVEL∗, SECO- LEVEL†,AND /OR COMPANY -LEVEL /sharp
METRICS USED IN OUR STUDY .
RQs. Metrics DescriptionRQ1 — DiversityGender (GD)† Proportion of new contributors who self-
declare as Male (m), Female (f) or non-
binary (n) [20].
Technical (TD) ∗ The number of different project teams
(technology) new contributors are in-volved in [41].
Corporate (CD)
/sharp The number of sponsoring compa-nies that contribute commits to the
SECO [2] [34].RQ2 — ProductivityDensity (Den)∗ Commit density, i.e., the median propor-tion of contributed churn over the sub-
mitted commits [42].
Time to ﬁrst commit(TFC)
∗Number of days it takes for contributorsto have their ﬁrst commit accepted andmerged into the codebase. [34]
Retention (Rt)
∗ The proportion of contributors, per cat-
egory, still contributing to the codebase
after N days [8] [34].
Patch AcceptanceRate (PAR)
∗Probability of a contributor’s contribu-tion (
‡pull-request; PR) to be accepted
(higher values are better) [34]:
PAR =#Accepted PRs
#Submitted PRs(1)RQ3 — QualityEffort (Eft)∗ A measure of the number of‡pull request
versions (attempts) necessary before a
contribution is accepted (lower values
are better; minimum value of 1) [34]:
Eft =Median #Attempts
#ActualCommits(2)
Bug-Inducing com-mits (SZZ)
∗,/sharpPercentage of submitted commits thatintroduce bugs [43].
‡Pull-request (GitHub) or change-request (Gerrit)
how the percentage of contributors who declared themselves
as female increased to 33% compared to the 18% (20%) values
for Cat-1 (Cat-2). Similarly, for contributors who declaredthemselves non-binary, the percentage signiﬁcantly increased
from 7% (10%) to 23%.
The main reason for these increases seems to be the fact
that a signiﬁcantly smaller proportion of contributors explicitly
declared themselves as having male gender, which thus far
has been the over-represented gender in open source devel-opment [44]. There are different interpretations possible. Themost likely explanation, supported by the fact that we did not
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference in gender between Cat-1 and Cat-
2, is that onboarding helped to attract a larger proportion ofcontributors of female gender, while providing conﬁdence toothers to declare themselves as non-binary instead of sticking
to a binary gender. Self-disclosed gender at OpenStack [20]is not open to the general public; it is available in internal
proﬁles for conﬁdentiality purposes. However, there could stillbe confounding factors. For example, maybe contributors with
male gender are less likely to participate in onboarding events.
More research is needed to better understand this.
2) Technical Diversity (TD): People who followed on-
boarding (irrespective of gender) are more polyvalent than
1039(a) Gender Diversity (GD) (b) Hired vs. V ols
Fig. 3. (Left) Median GD (in %) of each category ((F)emale, (M)ale, and
(N)on-binary) ; (Right) Hired vs. volunteer (V ols) contributors in Cat-1, Cat-2,
and Cat-3.
Fig. 4. Overview of technical diversity, showing the number of commits made
across different numbers of projects (Left) and the number of projects peoplecontribute to per declared gender (Right).
other contributors. Technical/code diversity measures the
number of distinct projects (modules) to which a developercontributes source code. Fig. 4 shows that people who joinedOpenStack without onboarding (Cat-1, not shown, & Cat-2)
contribute to at most three projects, whereas people who joined
through onboarding (Cat-3) often are contributors in more thanthree projects. For example, in Cat-2, 82.7% of individualscontribute to only one project, 16.6% contribute to two, and
only 0.7% contribute to three projects; only contributors withnon-binary or male gender contributed to two or more projects
in Cat-2. On the other hand, in Cat-3, 52.7% contribute tothree core projects, 31.9% contribute to four projects, and
15.5% to ﬁve or more projects; contributors who declared
male or non-binary gender are mostly contributing to three andfour projects, while contributors who declared female gender
are even contributing to ﬁve or more projects (signiﬁcantdifference between female and other genders). This supports
our earlier ﬁndings about gender diversity (Section V-B1).
Furthermore, we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant difference
(large effect size) between Cat-2 and Cat-3 in terms of TD,
and the number of commits made by Cat-3 contributors issigniﬁcantly higher than those by Cat-2 contributors (median
of 150 compared to 375).
3) Corporate Diversity (CD): refers to the way in which
the Cat-2 and Cat-3 contributors who contribute code to aSECO are distributed across companies. It also measures if aparticular company has a monopoly of over 50% or more ofthese contributions, which could inﬂuence the work culture of
the SECO or, in the worst case (departure of key contributors),
could cripple the SECO [45]–[48].
Studies [2], [9] show that companies contributing to the
OpenStack codebase have an uneven distribution of com-
Fig. 5. The evolution of the number of companies (NoC, solid blue line) for
each of the 7 studied OpenStack releases before (Cat-1, yellow) and after (Cat-2/3, green) the introduction of onboarding. The black dashed line represents
the top NoC responsible for 50% of a release’s commits and the red dashed
lines shows the total commits per release cycle.
mit across those companies. Also, we found that none of
the sponsoring companies (NoC) had a disproportionate
amount of contribution either by Cat-2 or Cat-3 contribu-
tors. Furthermore, 83% of Cat-3 contributors were hired
by companies compared to 51% of Cat-2 contributors,
and this difference is statistically signiﬁcant with a ρ-value
of3.006x10−40and a large (L) effect size. We also observed
that no single company has a dominating share of contributors(and contributions).
Furthermore, Fig. 3b shows how the number of new contrib-
utors that remained volunteers instead of being hired dropped
substantially from 48% in Cat-2 to 17% in Cat-3. In otherwords, onboarding seems to be correlated with higher chancesof being hired by OpenStack companies.
Only 13% of Cat-3 contributors were hired by the com-
panies that sponsor the onboarding events 70% of the 83%
hired Cat-3 contributors were employed by companies withinOpenStack that do not sponsor onboarding (median days to
hire for Cat-3 is 33.0 vs. 212.0 for Cat-2). While, overall,
the high percentage of 83% is positive for the ecosystem
as a whole, the sizeable proportion of contributors hired by
non-sponsoring companies could be interpreted as a form of
“brain drain” and “low return of interest” for the companies
organizing the onboarding training.
On a positive note, though, we observe that seven of the top
3
10 Cat-3 contributors in the SECO were hired by sponsoring
companies, which improves their onboarding ROI. On the
other hand, Cat-3’s hired contributors switch more easily fromone company to another. This could indicate that the expertiseof Cat-3 contributors is useful and sought-after in different
3We used rankdata [49] on TFC, SZZ, and Effort to rank and sort the
vectors of contributors in ascending order according to each of these three
metrics separately. Since a contributor can be better in one metric but worse
in the other, rankdata then aggregates the scores to identify the top 10
contributors.
1040Fig. 6. Comparison of commit density between Cat-2 and Cat-3.
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@p = 0.36
0.000.250.500.751.00
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
Time in DaysProbability of Survival@ @ @ FMN
@
@
@
@
@ @
@
@@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@p = 0.00071
0.000.250.500.751.00
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
Time in DaysProbability of Survival@ @ @ FMN
Fig. 7. Survival curves for time until the ﬁrst accepted contribution per gender
in Cat-2 (left) and Cat-3 (right).
contexts, or could be due to technology transfer between
ecosystem companies. For example, one given contributorstarted contributing to the Nova project in the Pike release
cycle with IBM, switched to Huawei and later to Futurewei,
all between February 20
th– August 1st(2017).
C. RQ2: Does onboarding correlate with new contributors’
productivity?
1) Commit Density (Den): Onboarding correlates with
increased contributor productivity. Fig. 6 shows a 61%
increase in the median density of Cat-3 contributions com-
pared to Cat-2 contributions, which is a statistically signiﬁcant
difference with large effect size (while no difference was ob-served between Cat-1 and Cat-2 contributions). This indicates
that people who did onboarding consistently produce a higheraverage churn across their contributions.
2) Time to ﬁrst commit (TFC): Onboarding correlates
with a median 45% or 35% lower time to ﬁrst commit
for female (male/non-binary) contributors. Fig. 7 shows the
survival curves [50] (with ρ-values obtained using the log-rank
test) for the time until ﬁrst commit (in number of days) for thethree categories of contributors, split across the three genders.
Only for Cat-3, we obtained statistically signiﬁcant results
among the genders. Furthermore, we obtained a signiﬁcantdifference with large effect size between Cat-2 against Cat-3,
across all three genders. It takes 100 (120) days for half of thefemale (male/non-binary) contributors in Cat-3 to make theirﬁrst commits, while in Cat-2, it takes at least 185 days for any
contributor (either gender) to get their ﬁrst commit accepted.
3) Retention rate: Onboarding correlates with a 16%
longer average retention rate across the three genders in
the SECO, i.e., Cat-3 contributors are active much longer
than Cat-2 (and Cat-1) contributors, which is beneﬁcial for@@@
@@@@@@
@
@
@@@@ @ @ @@
@ @ @@@@ @ @ @ @ @@ @@
@@@@ @
@@@@@@@ @@@ @
@ @@@ @@@
@@@@ @@@@@ @@ @ @ @ @
@@@@@@@ @@@@
@@@ @ @ @@ @ @@@@@ @ @@@ @
@@
@@@@@
@
@
@
@ @@@@@
@
@@ @@
@ @
@@ @
@
@ @ @ @
@
@ @
@
@ @ @ @ @
@
@
@ @
@
@
@
@ @
@ @
@ @
@
@ @ @ @
@p = 0.28
0.000.250.500.751.00
0 500 1000 1500
Time in DaysProbability of Survival@ @ @ FMN
@@ @
@
@@@
@
@
@
@ @ @
@ @ @
@
@p = 0.0012
0.000.250.500.751.00
0 500 1000 1500
Time in DaysProbability of Survival@ @ @ FMN
Fig. 8. Survival curves for the time until Cat-2 (left) and Cat-3 (right)
contributors leave.
 e.
Fig. 9. Comparison of patch acceptance rate between Cat-2 and Cat-3
the sustainability and cohesion within a community. We ob-
served from the survival analysis chart (Fig. 8) that 95% ofcontributors were active for 450 days in Cat-2 and 750 days
(four SECO release cycles) in Cat-3. While there is a 50%
probability of Cat-1 contributors (either gender) abandoningthe SECO/project within 1,000 days (not shown), this retentionperiod is 1,100 (1,000) days for Cat-3 (Cat-2) non-binary
contributors, 1,150 (1,100) days for males, and 1,290 (950)
days for females. Therefore, contributors, on average, were
productive for a signiﬁcantly longer time in Cat-3 than in both
Cat-1 and Cat-2 (large effect sizes), with self-declared female
contributors with onboarding experience persisting longer than
any other declared gender.
4) Patch Acceptance Rate (PAR): Onboarding correlates
with a signiﬁcant increase in the percentage of acceptedpull requests (i.e., Gerrit “change requests”), i.e., contrib-utors are more successful in getting their patches accepted.
Fig. 9 (top) shows that the median PAR for Cat-3 contributorsis 35.7% to 49.2% times higher compared to Cat-2 contribu-
tors. Our evidence suggests that contributors self-declared asfemale outperformed the other genders (not shown), in both
Cat-2 and Cat-3, in terms of PAR (large effect size).
D. RQ3: Does onboarding correlate with new contributors’
code quality?
1) Effort: Cat-3 contributors require less effort to have
their commit accepted. Based on our observation and results
in Fig. 10 , contributors who joined the ecosystem withoutan onboarding training (Cat-1 & 2) on average require sig-niﬁcantly more attempts to get their contributions acceptedthan those who were onboarded (Cat-3), with ρ-value of
6.621x10
−77and large effect size.
1041Fig. 10. An Overview of effort needed by Cat-2/3 contributors.
 y
Fig. 11. Likelihood of bug-inducing commits across Cat-2/3.
Since this observation only holds for Cat-3, this provides
initial evidence for the hypothesis that onboarding enables
contributors to better master the codebase, workﬂow and
guidelines of an ecosystem. More research is needed to furthervalidate this claim.
2) Bug-inducing Changes: Contributors who did on-
boarding produce code that is 14% less likely to introducebugs. Using the PyDriller [51] implementation of the SZZ al-gorithm [52]–[56], our results show that the median probabilityof a commit introducing a bug is 25% for Cat-2 compared to
14% for Cat-3 (Fig. 11). In other words, accepted patches areless buggy for Cat-3, even though Cat-3 contributors submit a
higher quantity (with more complexity) of code changes thancontributors from the other categories (as previously discussedin RQ1 for TD). These differences are signiﬁcant with a ρ-
value of 4.290x10
−57and a large effect size. Not only are
patches of Cat-3 contributors less buggy, they also requiredless attempts to be accepted (see previous metric).
VI. D
ISCUSSION
Based on the observational study ﬁndings (Fig. 1), we
notice how the themes in the afﬁnity diagram form aholistic set of socio-technical activities relevant to onboard-ing in a complex SECO. Such onboarding is more thangiving a tutorial on creating a feature branch or run-
ning a test suite. Mentors spent substantial effort explain-ing the interactions and differences between the Open-
Stack SECO and the individual projects inside the SECO.Knowledge on community concerns is another es-
sential pillar of the teaching content, as well as activities totrain participants’ active communication skills and
rational/analytical reasoning. Combining such
topics with the more technical hand-on activities requires (i)the use of a host of engaging teaching strategies, as well as
Fig. 12. Radar chart of the studied metrics showing that onboarding (Cat-
3) has signiﬁcant differences and improvements over Cat-2. The metrics are
those of Table I: Bug-inducing-commits (SZZ), Effort (Eft), Time to ﬁrst
commit (TFC), Retention (Rt), Patch Acceptance Rate (PAR), Density (Den),
Diversity: Gender (GD(f)), Technical (TD), and Corporate Diversity (CD).
(ii) a continuous (online) onboarding process that goes well
beyond the initial onboarding event.
While such an onboarding process requires an investment,
both ﬁnancially and in terms of in-kind, SECOs expect that theprocess can boost new recruits’ productivity and the qualityof their contributions and foster an inclusive and diverse
community, able to sustain the SECO.
In particular, we observed that as the community grooms
new contributors, they later become resourceful to the commu-
nity by impacting other new contributors’ growth by becoming
mentors themselves. The idea is that the community evolves;
mentees become mentors, and contributors stay longer withinthe community.
Our quantitative evaluation found evidence that some of
these major expectations indeed seem to hold. The radar chartin Fig. 12 shows the extent to which the diversity, productivity,
and quality of onboarded contributors (Cat-3) differ from
contributors without onboarding (Cat-2). For each metric, thechart plots the median values for Cat-2/3 at the contributor-,
SECO- (GD) or company-level (CD, SZZ), using log-scale.
In particular, onboarding correlates with improved diversity
(GD(f), TD, and CD) and productivity (TFC, Rt, PAR, and
Den) metrics, since contributors in Cat-3 recorded signiﬁcantly
higher values in these metrics against Cat-2 contributors.However, onboarding correlates with reduced bug-inducing
commits (SZZ) and efforts (Eft). Given that Cat-3 contributorsseem to spend less effort in making quality code changes
(commits). On the other hand, Cat-2 spent more time making
their ﬁrst accepted contributions (TFC) in terms of productiv-ity; they also expend more effort, which are more likely to be
bug inducing. Onboarded contributors stay longer in the SECOand make diversity more visible, but not necessarily within one
SECO project or company or with a company sponsoring theonboarding process. Other potential beneﬁts still need to beempirically evaluated.
Finally, several challenges could potentially complicate or
even inhibit the onboarding process. A substantial amount of
these challenges relate to people management—notably, thesteady supply of motivated participants and capable mentors.
1042While successful onboarding could yield new future mentors,
both the SECO and academia should monitor this continuity
carefully not to overload the same group of experts. At thesame time, the latter have to keep on reinventing their teachingstrategies to effectively teach the minimum material coveringas much as possible the workﬂow and requirements of both theoverarching SECO and the individual projects to be productiveas fast as possible. Future research should explore and addressthese challenges.
VII. T
HREATS TO V ALIDITY
Construct validity. This study uses existing diversity, pro-
ductivity, and quality metrics from the literature [2], [35], [57],[58] and open source communities such as CHAOSS [34].However, concerning gender, we relied on the self-declared
gender available in OpenStack’s internal proﬁles [20]. Further-
more, we observed an onboarding event and mined readilyavailable data from version control, issue reports, and codereview repositories but did not have access to the private
online communication between mentors and mentees after theonboarding event.
Another threat relates to the impact of the participants’
awareness of our observation study on their behavior. To
mitigate this, we observed selected people on a given task.We watched the onboarding event’s video recording to validatehow other participants performed the same activity when not
directly observing them.
Internal validity. Confounding factors may have been re-
sponsible for some of the observed differences between Cat-2
and Cat-3 contributors, i.e., factors other than the introduction
of onboarding could explain some of our ﬁndings. Our study
design included the Cat-1 control group, which, similar to
Cat-2, consists of participants that did not do onboarding tomitigate this threat. Hence, if, for a given metric, no changesare observed between Cat-1 and Cat-2, the likelihood ofconfounding factors reduces (but not to zero). None of ourquantitative analyses observed statistical differences between
Cat-1 and Cat-2.
Another threat concerns the effect of unreported bugs on
the result of the SZZ bug-inducing commit analysis, which
uses an implementation of the original SZZ algorithm [52]. Tomitigate this, we run SZZ on the entire history of OpenStack’s
ofﬁcial issue tracking systems (Launchpad/Storyboard). Also,
our study window spans 14 releases (7 for Cat-1 and 7 for Cat-
2/3), which gives ample time for contributors to make active
contributions. We base our study on the assumption that par-ticipants/contributors had no prior experience with any SECO.However, since some educational institutions introduce their
students to open-source development concepts and practices as
part of their learning path, this could be a confounding factorthat could affect our results. Since “generic” developmentconcepts form only a minor part of the onboarding process,we believe this threat is minimal.
External validity . While OpenStack is a representative
modern SECO, our results may not generalize to other ecosys-
tems. That said, the methods that we use in our observationaland quantitative studies are ecosystem-agnostic. Hence, prac-
titioners and researchers could use our methods to identify andevaluate the impact of any ecosystem’s onboarding program.As a side note, the post-Covid-19 era fosters a culture of onlinecollaboration that could disrupt the dynamics of in-person [59]
events. Even though Rodeghero et al. [60] studied onboarding
during the Covid-19 pandemic at the project-level, it is still tooearly to understand the impact of this on the top-level SECOtraining events or the SECO onboarding process as a whole.For example, the recent OUI training event on October 22-23,2020, was virtual, yet the turnout was much lower (8 mentorsand 11 participants) than previous events. Future research isnecessary for the new reality of in-person vs. virtual trainingevents in OSS communities.
Reliability validity. Except for conﬁdential participant in-
formation, we provide the necessary description and resources(OSS tools and dataset) [28] needed to replicate our research.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION
This paper provides the ﬁrst large-scale, mixed-methods
empirical study on onboarding in SECOs and is amongstthe ﬁrst empirical studies in the domain of software en-gineering onboarding in general. Though previous researchhas been conducted on onboarding within software projects,
these works did not provide a deeper understanding of the
overall SECO onboarding process, which involves an initial,top-level onboarding phase followed by one-to-one project-speciﬁc mentoring. Hence, this paper aimed to (1) understandthe onboarding process at SECO level, as well as to (2)quantitatively validate the impact of SECO-level onboarding
in terms of expected beneﬁts regarding diversity, productivity
and quality of contributions.
Our observation study of a top-level OpenStack onboarding
event yields a catalogue of six conceptual and eight hands-on categories of socio-technical onboarding content, eightteaching strategies used, eight expected onboarding beneﬁts,
and 13 onboarding challenges. Furthermore, our quantitativeanalysis of OpenStack contributors and contributions shows
that contributors who followed the onboarding process spendless time and effort to get their ﬁrst commit accepted andproduce larger, less bug-inducing commits. Moreover, we ob-
serve a strong correlation between onboarding and an increase
in the gender and technical diversity of the OpenStack SECO.
We provide our data set online [28].
The implications of this study are manifold and impact dif-
ferent stakeholders differently: (1) developers have empirical
evidence that onboarding could be beneﬁcial for them, sinceit correlates with increased productivity and chances of beinghired by a company of the SECO; (2) (prospective) mentors
have an overview of the relevant topics and strategies theyshould prepare for; and (3) organizations and SECOs as a
whole have empirical evidence that investments in onboardingcorrelate with increased productivity, diversity and quality,while they also have a list of challenges they should be aware
of while mounting or operating an onboarding program.
1043REFERENCES
[1] G. Poo-Caama ˜no, E. Knauss, L. Singer, and D. German, “Herding cats in
a foss ecosystem: a tale of communication and coordination for release
management,” Journal of Internet Services and Applications, vol. 8, 12
2017.
[2] Y . Zhang, M. Zhou, K.-J. Stol, J. Wu, and Z. Jin, “How do companies
collaborate in open source ecosystems? an empirical study of openstack,”
2020 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2020.
[3] Z. Wang, Y . Feng, Y . Wang, J. A. Jones, and D. Redmiles, “Unveiling
elite developers’ activities in open source projects,” ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 29, no. 3, Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387111
[4] S. Bayati, “Understanding newcomers success in open source
community,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering: Companion Proceeedings, ser. ICSE ’18. New
York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p.
224–225. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3183440.3195073
[5] C. Liu, D. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Hu, J. Barson, and B. Ray, “Poster: A
recommender system for developer onboarding,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM
40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion
(ICSE-Companion), May 2018, pp. 319–320.
[6] I. Steinmacher, C. Treude, and M. A. Gerosa, “Let me in: Guidelines
for the successful onboarding of newcomers to open source projects,”IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 41–49, July 2019.
[7] I. Rehman, D. Wang, R. G. Kula, T. Ishio, and K. Matsumoto, “New-
comer candidate: Characterizing contributions of a novice developer togithub,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02597, 2020.
[8] G. G. Sharma and K.-J. Stol, “Exploring onboarding success, organiza-
tional ﬁt, and turnover intention of software professionals,” Journal of
Systems and Software, vol. 159, p. 110442, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016412121930216X
[9] Y . Zhang, M. Zhou, A. Mockus, and Z. Jin, “Companies’ participation in
oss development - an empirical study of openstack,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2019.
[10] F. Fagerholm, A. S. Guinea, J. M ¨unch, and J. Borenstein, “The role
of mentoring and project characteristics for onboarding in open sourcesoftware projects,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE international
symposium on empirical software engineering and measurement. ACM,
2014, p. 55.
[11] C. Casalnuovo, B. Vasilescu, P. Devanbu, and V . Filkov, “Developer
onboarding in github: the role of prior social links and language expe-rience,” in Proceedings of the 2015 10th joint meeting on foundations
of software engineering. ACM, 2015, pp. 817–828.
[12] S. Bhartiya, “What open means to openstack,” https://www.
linuxfoundation.org/blog/2017/12/what-open-means-openstack/, Linux
Foundation, December 2017.
[13] Y . Dittrich, “Software engineering beyond the project – sustaining
software ecosystems,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 56,
no. 11, pp. 1436 – 1456, 2014, special issue on Software
Ecosystems. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0950584914000652
[14] G. Viviani and G. C. Murphy, “Reﬂections on onboarding practices
in mid-sized companies,” in Proceedings of the 12th International
Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering,
ser. CHASE ’19. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 83–84.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/CHASE.2019.00027
[15] OpenStack-Foundation. (2020, August) Links to oui archived
materials. [Online]. Available: https://www.openstack.org,[OUI]https:
//docs.openstack.org/upstream-training/upstream-archives.html,
[16] J. A. Teixeira and H. Karsten, “Managing to release early, often and on
time in the openstack software ecosystem,” Journal of Internet Services
and Applications, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 7, Apr 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13174-019-0105-z
[17] R. Britto, D. S. Cruzes, D. Smite, and A. Sablis, “Onboarding software
developers and teams in three globally distributed legacy projects: Amulti-case study,” Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 30,
no. 4, p. e1921, 2018.
[18] I. Steinmacher, A. P. Chaves, T. U. Conte, and M. A. Gerosa, “Prelim-
inary empirical identiﬁcation of barriers faced by newcomers to open
source software projects,” in 2014 Brazilian Symposium on Software
Engineering.
 IEEE, 2014, pp. 51–60.[19] A. Labuschagne and R. Holmes, “Do onboarding programs work?”
in2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories, May 2015, pp. 381–385.
[20] D. Izquierdo, N. Huesman, A. Serebrenik, and G. Robles, “Openstack
gender diversity report,” IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 28–33, 2018.
[21] A. N. Meyer, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann, and T. Fritz, “Enabling
good work habits in software developers through reﬂective goal-setting,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2019.
[22] J. Meinicke, C.-P. Wong, B. Vasilescu, and C. K ¨astner, “Exploring
differences and commonalities between feature ﬂags and conﬁguration
options,” in Proc. Int’l Conf. Software Engineering–Software Engineer-
ing in Practice (ICSE-SEIP). ACM, 2020.
[23] N. Shrestha, C. Botta, T. Barik, and C. Parnin, “Here we go again: Why
is it difﬁcult for developers to learn another programming language?”inProceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE, 2020.
[24] A. Rahman, C. Parnin, and L. Williams, “The seven sins: Security smells
in infrastructure as code scripts,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2019, pp. 164–175.
[25] C. Sadowski, E. S ¨oderberg, L. Church, M. Sipko, and A. Bacchelli,
“Modern code review: A case study at google,” in Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice, ser. ICSE-SEIP ’18. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 181–190. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3183519.3183525
[26] S. Mizuno, Management for quality improvement: the 7 new QC tools.
CRC Press, 2020.
[27] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data,” Biometrics, vol. 33, no. 1, 1977.
[28] A. Foundjem. (2021, January) Replication packages for our study on
seco onboarding –scripts/dataset. [Online]. Available: http://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.4457683
[29] S. Yeasmin and L. A. Albabtain, “Escape the countries: A vr escape
room game,” in 2020 3rd International Conference on Computer Appli-
cations Information Security (ICCAIS), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[30] C. Mendez, A. Sarma, and M. Burnett, “Gender in open source
software: What the tools tell,” in Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Gender Equality in Software Engineering, ser. GE ’18.
New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p.
21–24. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3195570.3195572
[31] K. Kohl Silveira, S. Musse, I. H. Manssour, R. Vieira, and R. Prik-
ladnicki, “Conﬁdence in programming skills: Gender insights from
stackoverﬂow developers survey,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-
Companion), 2019, pp. 234–235.
[32] A. Filippova, E. Trainer, and J. D. Herbsleb, “From diversity by numbers
to diversity as process: Supporting inclusiveness in software develop-ment teams with brainstorming,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2017, pp. 152–163.
[33] M. Alvi. (2016) A manual for selecting sampling techniques in
research. [Online]. Available: https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/70218/
[34] C. P. L. Foundation. (2020, August) Community health analytics open
source software. [Online]. Available: https://chaoss.community/metrics/
[35] A. N. Meyer, G. C. Murphy, T. Fritz, and T. Zimmermann,
Developers’ Diverging Perceptions of Productivity. Berkeley, CA:
Apress, 2019, pp. 137–146. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4842-4221-6
12
[36] S. Jansen, “Measuring the health of open source software ecosystems:
Beyond the scope of project health,” Information and Software Technol-
ogy, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 1508–1519, 2014.
[37] P. Chapfuwa, C. Li, N. Mehta, L. Carin, and R. Henao, “Survival
cluster analysis,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Health,
Inference, and Learning, ser. CHIL ’20. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 60–68. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3368555.3384465
[38] S. D. Pawar and D. T. Shirke, “Nonparametric tests for multivariate
multi-sample locations based on data depth,” Journal of Statistical
Computation and Simulation, vol. 89, no. 9, pp. 1574–1591, 2019.
[39] M. Allen, “The SAGE Encyclopedia of Communication Research
Methods,” Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://methods.sagepub.com/
reference/the-sage-encyclopedia-of-communication-research-methods
[40] F. Armstrong, F. Khomh, and B. Adams, “Broadcast vs. unicast review
technology: Does it matter?” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
1044Software Testing, V eriﬁcation and V alidation (ICST) , March 2017, pp.
219–229.
[41] C. Jergensen, A. Sarma, and P. Wagstrom, “The onion patch: Migration
in open source ecosystems,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT
Symposium and the 13th European Conference on F oundations of
Software Engineering, ser. ESEC/FSE ’11. New York, NY , USA:Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, p. 70–80. [Online].Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2025113.2025127
[42] S. H ¨onel, M. Ericsson, W. L ¨owe, and A. Wingkvist, “Importance
and aptitude of source code density for commit classiﬁcation intomaintenance activities,” in 2019 IEEE 19th International Conference
on Software Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS). IEEE, 2019, pp.109–120.
[43] E. C. Neto, D. A. da Costa, and U. Kulesza, “Revisiting and improving
szz implementations,” in 2019 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). IEEE,2019, pp. 1–12.
[44] C. Mendez, H. S. Pedala, Z. Steine-Hanson, C. Hilderbrand, A. Horvath,
C. Hill, L. Simpson, N. Patil, A. Sarma, and M. Burnett, “Open sourcebarriers to entry, revisited: A tools perspective,” 2017.
[45] G. Avelino, E. Constantinou, M. T. Valente, and A. Serebrenik, “On
the abandonment and survival of open source projects: An empirical in-vestigation,” in 2019 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–12.
[46] M. Valiev, B. Vasilescu, and J. Herbsleb, “Ecosystem-level determinants
of sustained activity in open-source projects: A case study of thepypi ecosystem,” in Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting
on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium onthe F oundations of Software Engineering, ser. ESEC/FSE 2018. NewYork, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p.644–655. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3236062
[47] V . Cosentino, J. L. C. Izquierdo, and J. Cabot, “Assessing the bus factor
of git repositories,” in 2015 IEEE 22nd International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2015,
pp. 499–503.
[48] I. Steinmacher, I. Wiese, A. P. Chaves, and M. A. Gerosa, “Why
do newcomers abandon open source software projects?” in 2013 6th
International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering (CHASE), May 2013, pp. 25–32.
[49] J. Li, G. Sun, G. Zhao, and H. L. Li-wei, “Robust low-rank discovery
of data-driven partial differential equations,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 01, 2020, pp. 767–774.[50] H. S. Qiu, A. Nolte, A. Brown, A. Serebrenik, and B. Vasilescu, “Going
farther together: The impact of social capital on sustained participation
in open source,” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) 2019, Montreal, Canada. IEEE, 2019, toappear.
[51] D. Spadini, M. Aniche, and A. Bacchelli, PyDriller: Python Framework
for Mining Software Repositories, 2018.
[52] J. ´Sliwerski, T. Zimmermann, and A. Zeller, “When do changes induce
ﬁxes?” SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1–5, May 2005.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1082983.1083147
[53] S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, K. Pan, E. James Jr et al., “Automatic iden-
tiﬁcation of bug-introducing changes,” in 21st IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE’06). IEEE, 2006,
pp. 81–90.
[54] C. Sadowski, C. Lewis, Z. Lin, X. Zhu, and E. J. Whitehead Jr, “An
empirical analysis of the ﬁxcache algorithm,” in Proceedings of the 8th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories. ACM, 2011,pp. 219–222.
[55] E. C. Neto, D. A. da Costa, and U. Kulesza, “The impact of refactoring
changes on the szz algorithm: An empirical study,” in 2018 IEEE
25th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and
Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2018, pp. 380–390.
[56] G. Rodr ´ıguez-P ´erez, G. Robles, and J. M. Gonz ´alez-Barahona,
 “Repro-
ducibility and credibility in empirical software engineering: A case study
based on a systematic literature review of the use of the szz algorithm,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 99, pp. 164–176, 2018.
[57] M. Hilton and A. Begel, “A study of the organizational dynamics of
software teams,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track (ICSE-
SEIP), May 2017, pp. 191–200.
[58] M. Borg, O. Svensson, K. Berg, and D. Hansson. (2019, 03) Szz
unleashed: An open implementation of the szz algorithm - featuring
example usage in a study of just-in-time bug prediction for the jenkinsproject.
[59] S.-F. Wen, “Learning secure programming in open source software
communities: A socio-technical view,” in Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Information and Education Technology,ser. ICIET ’18. New York, NY , USA: Association for ComputingMachinery, 2018, p. 25–32. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3178158.3178202
[60] P. Rodeghero, T. Zimmermann, B. Houck, and D. Ford, “Please turn
your cameras on: Remote onboarding of software developers during apandemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.08130, 2020.
1045