Relating Reading, Visualization, and Coding for
New Programmers: A Neuroimaging Study
Madeline Endres
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
endremad@umich.eduZachary Karas
Department of Psychology
University of Michigan
zackar@umich.eduXiaosu Hu
Department of Psychology
University of Michigan
xiaosuhu@umich.edu
Ioulia Kovelman
Department of Psychology
University of Michigan
kovelman@umich.eduWestley Weimer
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
weimerw@umich.edu
Abstract —Understanding how novices reason about coding at
a neurological level has implications for training the next gen-
eration of software engineers. In recent years, medical imaging
has been increasingly employed to investigate patterns of neural
activity associated with coding activity. However, such studies
have focused on advanced undergraduates and professionals.
In a human study of 31 participants, we use functional near-
infrared spectroscopy to measure the neural activity associated
with introductory programming. In a controlled, contrast-based
experiment, we relate brain activity when coding to that of
reading natural language or mentally rotating objects (a spatial
visualization task). Our primary result is that all three tasks—
coding, prose reading, and mental rotation—are mentally distinct
for novices. However, while those tasks are neurally distinct, we
ﬁnd more signiﬁcant differences between prose and coding than
between mental rotation and coding. Intriguingly, we generally
ﬁnd more activation in areas of the brain associated with spatial
ability and task difﬁculty for novice coding compared to that
reported in studies with more expert developers. Finally, in an
exploratory analysis, we also ﬁnd a neural activation pattern
predictive of programming performance 11 weeks later. While
preliminary, these ﬁndings both expand on previous results (e.g.,
relating expertise to a similarity between coding and prose
reading) and also provide a new understanding of the cognitive
processes underlying novice programming.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, the software engineering community has
increasingly used medical neuroimaging to understand the
cognitive processes behind programming [ 1]–[7]. Unlike eye-
tracking or other biometric methods, neuroimaging pinpoints
brain regions activated while completing speciﬁed tasks. Many
of the neuroimaging studies in software engineering have com-
pared programming to reading or spatial manipulation, two
skills with well-understood cognitive structures. As broadly
summarized in Table I, such studies have generally found
striking similarities between code comprehension and prose
reading [ 1]–[3], and one study has found similarities between
spatial reasoning and data structure manipulation [ 6].
Neuroimaging studies of programmers have the potential to
improve our understanding of expertise, to inform software
engineering pedagogy, and to guide tool development andretraining (see Floyd et al. [3, Sec. II-D] for a summary).
Critically, however, to the best of our knowledge all of the
software engineering neuroimaging studies thus far have only
studied programming experts that are either professionals or
students with multiple years of experience (e.g., [ 2, Sec. 3.3]).
Tantalizingly, one study [ 3] found that coding became more
neurologically similar to reading for programmers with even
greater expertise. However, to realize the potential of neu-
roimaging for understanding software engineering expertise,
we must also directly observe true novices . Studying novice
programmers is critical for exploring how cognitive processes
for coding evolve. In this paper, we seek to close this gap by
presenting the ﬁrst neuroimaging study of novice programmers
during code comprehension (cf. [ 2], [3]).
Studying novice programmers presents several challenges
relative to studying experts. First, we must create experimen-
tal stimuli that are amenable for novices with little to no
previous coding experience; the coding stimuli in previous
neuroimaging studies all involve constructs (e.g., trees [ 6]) or
software engineering tasks (e.g., code review [ 3]) unfamiliar
to novices. Second, we must pay particular care to recruit
participants with equivalent programming expertise; even in
an introductory course, some students have substantially more
programming experience than others. Finally, we propose and
use an experimental protocol that follows up with participants
months later to assess their programming progression using a
written assessment; to our knowledge, no previous neuroimag-
ing studies in software engineering have involved time-delayed
outcome measurements.
To better understand the cognitive processes of novice
programmers, we use functional near-infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS) to conduct a controlled neuroimaging study with 31
participants with no previous programming experience, all
enrolled in the same introductory computing class. We conduct
these scans during the ﬁrst third of the class. We compare
participants’ brain activation patterns while coding to those
while reading prose or using spatial reasoning (i.e., mentally
rotating 3D objects). We also use a written assessment at the
6002021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00062
Experiment Like reading? Like spatial Novices?
reasoning?
Siegmund et al. (2014) [ 1] 3 ?
Siegmund et al. (2017) [ 2] 3 ?
Floyd et al. (2017) [ 3] 3 ?
Huang et al. (2019) [ 6] 3 ?
TABLE I: “What is coding like in programmers’ brains?”
We use this informal summary of selected previous work to
motivate and contextualize the experiments in this paper.
end of the semester to conduct a preliminary exploration of
an aspect of learning, assessing if novices’ brain activation
patterns while coding can predict their future programming
ability.
We ﬁnd that, for novices, coding is a working memory
intensive task that is neurally distinct from both a spatial task
and prose reading ( p < 0:01,q < 0:05). Unlike previous
work with experts which generally reports strong similarities
between coding and reading [ 1]–[3], we observe more signif-
icant and substantial differences between coding and reading
than we do for coding and spatial tasks. This indicates that
novices rely heavily on visiospatial cognitive processes while
coding. Finally, we observe that particular activation patterns
at the beginning of a course can predict how well students
perform on a ﬁnal programming assessment 11 weeks later;
in general, the lesssimilar the activation patterns are between
coding and mental rotation, the better an individual performs
(r= 0:48,p= 0:006). This may indicate that novices who
use more problem-solving intensive strategies at the beginning
of the semester (i.e., ﬁnd programming more challenging)
make less progress. We also compare our results to those
of previous neuroimaging studies with more expert software
engineers, and we close with a discussion of the implications
of our results on introductory programming pedagogy and
future software engineering research.
II. B ACKGROUND
We give an overview of material necessary for understand-
ing the methods and experiments in this paper. In Section II-A,
we discuss neuroimaging and fNIRS, and in Section II-B,
we present relevant notation. In Section II-C, we discuss the
cognition behind spatial ability, and in Section II-D, we discuss
the cognition behind reading. See Section IXfor a discussion
of work more directly related to software engineering.
A. Neuroimaging and fNIRS
Brain activity and cognitive processes can be studied using
functional neuroimaging techniques. We focus on functional
near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). It is non-invasive, avoids
the ionizing radiation present in other methods (e.g., PET, CT),
and can measure activity in brain regions not accessible to
some invasive techniques (e.g., electrocorticography). Impor-
tantly, fNIRS offers higher spatial resolution than EEG, and
higher temporal resolution than fMRI, which is important for
studies relating a brain region’s contribution to a speciﬁc task.
Finally, fNIRS can be used in more natural and ecologically-
valid environments (e.g., standard desktop computer use, etc.)compared to alternatives like fMRI (which requires partici-
pants to lie still in a small tube and also complicates the use
of keyboards [ 7]). These properties motivate our decision to
use fNIRS for a study of novice software engineers.
fNIRS makes use of the hemodynamic response , or change
in neuronal blood ﬂow to active brain regions, to measure
brain activity [ 8]. fNIRS measures this via the use of near-
infrared light: transmitters and receivers are placed on a “cap”
worn by participants. Oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood
have different light absorption properties, so the hemodynamic
responses in a given brain region between a transmitter and
receiver pair (referred to as a channel ) can be measured
over time. fNIRS measures concentration changes in such
oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. The number of fNIRS
publications had doubled every 3.5 years since 1992 [ 9], and
it has been used to study human development, injury, and
psychiatric conditions [ 9]–[12].
For our purposes, the use of fNIRS imposes two key
experimental constraints: contrast-based design and task du-
ration. First, fNIRS experiments typically involve participants
completing tasks (e.g., mentally rotating objects or solving
programming problems) while time-series data is recorded.
Carefully controlled experiments are necessary, in which the
activity observed during one task is contrasted against the
activity observed during another. This allows confounding
brain activations (e.g., motor cortex activity from moving the
lungs to breathe) to be eliminated from consideration.
Second, because fNIRS is based on the hemodynamic
response, care must be taken to model [ 13], [14] the onset
of neuronal blood ﬂow (which peaks slightly after stimuli
are presented [ 15], [16]) and the design must avoid saturation
and weaker signals for tasks involving long activity [ 17]. As
a result, the hemodynamic response can typically be studied
only in experiments with brief stimuli (e.g., under 30 seconds
per question). Furthermore, fNIRS is only able to penetrate
a few centimeters down into the brain. More speciﬁcally, the
near-infrared light can reach a depth that is roughly half the
distance between a transmitter-receiver pair, depending on the
wavelengths and light intensities used [ 18].
Despite these limitations, fNIRS speciﬁcally, and medical
imaging in general, are growing in popularity for use in
software engineering studies (e.g., [ 1]–[7], [19]–[22]). They
provide a physically-grounded insight into cognition without
relying on potentially unreliable self-reporting [ 6].
B. Neuroscience Vocabulary and Notation
Vocabulary: The cerebrum of the human brain is composed
of two (largely symmetric) hemispheres, left and right, and
four primary lobes: frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital.
Loosely, the frontal lobe is at the front of each hemisphere,
thetemporal lobe is on the side of each hemisphere, the
parietal lobe is at the top of each hemisphere, and the occipital
lobe is at the back of each hemisphere. Activation is called
bilateral if both hemispheres are activated and lateralized if
one hemisphere activates disproportionately. Throughout this
paper, we will use various schema to refer to locations on the
601cerebrum’s cortex , the brain’s outer layer of neural tissue. One
such schema is Brodmann Areas , an anatomical classiﬁcation
system for the cortex [ 23]. Broadmann areas (BAs) divide
the cortex into 52 bilateral regions based on architectural
neurological features. Many BAs also have associated neuro-
logical functions. For instance, BAs 41 and 42 are associated
with auditory processing. We will also sometimes refer to
regions by their common names or location on a lobe. Three
important regions mentioned in this paper are Wernicke’s area
(left hemisphere, back of the parietal lobe), Broca’s area (left
hemisphere, lower frontal lobe), and the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex or DLPFC (bilateral in the frontal lobe). Wernicke’s and
Broca’s areas are strongly associated with language functions
while the DLPFC is associated with working memory.
Notation: In this paper, we will use the neuroimaging notation
Task A >Task B to indicate the contrast between brain activa-
tion patterns for two experimental tasks. The results of these
contrasts are reported as statistical t-values corresponding to
each fNIRS channel. These t-values range from  8to+8; a
positive t-value indicates that the speciﬁed brain area was more
active during Task A than Task B, while a negative t-value
indicates that the speciﬁed brain area was less active during
Task A than Task B. Values closer to  8and +8represent
stronger activation contrasts between the two tasks, and only
areas with signiﬁcant contrast ( p < 0:01) after correction for
multiple comparisons ( q < 0:05) are reported. Finally, we note
that contrast tests are directional: a signiﬁcant contrast in Task
A>Task B does not imply that the inverse contrast Task B
>Task A will also produce signiﬁcant results. This is because
the differences in the inverse contrast may be too small to be
statistically signiﬁcant.
C. Spatial Reasoning and Cognition
We now turn to a discussion of Spatial Reasoning and its
neurological representations. Spatial Reasoning refers to an
individual’s general ability to mentally manipulate objects and
encompasses skills such as mental rotation, mental folding,
pattern recognition, and spatial perception [ 24]. Spatial rea-
soning has been shown to correlate with performance in a
variety of activities including mathematics [ 25], [26], general
engineering [ 27], and programming [ 28], [29]. Spatial ability
is also malleable and can be improved through training [ 30].
Part of spatial reasoning, mental rotation involves the imag-
ined rotation of a two- or three-dimensional object around an
axis in three dimensional space [ 31]. Figure 2adepicts one of
the mental rotation stimuli we used (see Section III-C ). The
difﬁculty of a mental rotation problem is determined by the
size of the angle of rotation; Shepard and Metzler found that
the time a participant took to solve a given problem increased
linearly with respect to the angle of rotation between the two
objects [ 32]. In this paper, we use mental rotation ability as a
validated proxy for more general spatial reasoning ability.
Generally, neuroimaging has found that mental rotation ac-
tivates the posterior parietal and occipital cortices (BAs, 7, 17,
19, 39, and 40—see Zacks [ 31] for a survey). While bilateral,the parietal and occipital activation tends to be slightly stronger
in the right hemisphere; the right parietal lobe in particular is
believed to be important for spatial ability and spatial attention
tasks [ 33]. Many mental rotation neuroimaging studies have
also revealed bilateral activation in the supplementary motor
cortex, an area associated with motor control and planning
(BA 6) [ 31]. This frontal activation is most common for mental
rotation tasks that allow motor stimulation strategies.
D. Reading and Cognition
Next, we include a brief summary of the neurological
processes associated with reading. Neuroimaging has revealed
that language is supported by a complex network of cogni-
tive areas generally lateralized to the left hemisphere (see
Price [ 34] and Vigneau et al. [35] for surveys). Some language
processes are localized to speciﬁc structures in the brain, while
other language processes arise from a distributed network of
areas with multiple functions [ 34].
Two key left-hemisphere brain areas associated with reading
are Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area. Located in the frontal
lobe, Broca’s area (BAs 44 and 45) plays an important role
in language production and, to a lesser extent, language com-
prehension [ 35]. Wernicke’s area is in the posterior temporal
lobe and is associated primarily with comprehension of both
spoken and written language [ 35].
III. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DESIGN
We now present our experimental design for understanding
the neurological basis for novice programmers.1Our exper-
iment was conducted in two parts: an initial fNIRS scan
and a written followup assessment. During the fNIRS scan,
participants were shown three types of stimuli: code compre-
hension, mental rotation, and prose reading. During the written
post-test, participants completed a validated language-agnostic
programming assessment. All participants were enrolled in the
same 15-week introductory programming course. The initial
fNIRS scans were held during the ﬁrst third of the semester
while the written post-test was held during the last week of
the semester. This design allows the controlled exploration
of the relationships and contrasts between reading, coding,
and spatial reasoning for novice programmers. It also opens
a preliminary investigation of neurological factors that might
be predictive for programming. In the rest of this section we
describe our recruitment protocol (subsection III-A ); outline
our fNIRS data collection, experimental setup, and stimuli
(subsections III-B andIII-C ); and describe our followup pro-
gramming assessment (subsection III-D ).
A. Participant Recruitment
Participants were all recruited from the same CS1 course
at the University of Michigan, a large public US university,
via a combination of email, forum posts, and an in-class
presentation. To be eligible, participants had to be over 18,
have no prior programming experience, only be enrolled in
1A replication package containing all of our recruitment and stimuli
materials can be found at https://github.com/CelloCorgi/ICSE fNIRS2021 .
602that one programming course, and have be available to attend
the study.
Recruitment occurred during the third week of the ﬁfteen-
week semester, and the fNIRS scans were carried out in the
third through ﬁfth week of the semester. All participants were
thus in the ﬁrst third of their ﬁrst programming course while
completing the scan. Participants received $20 in compensa-
tion. In total, we collected fNIRS data from 37 participants.
Data from 31 participants passed our analysis quality threshold
(see Section IV). The ﬁnal 31 participants (24 female, 7 male)
ranged in age from 18 to 21.
Beyond the initial fNIRS scan, we also followed up with
participants via email at the end of the semester, inviting them
to attend an additional written programming assessment. Of
our 31 participants, 23 participated in this written post-test.
Post-test participants were compensated an additional $20.
During participant selection, we were keenly aware that
conﬁrming the absence of previous programming ability for
a diverse population is a challenging task. To mitigate self-
selection bias, we implemented checks for participant pro-
gramming ability in three places: recruitment, pre-screening,
and statistical validation of scores on a written programming
test. During recruitment, both in-person and written, we em-
phasized that participants could have no prior programming
experience of any kind. Prospective participants were explic-
itly told, in person, that even minimal practice or exposure to
textual or visual programming languages (such as Scratch [ 36]
or MIT App Inventor) counted as prior experience.
During prescreening, participants indicated if they “had any
prior programming experience” with one of “Yes”, “No”, or
“Other/unsure”. We only retained participants who selected
“No” outright. The presence of the “Other/unsure” option
mitigates some self-selection bias in experience reporting.
We also asked potential participants to indicate concurrent
and previous course enrollment from a list of courses at our
university. Courses that contained “programming” or “code”
in their syllabus or description precluded study participation.
These questions eliminated 18% of pre-screening respondents.
Finally, at the same time as the demographics questionnaire,
participants were given a brief programming test. The test
consisted of twelve pseudocode multiple-choice questions and
is a validated measure of CS1 concepts [ 37]. We expected low
scores: novices should have no prior programming exposure
(beyond the ﬁrst few weeks of their current course). Indeed,
we found an average score of 23% (random guessing yields
20%). There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between
participant scores and a random distribution. We believe that
these three mitigations help account for self-selection bias
issues and give conﬁdence that our pool contains novices (but
acknowledge that the issue is reduced, rather than eliminated).
We also observe that unusually for software engineering
studies, a majority of our population (77%) were female. We
believe that the high ratio of females in our population is
caused by a combination of: a more gender-balanced popula-
tion pool than most software engineering studies, fNIRs data
signal, and self selection bias. First, the course we recruitedfrom is fairly gender balanced: around 45–50% of students
identify as women, compared to 22% for CS overall at our
university. Second, by chance, two-thirds of the participants
who we were unable to analyze due to fNIRS signal quality
(i.e., measurement noise) were male. Third, women often
volunteer for college studies at higher rates than men and for
different reasons [ 38] while men are more likely to have some
prior programming experience [ 39] and thus be excluded from
our study.
B. fNIRS Data Collection and Setup
Each participant’s fNIRS data was collected during a sin-
gle session which lasted 1.5 hours. First, participants gave
informed consent and ﬁlled out a short demographic survey.
Next, participants watched a training video preparing them for
the scan, a 30–45 minute process that involved ﬁtting each
participant for the fNIRS cap by moving hair to optimize
sensor contact with the scalp, and thus, signal quality.
During the fNIRS scan, the participant sat in a chair facing
a monitor wearing the fNIRS cap. The room was kept dim to
reduce the amount of ambient light that could interfere with
the fNIRS data collection. Participants were also instructed to
stay as still as possible. Each participant was shown 90 stimuli:
30 mental rotation stimuli, 30 reading-based stimuli, and 30
coding-based stimuli. All stimuli asked the participant to
choose one of two answers. Participants indicated their answer
by pressing a corresponding key on a standard keyboard. For
each stimuli, participants had up to 30 seconds to respond.
The 90 stimuli were in randomized order and were broken
into three blocks of 30 questions, each containing 10 stimuli of
each type. Between stimuli, participants were shown a ﬁxation
cross for 2–10 seconds. Between blocks, participants had an
optional longer break to rest and/or drink water.
We now present technical information about our fNIRS
device and cap. We used a CW6 fNIRS system (TECHEN,
Milford, MA, USA) with 690 nm and 830 nm wavelengths.
It has ﬁber-optic cables which transmit light from the device
to sensors connected to the participant’s cap. These sensors
are either transmitters that emit light or receivers that detect
light. As a result, fNIRS collects a participant’s hemodynamic
response only along a set of pre-deﬁned channels between
transmitters and receivers. The location, number, and coverage
of these channels is determined by the cap design. We used a
probe conﬁguration similar to that used in Huang et al. [40]
with dense coverage of transmitter-receiver pairs in the occip-
ital, frontotemporal, and frontal regions. In total, 15 receiver
and 30 transmitter ﬁbers were used, yielding 55 channels
from which data were collected, covering Broadmann areas
6–9, 17–19, 21, 22, 39–41, and 44–47. The data from these
channels were then analyzed using both NIRS Brain AnalyzIR
Toolbox [ 41] and custom scripts written in MATLAB. A
picture of our cap coverage is in Figure 1; it includes areas
identiﬁed in previous mental rotation studies as well as key
language areas.
Our number of channels is higher compared to many
previously published fNIRS papers in software engineering,
603Fig. 1: fNIRS cap used in our experiments. Red circles are
light transmitters while blue circles are light receivers. fNIRS
is only able to observe brain activation on channels between
nearby transmitters and receivers.
giving broader coverage [ 4], [19]. We used two cap sizes to
accommodate different head circumferences (58 cm and 60
cm). Signals were sampled at 50 Hz.
C. fNIRS Stimuli
We now turn to a description of the content of our fNIRS
stimuli. As mentioned in Section III-B , participants were
shown three categories of stimuli: mental rotation, reading-
based stimuli, and coding-based stimuli. All three types asked
the participant to choose between two answers AandB.
We use mental rotation stimuli adapted from Peters and
Battista’s Mental Rotation Stimulus Library [ 42]. These stim-
uli are designed to induce brain activation associated with
mentally rotating 3D shapes, one facet of visiospatial cognition
(See section II-C ). In each mental rotation stimulus, the
participant was asked to choose which of two objects was
a possible rotation of a third object (see Figure 2afor an
example). To admit direct comparison with previous work, our
mental rotation stimuli are the same stimuli used by Huang et
al.when analyzing data structure manipulation brain activation
with experienced software developers [ 6].
For the reading stimuli, we use sentence completion tasks
adapted from ofﬁcial Graduate Record Examination practice
exam questions [ 43], an assessment required for admission to
many graduate programs. For each stimulus, participants were
asked to read a sentence and choose the appropriate word or
phrase to ﬁll a blank (see Figure 2bfor an example).
For the coding stimuli, we created a corpus of short code
snippets that use constructs familiar to introductory computing
students. Speciﬁcally, they contained boolean logic, while
loops, for loops, and arrays. These are all early core concepts
in most introductory curricula [ 44] and are also covered in our
institution’s CS1. Unfortunately, we were not able to directly
reuse coding stimuli from previous neuroimaging studies as
they are generally geared toward expert programmers and thus
contain constructs unfamiliar to novices. For the array-based
questions, however, we were able to adapt stimuli created by
Huang et al. [6]. For each coding stimulus, participates were
asked to choose either the correct output or return value of a
short code snippet (see Figure 2cfor an example).D. Followup Programming Assessment
At the end of the semester (10–12 weeks after the fNIRs
scans), we invited participants to complete a written program-
ming test. Along with the programming test, participants also
completed a battery of cognitive, and behavioral assessments.
For the programming assessment, we used the Second CS1
Assessment (SCS1), a validated language-agnostic measure of
CS1 programming ability [ 37]. The SCS1 contains 27 multiple
choice questions and takes one hour. It covers Boolean logic,
while loops, for loops, arrays, if statements, functions, and
recursion. There are three types of questions: deﬁnition ques-
tions, code tracing questions, and code replacement questions.
Due to COVID-19, we were unable to hold the test in person.
Rather, participants completed an online version of the SCS1
over a proctored video call. Responses were then checked for
timing-based anomalies to ensure participants did not rush
through the test.
IV. A NALYSIS METHODOLOGY
We now go over our methodology for analyzing the fNIRS
data. Broadly, there are three stages in our analysis pipeline:
preprocessing, individual modeling, and group level modeling.
1) Preprocessing: The raw data, in the form of light intensity
values, were converted into optical density data by calculating
the ﬂuctuations in light absorption by the presence of either
oxygenated (HbO) or deoxygenated (HbR) blood. The optical
density data were then converted into an HbO/HbR signal
using the Modiﬁed Beer-Lambert law. We ran a general linear
model (GLM) with pre-whitening and robust least squares to
ﬁt the data [ 45].
2) Individual Subject Modeling: After the hemodynamic
response was modeled for each subject, quality control checks
were implemented to limit the amount of noise in the group-
level model. The signal-to-noise ratio, anticorrelation of HbO
and HbR, and brain-activation plots were considered when
deciding whether to exclude individual blocks or whole par-
ticipants. The signal-to-noise ratio was calculated as a ratio
between the absolute signal mean and standard deviation, with
a threshold set at 0.9. As a result, 16 blocks were excluded
from further analysis (see Section III-B for a discussion of our
experimental block setup). In an ideal hemodynamic response
function, the levels of HbO will increase as the levels of HbR
decrease and vice-versa [ 46], so the correlation between these
two levels should be negative. Thirteen additional blocks that
did not show this pattern were excluded from further analysis.
Next, the brain activations estimated by the GLM for All
Conditions >Rest were plotted onto brain models using
a photogrammetry-based localization method [ 47], at which
point the loci of activity could be examined and scrutinized.
We expected activity in the visual cortex (as this is a visual
experiment), as well as in the inferior frontal gyrus during
the reading task (as this is a well-documented region for
language processing). Thirty seven blocks that did not pass this
activation pattern check were excluded. These criteria were not
mutually exclusive. In total, 59 blocks from 31 participants
were included in the group-level modeling.
604(a) Mental Rotation: correct answer is “A”.
 (b) Reading: correct answer is “B”.
 (c) Code: correct answer is “A”.
Fig. 2: Example fNIRS Stimuli for mental rotation (a), reading (b), and coding (c)tasks.
3) Group Modeling: We used a linear mixed effects model
for group level analysis, contrasting Task >Baseline acti-
vations to estimate task-related brain activations and brain-
behavior correlations. Lastly, we applied a false-discovery rate
(FDR) threshold correction ( q < 0:05) to account for the
multiple-comparison issue.
V. V ALIDATION
In this section we validate that the brain activation patterns
we observe during mental rotation and reading align with those
established by previous work. Speciﬁcally, we present our
results for the contrasts Mental Rotation >Rest andReading
>Rest. We provide brain activation visualizations for Mental
Rotation >Rest and Reading >Rest in Figures 3and 4
respectively. We also provide a tabular view of our results with
speciﬁc t-values in Table II(see Section II-B for an overview
oft-values and A>Bnotation).
InMental Rotation >Rest, we observe signiﬁcant bilateral
activation in the occipital and parietal lobes (BAs 7, 17, 18,
19, 39). The occipital lobe (BAs 17, 18, 19) is associated
with the visual cortex and is responsible for tasks such as
image and pattern recognition, both visiospatial processes. The
parietal activation (BAs 7, 39) is also localized in regions
associated with spatial tasks including spatial reasoning and
mental rotation [ 33], [48].
Our results are therefore consistent with previous mental
rotation neuroimaging; in his meta-review of mental rotation
imaging studies, Zacks also identiﬁed BAs 7, 17, 19, and
39 as active during mental rotation tasks [ 31]. We do not
observe signiﬁcant supplementary motor cortex activation (BA
6), another area often active during mental rotation tasks. This
is not too surprising, however, as the supplementary motor
cortex is most strongly activated in tasks which encourage
participants to use motor simulation strategies [ 31]; we did not
prompt participants to use such strategies in our experiment.
InReading >Rest, we observe signiﬁcant occipital, parietal,
and prefrontal activation lateralized to the left hemisphere,
aligning with previous work. We observe signiﬁcant activation
in both Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas, widely considered two
of the most important language areas [ 34]. We also observe
signiﬁcant activation in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(See section II-B, BA 46), a region associated with attention
and working memory. Regarding the occipital activation, while
we observe some bilateral activation, signiﬁcant activation is
Fig. 3: Baseline Mental Rotation Activation: Red indicates
regions more activated during the mental rotation task while
blue indicates regions more activated during rest. Note that all
signiﬁcant mental rotation activation is located in the back of
the head in the parietal and occipital lobes.
Fig. 4: Baseline Reading Activation: Red indicates regions
more activated during the reading task while blue indicates
regions more activated during rest. Note the reading activation
in Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (the double arrow) as well as
the left-lateralized occipital and parietal activation (the star).
substantially more widespread in the left hemisphere. The left
occipital cortex has been found to correspond with word and
letter speciﬁc pattern recognition [ 49].
605Our activations for rotation and reading align with pre-
vious work: signiﬁcant occipital and parietal activation
for rotation, and occipital and prefrontal activation for
reading, including Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. Rotation
activation is bilateral while reading is primarily in the
left hemisphere. This validation gives conﬁdence for both
construct and internal validity (i.e., that our protocol mea-
sures what we think it measures and does so correctly).
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We now present the results of our experiment probing the
neurological connections between reading, mental rotation,
and programming for novice programmers (See Section II-B
for an overview of relevant notation and vocabulary (e.g. A>
B). We focus our results around three research questions:
RQ1—Programming Activation: What areas of the brain
activate when novice software engineers program?
RQ2—Comparative Activation: How does the coding
brain activation of novices compare to their brain acti-
vation during mental rotation and during reading?
RQ3—Prediction: Are there connections between coding
brain activation patterns at the beginning of CS1 and their
programming performance at the end of the course?
A. RQ1—Programming Activation
To determine which areas of the brain activate when novice
software engineers program, we present the results of the
contrast Code >Rest. That is, we test which brain areas
signiﬁcantly distinguish programming from a resting state
(p < 0:01,q < 0:05). We also discuss the functionality of
the distinguishing brain regions. Figure 5contains a brain
activation visualization for Code >Rest, and we provide a
tabular view of our results with speciﬁc t-values in Table II.
While coding, novices exhibit signiﬁcant occipital activation
(BAs 17, 18, 19). While bilateral, we observe somewhat
stronger right hemisphere activity. Functionally, the occipital
cortex is associated with visual processing, and it includes
areas such as the primary visual cortex (BA 17) and visual
association area (BA 18). This occipital activation is the
strongest activation we observe in Code >Rest, with three
out of the ﬁve channels with t-values greater than ﬁve.
Beyond occipital activation, we also observe signiﬁcant
posterior parietal activation, primarily in the angular gyrus
(BA 39). This activation is bilateral: the other two channels
with t-values greater than ﬁve both cover BA 39, one in
each hemisphere. In the left hemisphere, the angular gyrus
is important for language-related tasks [ 50]. Some researchers
also include BA 39 in Wernicke’s area, one of the two main
brain cortex regions associated with natural language process-
ing. However, we do not observe activation while coding in
the regions most commonly associated with Wernicke’s area:
BAs 22 and 40. The angular gyrus is also strongly associated
with spatial cognition tasks including spatial orientation (e.g.,
distinguishing left from right), spatial attention, numerical
Fig. 5: Signiﬁcant Coding Activation: Red indicates regions
more activated during the coding task while blue indicates re-
gions more activated during rest. Note the widespread bilateral
activation in both the DLPFC (the arrows) and the occipital
and posterior parietal cortices (the star).
computation, and mental rotation [ 31], [51]. While the spatial
functionality of the angular gyrus is bilateral, many spatial
tasks, including mental rotation, are concentrated in the right
hemisphere [ 51]. Therefore, the bilateral activation of the
angular gyrus indicates that novices use both language and
spatial cognitive processes while programming .
We also observe signiﬁcant activation in the frontal cortex.
Speciﬁcally, we observe bilateral activation in the DLPFC (BA
46) and activation in the left superior premotor cortex (BA 6).
The premotor cortex is associated with motor processing, and
it has also been found to activate during visiospatial tasks
including mental rotation [ 31]. The DLPFC is associated with
working memory; lower activation in this region corresponds
with worse performance on working-memory intensive tasks
such as complex problem solving [ 52]. The signiﬁcant bilateral
DLPFC activation, therefore, indicates that novices ﬁnd pro-
gramming a challenging and working memory intensive task .
Novices engage brain regions associated with language
and spatial cognition, as well as regions associated with
increased demand for attention and executive function (via
neural activity in Code >Rest,p < 0:01,q < 0:05).
B. RQ2—Signiﬁcant Comparative Activation
We now compare novices’ coding brain activation to their
activation during mental rotation and reading by presenting our
ﬁndings for the contrasts Code >Mental Rotation andCode >
Reading . We provide brain activation visualizations for Mental
Rotation >Rest andReading >Rest in Figures 6and7, and
we provide a tabular view of our results with speciﬁc t-values
in Table II. Our high level ﬁnding is that while coding, mental
rotation, and reading are all neurally distinct tasks, we observe
more substantial differences between coding and reading than
we do between coding and mental rotation .
606Brain Region Rotation >Rest Reading >Rest Code >Rest Code >Rotation Code >Reading
Frontal Cortex
Left DLPFC (BA 46) 3:32 3:32 3 :30 3:95 2 :78 2:96 3 :76 3:76
Right DLPFC (BA 46)  2:62   2:62 2 :78 3:27 3 :79 3:79 2 :99 4:72
Broca’s Area (Left BAs 44 and 45) 3:76 3:76  3:54   3:54
IFG (Right BAs 44 and 45) 2:78 3:27 3 :11 3:79 2 :99 2:99
Left Supplementary Motor Cortex (BA 6) 3:45 3:45 3 :45 3:45 3:22 5:32
Right Premotor Cortex (BA 6)  2:98   2:98
Left BA 8  4:07   4:07 3 :30 3:30 2 :96 2:96  4:93 3:93
Right BA 8  3:95   2:62 2:67 4:72
Left BA 9  6:26   6:26 4:07   2:63 7:49   7:49  5:10 3:93
Right BA 9  7:46   7:46 6:69   2:67 6:13   6:13 2:67 4:72
Temporal Cortex
Wernicke’s Area (Left BAs 22, 40)  6:44   6:44 5:91 5:91 6:51 6:51 4:77   4:77
Right BA 21 2:79 2:79
Right BA 22  3:65   3:65 3:15 3:15
Right Auditory Cortex (BA 41)  5:81   5:81 6:70 6:70
Parietal Cortex
Left BA 7 3:38 3:38 3 :15 3:17 3 :64 3:64 2 :60 2:60
Left Angular Gyrus (BA 39) 4:95 4:95 3:19   3:19  2:99 5:28 6:86 6:86
Right Angular Gyrus (BA 39) 6:83 6:83 3:68 5:15  3:49 3:98 4 :29 4:29
Occipital Cortex
Left BA 17 5:78 6:36 8:11 8:11 2 :75 2:83 3:26   3:23  4:48 4:78
Right BA 17 4:17 4:17 4 :29 4:29  2:84   2:84 2:91   2:91
Left BA 18 4:69 6:36 3:06 8:11 2 :75 3:84 3:23   3:23 4:48   4:48
Right BA 18 4:18 6:48 4 :29 4:29 5:95 5:91 2:84   2:84  2:91 5:26
Left BA 19 4:52 7:76 2 :71 4:16 3:84 5:46
Right BA 19 3:95 6:83 3:68 5:95 3:49   3:49 3:54 5:65
TABLE II: t-value statistics for Mental Rotation >Rest,Reading >Rest,Code >Rest,Code >Mental Rotation , and Code >
Reading . All reported results are signiﬁcant ( p < 0:01) and pass our false discovery threshold ( q < 0:05). Blank cells indicate
no signiﬁcant effect was found in that region. Results closer to +8 or -8 indicate more signiﬁcant activation or deactivation.
We highlight results with t-values less than -5 or greater than +5.
Fig. 6: Activation Contrast between Programming and Mental
Rotation: Red indicates regions more activated during coding
while blue indicates regions more activated during mental
rotation. Note that compared to mental rotation, coding has
stronger bilateral frontal activation (the arrow) and right pos-
terior parietal activation in the angular gyrus (the star).
ForCoding >Mental Rotation , we observe several signiﬁ-
cant differences in activation. First, when coding, participants
exhibit more bilateral frontal activation than while mentally
rotating objects. This comparative activation is in the DLPFC
and the premotor cortex (BAs 6 and 46), areas commonly as-
Fig. 7: Activation Contrast between Programming and Read-
ing: Red indicates regions more activated during coding while
blue indicates regions more activated during reading. Note
that reading has comparatively more activation in Broca’s and
Wernicke’s areas (the double arrow), while coding has substan-
tially more right frontal activation (the star) and more right-
lateralized occipital / parietal activation (the single arrow).
sociated with working memory and spatial manipulation [ 31],
[52]. Similarly, we observe comparatively high coding activa-
tion in the right angular gyrus, a region also connected with
spatial reasoning [ 51]. We ﬁnd it intriguing that many of the
607areas with more activity for coding than for mental rotation
are associated with spatial reasoning, ostensibly the process
measured by the mental rotation stimuli. This may imply that
coding is a challenging task that is actually more spatially
intensive for novices than simple mental rotation.
When considering a contrast A>B, it is important to
distinguish between a comparison that is positive because A
is greater than B(called a “true activation”) vs. one that is
positive only because Bis negative (a “strong deactivation”).
All of the signiﬁcant Coding >Mental Rotation differences
discussed so far are channels with either positive activation or
no signiﬁcant activation in Rotation >Rest. Thus, they are
all true differences between coding and mental rotation. On
the other hand, while we also observe a very strong compar-
ative activation ( t= 6:51) in Coding >Mental Rotation in
Wernicke’s area, this is a facet of the same channel’s strong
deactivation in Rotation >Rest instead of a true activation.
ForCoding >Reading , we also observe signiﬁcant differ-
ences in activation: coding has comparatively stronger acti-
vation throughout the right hemisphere and in the premotor
cortex while reading has stronger activation in Broca’s and
Wernicke’s areas. All of the signiﬁcant differences in the left
hemisphere including Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas are true
contrasts; that is, none of them are caused by a signiﬁcant
deactivation in one of the Task>Rest comparisons. In the
right hemisphere, several of the apparent activations for coding
are caused by strong deactivation in Reading >Rest. Even
so, we observe true comparative right-hemisphere activations:
the right occipital, angular gyrus, and DLPFC are all more
activated while coding than while reading.
While we observe that Coding is neurologically distinct
from both mental rotation and reading, we also observe more
substantial differences in Coding >Reading than in Coding
>Mental Rotation . In Coding >Reading , there are four
channels with t-values greater than +5or less than  5,
while in Coding >Mental Rotation , there is only one (see
Table II). Furthermore, the strong channel difference in Coding
>Mental Rotation is not particularly compelling as it is caused
by deactivation. Taken together with the previous functional
analysis, this trend hints that for novices, coding is a more
spatially based and a less language-based cognitive process.
We ﬁnd that, for novices, coding is neurally distinct
from both reading and spatial reasoning. Coding engages
regions associated with working memory more than does
either reading or rotation, indicating that programming
is a more cognitively challenging task. However, we
observe more signiﬁcant substantial differences in Coding
>Reading than we do in Coding >Rotation : novices may
rely heavily on spatial reasoning while coding.
C. RQ3—Prediction
We now turn to an exploratory analysis of connections
between observed brain activation patterns and participants’ﬁnal programming assessment scores. To do so, we use Repre-
sentational Similarity Analysis (RSA), a common Psychology
approach, to correlate brain activity interactions with scores on
the programming post-test (see Kriegeskorte et al. [53] for an
introduction to RSA). We test if the brain activation similarity
between mental rotation and coding ( Mental Rotation 
Coding ) or the brain activation similarity between reading and
coding ( Reading Coding ) are correlated with SCS1 scores.
We calculate these correlations for the right hemisphere, left
hemisphere, right hemisphere frontal, left hemisphere frontal,
and occipital regions for a total of ﬁve statistical tests per
hypothesis and ten total test–hypothesis pairs.
We ﬁnd a correlation that remains signiﬁcant after apply-
ing the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons [ 54].
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant medium negative correlation
between ( Mental Rotation Coding ) in the right frontal region
and programming post-test score ( r= 0:48,p= 0:0006 ,
adjusted Bonferroni p= 0:006): the less similar the neural
activation patterns for coding and rotation, the better the ﬁnal
programming assessment outcome.
Notice that coding also elicited stronger right frontal activa-
tion than the mental rotation task. It is therefore possible that
the more individuals engage the right frontal, in a way that
is dissimilar from its engagement during spatial processing,
the less progress they make over the course of the semester.
The hypothesis is similar to the observation that the more
dissimilar is the activity between novice readers and their
language, the less progress they make in learning to read [ 55].
In the Psychology literature, one common approach for testing
such a hypothesis would be to investigate correlations between
signiﬁcant channel activations and response time. However,
while in some settings response time can be used as a proxy
for difﬁculty, our coding stimuli were not designed with
that consideration; we do not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant
correlation ( r= 0:095,p= 0:4866 ) and lack enough
information to either substantiate or refute that hypothesis.
In an exploratory analysis relating initial brain activation
patterns and post-test programming scores, we ﬁnd that
less similar patterns of activation for coding and mental
rotation in the right frontal hemisphere at the start of the
semester predict better outcomes on the end-of-semester
ﬁnal programming assessment ( r= 0:482,p= 0:006).
VII. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the implications of our experi-
mental results. In particular, we consider how the coding brain
activation patterns of novice programmers compare to those
of more experienced software developers (Section VII-A ) and
also discuss future research directions (Section VII-B ).
A. Novices vs. Experts
In this section, we discuss how our results compare to
those observed in neuroimaging studies of expert developers.
Generally, we observe more right-hemisphere activation, more
608engagement of visiospatial processes, and less engagement of
language processes than is seen in experts. For example, all
signiﬁcant activation areas observed by Siegmund et al. were
in the left hemisphere, a majority coinciding with established
language regions [ 1]. Similarly, Floyd et al. found that for
experts, programming becomes increasingly less distinguish-
able from reading, a left-lateralized cognitive activity. In this
context, our work helps establish an experience-based later-
alization shift: novice programmers generally exhibit bilateral
activation, especially in regions associated with visiospatial
processing, while expert developers see increasingly left-
lateralized activation centered in language-associated regions.
However, not all extant studies of experts observe a strong
connection between reading and programming: in their study
examining code writing (as opposed code reading, the focus
of other neuroimaging studies including our own), Krueger
et al. observed signiﬁcantly more right-brain activation in
spatial areas during code writing than prose writing [ 7]. More
investigation is needed to see if code writing exhibits a similar
lateralization trend with expertise. However, it is possible that
code writing consistently remains a more spatial activity.
B. Future Directions and Implications
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper to use
medical imaging to explicitly investigate novice programmer
coding brain activation patterns and their correlates. As a
result, beyond replications and meta-analyses, which are more
common in Psychology (e.g., [ 56]) but not yet as prevalent in
Computer Science, many of the research implications relate
to building on the baselines established by the results pre-
sented here. We focus on two dimensions: how programmers
learn other computing activities at a cognitive level, and
how learning programming in general compares to established
neurological theories for learning other disciplines.
For the former, we note that recent medical imaging re-
search on programming has focused on program comprehen-
sion and code review, with a lesser emphasis on data structures
and code writing [ 1]–[3], [6], [7]. Other activities remain un-
explored. To take one example, it is unknown whether boolean
logic has a signiﬁcant spatial cognitive component. While
general logic has been studied, particular paradigms, such as
circuit design, may be processed differently by humans, poten-
tially suggesting alternate training or tool-support approaches.
Other experimental protocol paradigms are also relatively
unexplored: almost all software engineering neuroimaging re-
search consists of showing ﬁxed, static stimuli. Even relatively
foundational experimental structures in Psychology, such as
priming, masking, and recall are unexplored. For example,
building on the inﬂuential work of Chase and Simon [ 57],
Psychologists have studied the relationship between chess
expertise and the ability to recall or reason about brieﬂy-
presented random chess boards [ 58]. While Siegmund et al.
randomized aspects of programs to study comprehension [ 2],
using such paradigms to tease apart programming expertise
neurologically remains unexplored.For the latter, we observe that a number of theories and
hypotheses about how humans learn various subjects, from
second languages [ 59] to musical instruments [ 60], have
been posited in the literature. We believe that it will be
fruitful to investigate whether a sequential model or a more
spatial encoding strategy (see Margulieux [ 24]) best describes
learning to program. Based on our results, our preliminary
speculation is that spatial encoding is indeed a key general
strategy employed by novices that may decrease in importance
over time. If true, this would have implications for the use
of domain-speciﬁc strategies in skills-based training. A more
concrete investigation for programming is merited.
VIII. L IMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY
Although our experiments and analysis provide signiﬁcant
evidence about novice programmers and spatial ability, our
results may not generalize. We consider a number of threats
to validity and discuss how our approach mitigates them.
We note that fNIRS experiments are dependent on transmit-
ters and receivers for infrared light (see Section II-A ): if no
pairs are present for a relevant portion of the brain, activity
there cannot be measured. We mitigate this potential source of
false negatives in two ways. First, adapt a validated cap design
proposed by Huang et al. for use in software engineering
and spatial ability studies [ 6]. Second, information from other
medical imaging approaches, such as fMRI, which do not
depend on transmitter placement, is used to determine which
brain regions to measure [ 1], [3], [7].
We also consider issues of construct validity: are we mea-
suring what we claim to be measuring (e.g., spatial ability,
introductory programming, etc.)? While there are multiple
aspects to spatial ability, we use mental rotation, an established
paradigm for investigating spatial ability, both in psychology
in general [ 33], [48], [61] and in computer science in particu-
lar [6], [62]. For introductory programming, we make use of
the SCS1, a validated assessment [ 37].
Finally, all of our subjects are students at the same large
US university. This aspect of participation selection may limit
the generality of our results to other populations.
IX. R ELATED WORK
We place our results in context with respect to three broad
categories of previous work.
a) Spatial Skills and Programming: There is a positive
relationship between programming and spatial ability and [ 28],
[29], [63], [64]. Parkinson and Cutts found that “spatial skills
typically increase as the level of academic achievement in
computer science increases” [ 29]. Furthermore, Parker et al.
found that spatial reasoning is better mediating variable for
afﬂuence discrepancies in computer science than computing
access [ 64]. There have also recently been studies establishing
a causal transfer between spatial reasoning training and com-
puter science performance. Cooper et al. and Bockmon et al.
ran studies with high school and university programmers, ﬁnd-
ing that those who participated in additional spatial training
609performed better on a ﬁnal programming test [ 62], [65]. Mar-
gulieux’s spatial encoding strategy (SpES) framework relates
the cogitative processes behind spatial ability and learning to
program [ 24]. SpES hypothesizes that strong spatial reasoning
ability helps novice programmers use general strategies for
mentally encoding non-verbal information.
Our results provide context and nuance to such claims:
we ﬁnd that novice programmers douse spatial cognitive
processes while programming (RQ1) and that the degree of
dissimilarity between patterns of neural activity for coding and
spatial tasks canpredict ﬁnal outcomes (RQ3).
b) Reading and Programming: From documentation to
code review to requirements elicitation to code summarization,
many software engineering activities involve a signiﬁcant
reading component [ 66]–[68]. Experimentally, several studies
report a correlation between overall programming ability and
the ability to read a program and describe its function in
natural language [ 69], [70] or posit natural language reading
as a basis for code comprehension [ 71], [72]. Some models
extend to training: Fedorenko et al. hypothesize that “peda-
gogies for developing linguistic ﬂuency” can inform how to
train programmers, based on a perceived similarity between
learning programming and second language learning [ 73].
Their hypothesis was supported by a recent study by Prat et al.
which found that natural language aptitude was a signiﬁcant
factor in predicting programming success [ 72].
Our results elaborate on how such claims apply to novice
programmers: while novices douse language cognitive pro-
cesses when coding (RQ1), we ﬁnd that coding and reading are
more different for novices than are coding and spatial ability,
suggesting they rely more on spatial reasoning when coding.
c) Medical Imaging and Software Engineering: Follow-
ing the pioneering work of Siegmund et al. [1], a number of
papers have used medical imaging techniques to investigate
software engineering activities (e.g., [ 1]–[5], [7], [19]–[21]).
Related to our work in particular, Yu et al. used fNIRS to com-
pare mental rotation tasks to data structure manipulation [ 6].
A key distinction of our work is that those studies focus on
programmers with years of experience. Explicit investigations
of programming expertise using neuroimaging are relatively
rare, and tend to involve either proxies such as undergraduate
grades [ 3] or comparisons between graduates or professionals
and undergraduates (e.g., Siegmund et al. measure 8 students
and 3 professionals [ 2, Sec. 3.3]). While Floyd et al. found
that coding and prose tasks are more similar in terms of
neural activity for senior undergraduate than for mid-level
undergraduates [ 3] (i.e., as programmers become more experi-
enced), our results provide evidence that the pattern continues :
as programmers become less experienced, programming and
reading show less cognitive similarity (RQ1, RQ2).
X. C ONCLUSION
Neurological understandings of how novices engineer soft-
ware has implications for training, pedagogy and tool de-
velopment. In a study of 31 participants, we use fNIRS to
compare the neural activity for introductory programming,reading and spatial reasoning tasks in a controlled, contrast-
based experiment. We ﬁnd that all three tasks — coding,
prose reading, and mental rotation — are mentally distinct
for novices . This clariﬁes previous ﬁndings that they may be
more similar in experts [ 3] or for complex data structures [ 40].
However, while those tasks are neurally distinct, we ﬁnd
more signiﬁcant and substantial differences between prose
and coding than between mental rotation and coding .
Intriguingly, we ﬁnd generally more activation in areas of
the brain associated with spatial ability and task difﬁculty
while coding compared to that reported studies with more
expert developers. Finally, in an exploratory analysis, we ﬁnd
that certain patterns of neural activity at the start of the
semester are predictive of end-of-semester outcomes , open-
ing the door for future experiments to model such phenomena
more directly. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
study to focus speciﬁcally on novice programmers and to
make use of a signiﬁcant time-delayed outcomes assessment.
While preliminary, these ﬁndings both elaborate on previous
results (e.g., relating expertise to a similarity between coding
and prose reading) and also provide a new understanding the
cognitive processes underlying novice programming.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the partial support of the NSF (CCF
1908633, CCF 1763674) as well as both the Center for
Research on Learning and Teaching and also the Center for
Academic Innovation at the University of Michigan. Addi-
tionally, we thank Jessica Kim for her help understanding
the fNIRS setup, and we thank Yu Huang for sharing the
fNIRS cap from her previous work. Finally, we thank our
undergraduate research assistants Anne Fitzpatrick, Annie Li,
and Serena Chan for their logistical help and their help piloting
fNIRS stimuli.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Siegmund, C. K ¨astner, S. Apel, C. Parnin, A. Bethmann, T. Leich,
G. Saake, and A. Brechmann, “Understanding understanding source
code with functional magnetic resonance imaging,” in Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2014, pp.
378–389.
[2] J. Siegmund, N. Peitek, C. Parnin, S. Apel, J. Hofmeister,
C. K ¨astner, A. Begel, A. Bethmann, and A. Brechmann, “Measuring
Neural Efﬁciency of Program Comprehension,” in Foundations
of Software Engineering , 2017, pp. 140–150. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3106237.3106268
[3] B. Floyd, T. Santander, and W. Weimer, “Decoding the representation of
code in the brain: An fmri study of code review and expertise,” in 2017
IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 175–186.
[4] T. Nakagawa, Y . Kamei, H. Uwano, A. Monden, K. Matsumoto, and
D. M. German, “Quantifying programmers’ mental workload during
program comprehension based on cerebral blood ﬂow measurement: a
controlled experiment,” in Companion proceedings of the 36th interna-
tional conference on software engineering , 2014, pp. 448–451.
[5] S. Fakhoury, Y . Ma, V . Arnaoudova, and O. Adesope, “The effect of poor
source code lexicon and readability on developers’ cognitive load,” in
International Conference on Program Comprehension , 2018.
[6] Y . Huang, X. Liu, R. Krueger, T. Santander, X. Hu, K. Leach,
and W. Weimer, “Distilling neural representations of data structure
manipulation using fMRI and fNIRS,” in International Conference
on Software Engineering , 2019, pp. 396–407. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00053
610[7] R. Krueger, Y . Huang, X. Liu, T. Santander, W. Weimer, and K. Leach,
“Neurological divide: An fmri study of prose and code writing,” in
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2020.
[8] R. B. Buxton, K. Uluda ˘g, D. J. Dubowitz, and T. T. Liu, “Modeling the
hemodynamic response to brain activation,” Neuroimage , vol. 23, pp.
S220–S233, 2004.
[9] D. A. Boas, C. E. Elwell, M. Ferrari, and G. Taga, “Twenty years of
functional near-infrared spectroscopy: introduction for the special issue,”
2014.
[10] S. Lloyd-Fox, A. Blasi, and C. Elwell, “Illuminating the developing
brain: the past, present and future of functional near infrared spec-
troscopy,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
269–284, 2010.
[11] A.-C. Ehlis, S. Schneider, T. Dresler, and A. J. Fallgatter, “Application
of functional near-infrared spectroscopy in psychiatry,” Neuroimage ,
vol. 85, pp. 478–488, 2014.
[12] H. Obrig, “NIRS in clinical neurology — a ‘promising’ tool?” Neuroim-
age, vol. 85, pp. 535–546, 2014.
[13] Scicurious, “IgNobel prize in neuroscience: The dead salmon
study,” Scientiﬁc American Blog Network , Sep 2012. [On-
line]. Available: https://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/scicurious-brain/
ignobel-prize-in-neuroscience-the-dead-salmon-study/
[14] C. M. Bennett, M. Miller, and G. Wolford, “Neural correlates of
interspecies perspective taking in the post-mortem atlantic salmon: an
argument for multiple comparisons correction,” Neuroimage , vol. 47, no.
Suppl 1, p. S125, 2009.
[15] R. N. Henson, C. J. Price, M. D. Rugg, R. Turner, and K. J. Friston, “De-
tecting latency differences in event-related bold responses: application to
words versus nonwords and initial versus repeated face presentations,”
Neuroimage , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 83–97, 2002.
[16] R. Aamand, T. Dalsgaard, Y .-C. Lynn Ho, A. Moller, A. Roepstorff, and
T. Lund, “A NO way to BOLD?: Dietary nitrate alters the hemodynamic
response to visual stimulation,” NeuroImage , vol. 83, 07 2013.
[17] M. A. Lindquist, J. M. Loh, L. Y . Atlas, and T. D. Wager, “Modeling
the hemodynamic response function in fMRI: efﬁciency, bias and mis-
modeling,” Neuroimage , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. S187–S198, 2009.
[18] M. Ferrari and V . Quaresima, “A brief review on the history of human
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fnirs) development and ﬁelds of
application,” Neuroimage , vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 921–935, 2012.
[19] Y . Ikutani and H. Uwano, “Brain activity measurement during program
comprehension with nirs,” in Software Engineering, Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing . IEEE, 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[20] J. Duraes, H. Madeira, J. Castelhano, C. Duarte, and M. C. Branco,
“WAP: Understanding the Brain at Software Debugging,” in Interna-
tional Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering , 2016, pp. 87–92.
[21] J. Castelhano, I. C. Duarte, C. Ferreira, J. Duraes, H. Madeira, and
M. Castelo-Branco, “The Role of the Insula in Intuitive Expert Bug
Detection in Computer Code: An fMRI Study,” Brain Imaging and
Behavior , May 2018.
[22] N. Peitek, J. Siegmund, C. Parnin, S. Apel, J. Hofmeister, and A. Brech-
mann, “Simultaneous Measurement of Program Comprehension with
fMRI and Eye Tracking: A Case Study,” in Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement , 2018, to appear.
[23] K. Brodmann, Brodmann’s: Localisation in the cerebral cortex .
Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[24] L. E. Margulieux, “Spatial encoding strategy theory: The relationship
between spatial skill and stem achievement,” in Proceedings of the 2019
ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research , ser.
ICER ’19, 2019, p. 81–90.
[25] M. Hegarty and M. Kozhevnikov, “Types of visual–spatial represen-
tations and mathematical problem solving.” Journal of educational
psychology , vol. 91, no. 4, p. 684, 1999.
[26] J. Wai, D. Lubinski, and C. P. Benbow, “Spatial ability for stem domains:
Aligning over 50 years of cumulative psychological knowledge solidiﬁes
its importance.” Journal of Educational Psychology , vol. 101, no. 4, p.
817, 2009.
[27] S. Sorby, N. Veurink, and S. Streiner, “Does spatial skills instruction
improve stem outcomes? the answer is ‘yes’,” Learning and Individual
Differences , vol. 67, pp. 209–222, 2018.
[28] S. Jones and G. Burnett, “Spatial ability and learning to program,”
Human Technology: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT
Environments , 2008.[29] J. Parkinson and Q. Cutts, “Investigating the relationship between
spatial skills and computer science,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
Conference on International Computing Education Research , 2018, pp.
106–114.
[30] D. H. Uttal, N. G. Meadow, E. Tipton, L. L. Hand, A. R. Alden,
C. Warren, and N. S. Newcombe, “The malleability of spatial skills:
A meta-analysis of training studies.” Psychological bulletin , vol. 139,
no. 2, p. 352, 2013.
[31] J. M. Zacks, “Neuroimaging studies of mental rotation: a meta-analysis
and review,” Journal of cognitive neuroscience , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–19,
2008.
[32] R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, “Mental rotation of three-dimensional
objects,” Science , vol. 171, no. 3972, pp. 701–703, 1971.
[33] J. C. Culham and N. G. Kanwisher, “Neuroimaging of cognitive func-
tions in human parietal cortex,” Current opinion in neurobiology , vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 157–163, 2001.
[34] C. J. Price, “A review and synthesis of the ﬁrst 20 years of pet and fmri
studies of heard speech, spoken language and reading,” Neuroimage ,
vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 816–847, 2012.
[35] M. Vigneau, V . Beaucousin, P.-Y . Herve, H. Duffau, F. Crivello,
O. Houde, B. Mazoyer, and N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, “Meta-analyzing
left hemisphere language areas: phonology, semantics, and sentence
processing,” Neuroimage , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1414–1432, 2006.
[36] J. Maloney, M. Resnick, N. Rusk, B. Silverman, and E. Eastmond,
“The scratch programming language and environment,” ACM Trans.
Comput. Educ. , vol. 10, no. 4, Nov. 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1868358.1868363
[37] M. C. Parker, M. Guzdial, and S. Engleman, “Replication, validation,
and use of a language independent cs1 knowledge assessment,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on International Computing
Education Research , ser. ICER ’16, 2016, p. 93–101.
[38] L. Lobato, J. M. Bethony, F. B. Pereira, S. L. Grahek, D. Diemert, and
M. F. Gazzinelli, “Impact of gender on the decision to participate in
a clinical trial: a cross-sectional study,” BMC Public Health , vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[39] M. G. Sackrowitz and A. P. Parelius, “An unlevel playing ﬁeld: Women
in the introductory computer science courses,” ACM SIGCSE Bulletin ,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 37–41, 1996.
[40] Y . Huang, X. Liu, R. Krueger, T. Santander, X. Hu, K. Leach, and
W. Weimer, “Distilling neural representations of data structure manipu-
lation using fMRI and fNIRS,” in International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) , 2019.
[41] H. Santosa, X. Zhai, F. Fishburn, and T. Huppert, “The NIRS brain
AnalyzIR toolbox,” Algorithms , vol. 11, no. 5, May 2018.
[42] M. Peters and C. Battista, “Applications of mental rotation ﬁgures of the
shepard and metzler type and description of a mental rotation stimulus
library,” Brain and cognition , vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 260–264, 2008.
[43] ETS.org. (2020) Gre home. ETS. [Online]. Available: https://www.ets.
org/gre
[44] A. E. Tew and M. Guzdial, “Developing a validated assessment of
fundamental cs1 concepts,” in Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical
symposium on Computer science education , 2010, pp. 97–101.
[45] J. W. Barker, A. Aarabi, and T. J. Huppert, “Autoregressive model based
algorithm for correcting motion and serially correlated errors in fNIRS,”
Biomedical optics express , vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 1366–1379, 2013.
[46] X. Cui, S. Bray, and A. Reiss, “Functional near infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS) signal improvement based on negative correlation between oxy-
genated and deoxygenated hemoglobin dynamics,” Neuroimage , vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 3039–3046, 2010.
[47] X.-S. Hu, N. Wagley, A. T. Rioboo, A. F. DaSilva, and I. Kovelman,
“Photogrammetry-based stereoscopic optode registration method for
functional near-infrared spectroscopy,” Journal of Biomedical Optics ,
vol. 25.
[48] M. S. Cohen, S. M. Kosslyn, H. C. Breiter, G. J. DiGirolamo, W. L.
Thompson, A. Anderson, S. Bookheimer, B. R. Rosen, and J. Belliveau,
“Changes in cortical activity during mental rotation a mapping study
using functional mri,” Brain , vol. 119, no. 1, pp. 89–100, 1996.
[49] L. Cohen, O. Martinaud, C. Lemer, S. Leh ´ericy, Y . Samson, M. Obadia,
A. Slachevsky, and S. Dehaene, “Visual word recognition in the left and
right hemispheres: anatomical and functional correlates of peripheral
alexias,” Cerebral cortex , vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 1313–1333, 2003.
[50] S. L. Brownsett and R. J. Wise, “The contribution of the parietal lobes
to speaking and writing,” Cerebral Cortex , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 517–523,
2010.
611[51] M. L. Seghier, “The angular gyrus: multiple functions and multiple
subdivisions,” The Neuroscientist , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 43–61, 2013.
[52] A. K. Barbey, M. Koenigs, and J. Grafman, “Dorsolateral prefrontal
contributions to human working memory,” cortex , vol. 49, no. 5, pp.
1195–1205, 2013.
[53] N. Kriegeskorte, M. Mur, and P. A. Bandettini, “Representational
similarity analysis-connecting the branches of systems neuroscience,”
Frontiers in systems neuroscience , vol. 2, p. 4, 2008.
[54] S.-Y . Chen, Z. Feng, and X. Yi, “A general introduction to adjustment
for multiple comparisons,” Journal of thoracic disease , vol. 9, no. 6, p.
1725, 2017.
[55] R. A. Marks, I. Kovelman, O. Kepinska, M. Oliver, Z. Xia, S. L. Haft,
L. Zekelman, P. Duong, Y . Uchikoshi, R. Hancock, and F. Hoeft, “Spo-
ken language proﬁciency predicts print-speech convergence in beginning
readers,” NeuroImage , vol. 201, p. 116021, 2019.
[56] P. R. Ventura Jr, “Identifying predictors of success for an objects-ﬁrst
cs1,” Computer Science Education , 2005.
[57] H. A. Simon and W. G. Chase, “Perception in chess,” Cognitive
Psychology , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 55–81, 1973.
[58] Y . Gong, K. Ericsson, and J. Moxley, “Recall of brieﬂy presented
chess positions and its relation to chess skill,” PLoS ONE ,
vol. 10, no. 3, p. e0118756, 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0118756
[59] I. Kovelman, S. A. Baker, and L. A. Petitto, “Bilingual and monolingual
brains compared: a functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation
of syntactic processing and a possible “neural signature” of bilingual-
ism,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 153–169,
2008.
[60] R. L. Lathrop, “How students learn music: The psychology of music and
music education,” Music Educators Journal , vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 47–145,
1970.
[61] I. M. Harris, G. F. Egan, C. Sonkkila, H. J. Tochon-Danguy, G. Paxinos,
and J. D. Watson, “Selective right parietal lobe activation during mental
rotation: a parametric pet study,” Brain , vol. 123, no. 1, pp. 65–73, 2000.
[62] R. Bockmon, S. Cooper, W. Koperski, J. Gratch, S. Sorby, and
M. Dorodchi, “A cs1 spatial skills intervention and the impact on
introductory programming abilities,” in Proceedings of the 51st ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , 2020, pp. 766–
772.
[63] S. Fincher, A. Robins, B. Baker, I. Box, Q. Cutts, M. de Raadt, P. Haden,
J. Hamer, M. Hamilton, R. Lister et al. , “Predictors of success in a ﬁrst
programming course,” in Proceedings of the 8th Australasian Computing
Education Conference (ACE 2006) , vol. 52. Australian Computer
Society Inc., 2006, pp. 189–196.
[64] M. C. Parker, A. Solomon, B. Pritchett, D. A. Illingworth, L. E.
Marguilieux, and M. Guzdial, “Socioeconomic status and computer
science achievement: Spatial ability as a mediating variable in a novel
model of understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference
on International Computing Education Research , ser. ICER ’18, 2018,
p. 97–105.
[65] S. Cooper, K. Wang, M. Israni, and S. Sorby, “Spatial skills
training in introductory computing,” in International Computing
Education Research , 2015, pp. 13–20. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2787622.2787728
[66] X. Xia, L. Bao, D. Lo, Z. Xing, A. E. Hassan, and S. Li, “Measuring
program comprehension: A large-scale ﬁeld study with professionals,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 951–
976, 2017.
[67] S. Haiduc, J. Aponte, L. Moreno, and A. Marcus, “On the use of
automated text summarization techniques for summarizing source code,”
in2010 17th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering . IEEE, 2010,
pp. 35–44.
[68] P. W. McBurney and C. McMillan, “Automatic source code summa-
rization of context for java methods,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 103–119, 2015.
[69] L. Murphy, S. Fitzgerald, R. Lister, and R. McCauley, “Ability to’explain
in plain english’linked to proﬁciency in computer-based programming,”
inProceedings of the ninth annual international conference on Interna-
tional computing education research , 2012, pp. 111–118.
[70] M. Lopez, J. Whalley, P. Robbins, and R. Lister, “Relationships between
reading, tracing and writing skills in introductory programming,” in Pro-
ceedings of the fourth international workshop on computing education
research , 2008, pp. 101–112.[71] T. Busjahn, C. Schulte, and A. Busjahn, “Analysis of code reading to
gain more insight in program comprehension,” in Proceedings of the
11th Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education
Research , 2011, pp. 1–9.
[72] C. S. Prat, T. M. Madhyastha, M. J. Mottarella, and C.-H. Kuo,
“Relating natural language aptitude to individual differences in learning
programming languages,” Scientiﬁc reports , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–10,
2020.
[73] E. Fedorenko, A. Ivanova, R. Dhamala, and M. U. Bers, “The language
of programming: a cognitive perspective,” Trends in cognitive sciences ,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 525–528, 2019.
612