“How Was Y our Weekend?” Software Development
Teams Working From Home During COVID-19
Courtney Miller∗, Paige Rodeghero‡, Margaret-Anne Storey§, Denae Ford¶and Thomas Zimmermann/bardbl
∗New College of Florida, FL, USA. Email: courtney.miller17@ncf.edu
‡Clemson University, SC, USA. Email: prodegh@clemson.edu
§University of Victoria, BC, Canada. Email: mstorey@uvic.ca
¶Microsoft Research, W A, USA. Email: denae@microsoft.com
/bardblMicrosoft Research, W A, USA. Email: tzimmer@microsoft.com
Abstract —The mass shift to working at home during the
COVID-19 pandemic radically changed the way many software
development teams collaborate and communicate. To investigatehow team culture and team productivity may also have beenaffected, we conducted two surveys at a large software company.The ﬁrst, an exploratory survey during the early months ofthe pandemic with 2,265 developer responses, revealed thatmany developers faced challenges reaching milestones and thattheir team productivity had changed. We also found throughqualitative analysis that important team culture factors such ascommunication and social connection had been affected. Forexample, the simple phrase “How was your weekend?” hadbecome a subtle way to show peer support.
In our second survey, we conducted a quantitative analysis of
the team cultural factors that emerged from our ﬁrst survey tounderstand the prevalence of the reported changes. From 608developer responses, we found that 74% of these respondentsmissed social interactions with colleagues and 51% reported adecrease in their communication ease with colleagues. We useddata from the second survey to build a regression model toidentify important team culture factors for modeling team pro-ductivity. We found that the ability to brainstorm with colleagues,difﬁculty communicating with colleagues, and satisfaction withinteractions from social activities are important factors that areassociated with how developers report their software developmentteam’s productivity. Our ﬁndings inform how managers andleaders in large software companies can support sustained teamproductivity during times of crisis and beyond.
I. I NTRODUCTION
As COVID-19 spread globally, many companies, including
Google, Microsoft, Twitter, Amazon, and Facebook, instructed
their software developers to go home and work remotely [1].Entire software development teams that used to work predom-inantly in-person suddenly had to pivot their work and quicklyestablish effective remote collaboration and communication.
Prior research has studied how working from home (WFH)
affects productivity [2], [3]. While regular WFH is not thesame as WFH during a pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemichas created a natural experiment for researchers to studyWFH on a much larger scale than previously possible. Forinstance, it has helped reduce selection bias in studies ofWFH since almost everyone has to work from home, and ithas helped researchers identify and understand the concretechallenges faced by developers while working remotely. ThereFig. 1. Methodology Flow Chart
are recent papers that already began investigating the impactsof this unique work setting. Bao et al. performed a case
study using automated trace data, along with other metrics,to determine how productivity has been affected. They foundthat productivity was affected in various ways depending onthe productivity metrics used [4]. Ralph et al. performed
an international large-scale questionnaire survey of developerwell-being and productivity and found that productivity andwell-being are closely related, and both are currently suffer-ing [5]. As insightful as these works are at providing empiricalevidence of factors affecting individual developer productivity,they lack a deeper understanding of a major responsibility ofindustrial software developers—collaborating with a team.
In our work, we identify factors that affect software de-
velopment team productivity such as team culture factors,including communication, camaraderie, and team cohesion [6],[7]. We hypothesize these factors are at particular risk ofbeing disrupted by this unexpected shift to WFH. Thus, weinvestigated the effects of WFH on teams and answered thefollowing research questions (RQs):
RQ1 How has the ability for teams to meet milestones
changed during WFH?
RQ2 How has team culture changed during WFH?
6242021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00064
RQ3 How have teams supported their members during WFH?
RQ4 How has team communication and collaboration
changed during WFH?
RQ5 How have social interactions within teams changed
during WFH?
RQ6 Which factors are associated with a change in team
productivity during WFH?
To answer our research questions, we conducted two sur-
veys. The ﬁrst survey was an exploratory survey to understand
how team productivity, ability to meet milestones, culture,and support structures have changed. We refer to this survey
throughout the paper as the “WFH-Survey.” We analyze data
collected from the exploratory survey that was aimed to betterunderstand team culture factors and changes in communicationand interaction practices. We also achieve early insights about
team productivity, speciﬁcally how some believe it has been
reduced and the reasons why teams may not meet milestones.
We found a common narrative among developers about
how ad-hoc in-person communication has been replaced with
online communication that, despite the often times more
meaningful intent, has more friction. For example, as one of
our respondents put it, formerly shallow questions from team
members like “How was your weekend?” are now a deep
inquiry of well-being and genuine concern. Many developers
also discussed how their teams had trouble ﬁnding satisfying
replacements for the low-effort in-person social activitieslike lunch or coffee breaks that were used to help maintaincamaraderie and social connection on their team.
Consequently, we designed an additional quantitative sur-
vey, which we refer to throughout the paper as the “Team-
Survey” to focus on team-speciﬁc factors and their prevalence.
From our Team-Survey, we found that 66% of respondentsreported a decrease in social connection with their teammembers, and 78% and 65% cited a decrease in impromptu
and scheduled social activities, respectively. Across the board,we saw a dramatic decrease in feelings of social connection
and team cohesion. We also found that 57% of respondents felta decrease in their ability to brainstorm with their colleagues.
Likewise, the quality and ease of communication were com-monly cited challenges. To understand the reﬁned impact of
these factors, we built a model of team productivity where wefound that factors including the ability to brainstorm with team
members, the frequency of scheduled social activities, and ex-
periencing difﬁculties communicating with colleagues all havea signiﬁcant relationship with change in team productivity.
As remote work will continue beyond the pandemic, it is
important for us to know how to evolve our approaches to
support remote work. Our work can help improve the experi-
ence of remote teams by identifying crucial factors that theyshould focus on strengthening, like the ability to effectively
communicate and brainstorm, and factors they should workon maintaining like social connection and team cohesion.
II. M
ETHODOLOGY
To answer our research questions, we distributed two sur-
veys to full-time software engineers at a large software com-pany in the United States. The company started working from
home in March 2020 around the same time when Amazon,Facebook, Google, and Microsoft started remote work due tothe COVID-19 pandemic.
Figure 1 shows a methodology ﬂowchart. The ﬁrst survey
(WFH-Survey, Section II-A) collected qualitative data and wasused to answer RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3. The second survey
(Team-Survey, Section II-B) builds on the ﬁrst survey and
collected quantitative data to answer RQ4, RQ5, and RQ6.
Both surveys were anonymous, and no personally identiﬁ-
able information was collected. We emphasized the anonymityof the survey to help organically create a more-candid spacefor respondents [8]. Respondents were invited to reach out tous via separate email if they had any questions or concerns.
Both surveys included a ﬁlter question, in the beginning,
asking respondents whether they were currently working fromhome to ensure they qualiﬁed to participate. The completesurveys can be found in the replication package [9].
In both surveys, we asked participants about the change in
perceived team productivity:
•Compared to working in ofﬁce, how has your teamproductivity changed? (WFH-Q1, Team-Q1)
1
The responses to this question were on a ﬁve-point scale fromsigniﬁcantly decreased tosigniﬁcantly increased.
A. WFH-Survey
In April 2020, we ran a large-scale three-week survey with
the goal of understanding how developers are being affected
by WFH at the large software company.
Survey Instrument. We asked participants a wide array
of questions (42 in total) about their experiences working
from home. Most questions were focused on the respondents’individual experiences. For this paper, we analyzed the subsetof questions that were speciﬁcally related to teams. We usedthree open-ended questions for the qualitative analysis of how
teams are affected as they work from home:
•How has your team culture changed? (WFH-Q2)
•How has your team supported you during this crisis?(WFH-Q3)
•Compared to working in ofﬁce, do you think the ability
of the team to reach milestones has changed? (No/Yes).
If yes, please explain. (WFH-Q4)2
To identify common ways teams are being affected by WFH,
we triangulated the responses from these three questions. Thishelps create a more holistic perspective on the effects of WFH
by considering team culture, team support, and challenges inmeeting milestones.
Participants. The WFH-Survey was deployed using the
Qualtrics survey tool and participants were invited via per-
sonalized emails. We sent email invitations over a period of
three weeks to a random sample of 9,000 software engineers
1We renumbered the questions for this paper. The preﬁx indicates whether
the question belongs to the WFH-Survey or the Team-Survey.
2The question WFH-Q4 was asked only in Weeks 2 and 3.
625(3,000 per week). This survey received 2,265 responses (re-
sponse rate of 25%, which is comparable to other surveys
in software engineering [10]). After completion of the WFH-Survey, participants could enter a sweepstakes to win USD
$100 Amazon.com gift certiﬁcates.
Analysis. We used qualitative content analysis coding [11]
(sometimes also known as card sorting), which provides a
framework to ascertain the meaning and summarize overar-
ching themes of responses within the context of the researchquestion. In the analysis, we grouped similar responses to theopen-ended questions into codes. The ﬁrst iteration of coding
was performed by one author, and any responses the ﬁrst
author was unsure of were decided by discussion with another
author. All the codes were then reviewed by the other authors.
For the questions about team culture (WFH-Q2) and team
provided support (WFH-Q3), we coded a random sampleof 600 responses. We selected this sample based on (1)
previous experience with similar surveys and (2) a samplesize determination for a conﬁdence interval of 95% and a
margin of error of 5%, which required 385 or more responses.
For both questions we reached saturation, deﬁned as coding100 responses without new codes (for WFH-Q2 saturation wasafter 358 responses, for WFH-Q3 after 511 responses).
For the question about whether the team’s ability to meet
milestones has changed (WFH-Q4, shown only in Weeks 2 and3), we used all 416 explanations provided when participants
responded “Yes.” Of the 1,477 responses, 446 responded “Yes”(30%) but not all provided an explanation.
In Section III, we discuss the most common responses
(codes) in more detail and include examples from the WFH-
Survey. The codes are discussed in order from most to least
frequently cited in the responses. The codes were selected until
there was a natural dip in frequency. The full list of codes canbe seen in our replication package [9].
B. Team-Survey
From the analysis of the WFH-Survey, we learned that
communication and collaboration with team members were
among the most commonly cited challenges impacting the
ability to reach milestones. We also found that social con-nectedness and communication were the most commonly cited
team culture factors affected by WFH. Because the ﬁrst survey
was primarily open-ended, we were not able to quantifyhow widespread these experiences were and how they areassociated with team productivity. We, therefore, designed a
second survey (“Team-Survey”). To identify speciﬁc commondeveloper experiences that relate to social connectedness and
quality of communication to include in the Team-Survey, we
referred to the responses to the WFH-Survey that cited socialconnectedness and communication factors.
Survey Instrument. The Team-Survey contained 19 ques-
tions in total, including questions about demographics, team
productivity, team culture, communication and collaboration,
social connectedness, as well as three open-ended questionsat the end to provide respondents with an opportunity toshare additional thoughts and feedback. The majority of thequestions were Likert response questions to allow for morequantitative analysis.
We asked two key questions exploring team culture factors:
•How has communication with your team changed sinceworking from home? (Team-Q2)
•How has social interaction with your team memberschanged since working from home? (Team-Q3)
The items and response formats for Team-Q2 and Team-Q3can be found in Tables I and II. The items for Team-Q2and Team-Q3 were derived from a combination of the WFH-Survey and previous literature [12].
We also asked about how respondents stayed socially con-
nected to colleagues (Team-Q4), about work-related chal-
lenges while working from home, and how impactful thesechallenges are (Team-Q5).
To quantify and model which factors are associated with a
change in team productivity, we included team culture factors
as items in the Team-Survey because team culture factorshave been established as important factors of productivity [13].Related work has shown that there are additional team-related
factors that can predict productivity including conﬁdence and
supportiveness of a team [12]. Therefore, we added a questionto the survey with agreement about: (1) my manager is highlycapable; (2) my team members are highly capable; (3) my team
members are supportive of new ideas; and (4) I feel positivelyabout other people on my team.
Participants. The Team-Survey was implemented with the
Microsoft Forms Pro survey tool and participants were invitedvia personalized emails. Invitations were sent to a random
sample of 3,500 software engineers in July 2020. We received178 out of ofﬁce responses giving us a pool of 3,322 potentialparticipants, of whom 608 responded yielding about an 18%
response rate, which is comparable to other software engineer-ing surveys [10]. There was no overlap between the invitees
of the WFH-Survey and the Team-Survey. The gender identiﬁ-cation breakdown of respondents is as follows, 455 identiﬁed
as men, 90 as women, 2 as non-binary/gender diverse, and17 preferred not to answer. While our survey collected the
gender identity of respondents, we did not ask about the gender
composition of teams as our scope was on team productivity.Thus, we did not analyze gender composition.
Survey respondents did not receive compensation, but for
each response USD $2 were donated to the Black Lives MatterGlobal Network [14] for a total of up to USD $400.
Analysis. To understand the overall trends of the responses
and to quantify the themes that emerged in the Team-Survey
we used visualizations and descriptive analyses.
To model the change in perceived team productivity with the
factors in the survey (RQ6), we ran a regression analysis with
three steps described as follows. We ﬁrst built a model using
all factors, then we used AIC backwards stepwise regressionfor variable selection, followed by standard model diagnostics.
Step 1: Build Regression Model. We initially built a multiple
linear regression model using all the factors included in the
626Team-Survey [15]. Multiple linear regression analysis is a form
of regression modeling used to model a quantitative response
variable using multiple explanatory variables that can be bothquantitative and categorical [16]. The response variable was
the perceived change in team productivity (Team-Q1), which
was formatted as a 5-point Likert response item. Since we useda 5-point scale, it is appropriate to treat it as an ordinal version
of a continuous variable and to code it as a numerical variablefor the model [17], [18]. However, the explanatory variables
remained categorical because some of them are Likert responseitems with only three levels rather than ﬁve, so they couldnot be coded numerically. All explanatory variables were kept
categorical to help preserve the consistency of interpretation.
Step 2: Perform V ariable Selection. Once we had the full
model built with all the factors from the Team-Survey, wereduced the model using variable selection. The goal of
variable selection is to reduce the model down to only themost important variables, for this we use Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) [19]. AIC considers two key components inits formula. First, it considers the quality of ﬁt for the model
given by the model’s sum of squared error (SSE). Second, itconsiders the complexity of the model, based on the numberof parameters. Removing a variable from the model will lower
the complexity of the model, but it will also possibly increasethe error of the SSE, this balance is what the criterion is based
on. We used backward stepwise selection, which starts withthe full model and removes variables one at a time according
to the AIC [20] with the goal of minimizing the AIC.
Step 3: Model diagnostics. We ﬁrst examined the V ariance
Inﬂation Factor (VIF) for each factor, which signals whether
multicolinearity is an issue [21]. We removed any variables
with a VIF score greater than 5, which is a standard benchmarkwithin the statistics community [15]. We also performedthe standard diagnostic plots to assure the linear regression
assumptions of linearity, constant variance, and normality
were upheld [15]. We then used ANOV A testing to identify
which variables in the model had a statistically signiﬁcant
relationship with perceived change in team productivity [22].
III. R
ESULTS
A. How has the ability for teams to meet milestones changedduring WFH? (RQ1)
We discuss the responses to the question “Compared
to working in ofﬁce, do you think the ability of theteam to reach milestones has changed?” (WFH-Q4). 30%
of respondents said “Yes” the ability to reach milestonesis affected. When people responded that their ability wasaffected, they were asked to elaborate. Although this questionwas phrased neutrally, the vast majority of respondents whoelaborated cited challenges that hindered their ability to reach
milestones. Beyond general reduced productivity and current
events, participants commonly cited collaboration challenges,
and challenges surrounding effective communication. Thesecommunication-related factors were frequently raised.Reduced Productivity – General. (72× ) General reduced
productivity was characterized by an overall decrease in gen-eral efﬁciency/productivity among team members, it could alsomanifest as the velocity of work decreasing.
/commentWe have lost somewhere between 20%-40% effectiveness
in use of time. In order to keep up, people are workinglonger hours. We are starting to see burnout. (S1384)
/commentWe deﬁnitely are not as efﬁcient. (S1629)
Reduced Productivity – Current Events/Kids. (71× ) This
code encompasses reduced productivity/efﬁciency due to WFHchallenges speciﬁcally related to current events includingCOVID-19 and childcare responsibilities.
/commentThe time pressure due to child care expectations and
more-frequent scheduled meetings (vs. quick hallway chats)
has deﬁnitely slowed the team down. We have explicitly and
ofﬁcially postponed some work, citing Coronavirus-rootedchallenges as reasons. (S887)
Communication Challenges. (46× ) This code captured
issues related to brainstorming sessions, discussions, and meet-
ings, or issues with miscommunications.
/commentIt is more difﬁcult to land nuanced discussions. 1:1 is
OK, but in a multi-person discussion it is very, very hard
to keep focus. (S1777)
/commentDifﬁculties in communication lead to additional time
necessary to connect and sync. Similar communicationdifﬁculties lead to wasted work, re-work on at least a couple
occasions. (S2072)
Collaboration Challenges. (43× ) This code included issues
with collaborative brainstorming, effective discussions, and
other coordination tasks.
/commentI think we spend a lot more time trying to coordinate with
each other and driving for clarity and shared understandingis harder . This means more time solidifying what we need
to be doing and less time doing/building it. (S835)
/commentBrainstorming activities that need whiteboard and in-
volve more passionate conversation progresses slower thanbefore and can be frustrating. (S1833)
B. How has team culture changed during WFH? (RQ2)
Here, we discuss the responses to “How has your team
culture changed?” (WFH-Q2). The most common answer
to this question was actually No Change. After No Change,
the most commonly cited changes were related to social
connection and communication. There appears to be a generalpush for increased conscious interactions, especially focusedon social connectedness and communication.
No Change. (109× ) No change constituted not noticing or
experiencing any signiﬁcant change in team culture.
/commentI do not think there was any drastic changes (S1642)
/commentI feel no difference (S1801)
Social Interaction Emphasized. (49× ) Respondents re-
ported teams were investing a conscious effort into promoting,
627reinforcing, and improving social interactions and connections
within a team, or a focus on implementing social events.
/commentWe have had to setup dedicated socializing meet-
ings/channels/chats to ﬁll the void of hallway conversations.
(S232)
Teams were putting an active effort into ensuring they
were able to engage socially during WFH. Participants often
reported that this active effort was necessary due to the loss ofad-hoc social events that they engaged in when in the ofﬁce.
/commentMore explicit efforts to facilitate social events and foster
team relationships. (S1676)
More Meetings. (39× ) Respondents described an increased
number of either formal or informal meetings, including syncup meetings, collaboration meetings, and social meetings.
/commentWe are trying to adapt to daily sync ups and face time
between all team members. which helps with communicationbut adds into the million meetings (S1722)
/commentWe have more meetings in general, but we also have
had some team meetings to discuss how people are feel-
ing/coping with the situation (S1988)
Missing General Interaction. (39× ) Respondents reported
a general lack of communication, interaction, and/or connec-
tion with team members.
/commentI don’t really interact/talk to them very much anymore
(S110)
/commentfewer interactions overall. More interactions with fewer
people. (S1428)
Missing Social Interaction. (36× ) Respondents reported
experiencing a lack of casual interpersonal communication and
socialization. Pre-WFH, these informal interactions often used
to be manifested as lunch, quick chats, and other team bondingexperiences. Respondents commonly cited not having found
equivalent remote substitutions for these interactions.
/commentFewer informal sessions of “just chatting” before/after
meetings makes things feel lonely (S1280)
/commentWe used to have lunches together , and had good comer-
aderie. No more lunches together , less comeraderie, and lessincidental ‘water cooler’ information exchange. (S2049)
Increased Empathy. (36× ) Respondents reported that their
team has an increased understanding, consideration, or empa-
thy for the situations of others on the team.
/commentWe are deﬁnitely acting bit more caring and respectful of
each others struggles during this time. We are going out ofour way to make everyone comfortable. At the same time,
fatigue is seeping in and folks are gradually giving up hope
on this whole situation. (S2269)
C. How have teams supported members during WFH? (RQ3)
We next discuss the responses to “How has your team
supported you during this crisis?” (WFH-Q3) After Peer
Support, the most commonly cited methods of support
focused on communication, social connection, and empa-
thy/understanding. Many participants described a focus onsupporting social connection and an empathetic culture.Peer Support. (56× ) The most commonly cited method
of support was peer support. This constituted respondents
reporting general shows of support from team members.
/commentFolks are always there to help each other out. (S577)
/commentEveryone is supportive of each other . It is easy to talk
with someone if needed. Feel supported. (S1053)
Social Engagements. (42× ) Social engagements were de-
ﬁned as meetings organized with the purpose of fostering
social interaction, including lunch calls and virtual happy hour.
/commentWe try to organize online events such as Friday night
chats and virtual lunches. (S397)
/commentWe have weekly social hours, which helps with some of
the social isolation I’ve been feeling. (S1562)
Communication Tools. (41× ) Respondents reported the
use of communication tools such as Slack and Microsoft
Teams to connect with other employees across the company.
Respondents reported the use of such tools to help facilitate
meetings, discussions, and other forms of communication.
/commentLots of online meetings. (S169)
/commentA lot of interactions, face time via communication tools
to help us feel less socially isolated. (S1663)
Understanding Personal WFH Situations. (40× ) The
respondents described team members being understandingand supportive of child care responsibilities, limited schedule
availability, and various WFH challenges such as needing
personal breaks between meetings.
/commentWe’ve more intentionally focused on learning about peo-
ple’s personal lives & situations. “How was your weekend”
has transitioned from a perfunctory pleasantry into realpersonal concern/care for others. (S1840)
/commentAgreement that meetings should start at 5- or 10- after
the hour to allow for personal breaks. (S2085)
/commentEveryone is in the same position and therefore very
understanding of each person’s individual circumstances,
so there is empathy and ﬂexibility. (S438)
/commentEveryone has been very supportive when I needed ﬂexi-
bility to help my kids get started with their home schooling(S546)
Personal Check Ins. (39× ) Personal check-ins were de-
ﬁned as check-in meetings with a small number of team
members, often with the objective of exploring personal well-being or work progress.
/commentMore meetings with our direct manager’s team just to
talk and check in. (S1636)
/commentOpen conversation and checking in during 1:1’s. (S1343)
D. How has team communication and collaboration changed
during WFH? (RQ4)
Issues with communication and collaboration among teams
were commonly cited by developers in the WFH-Survey.
These are important challenges to recognize because previous
research has highlighted the importance of efﬁcient commu-
nication ﬂow for developer productivity [23]. The ﬁndings
628TABLE I
HOW HAS COMMUNICA TION WITH YOUR TEAM MEMBERS CHANGED SINCE WORKING FROM HOME ?( T EAM -Q2, 608 RESPONSES )
Communication Method
CM1 Frequency of scheduled meetings 12% 51% 37%
CM2 Frequency of team member notiﬁcations 15% 46% 40%
CM3 Frequency of ad-hoc meetings 36% 37% 26%
CM4 Impactful contributions I make to team 16% 28% 56%
CM5 Quality of scheduled meetings 23% 24% 54%
CM6 Positive interactions with my team 25% 23% 52%
CM7 Ability to collaborate with colleagues 1:1 34% 23% 43%
CM8 Positive interactions with my manager 20% 23% 58%
CM9 Satisfaction with communication with team 29% 20% 51%
CM10 Ability to ask questions in group meetings 20% 19% 61%
CM11 Effectiveness of communication with colleagues 28% 19% 53%
CM12 Ability to share thoughts in group meetings 21% 16% 63%
CM13 Communication ease with colleagues 51% 15% 34%
CM14 Communication breakdowns w/in my team 18% 15% 68%
CM15 Awareness of colleague’s work 40% 14% 45%
CM16 Speed of decision making on my team 25% 12% 63%
CM17 Ability to brainstorm with colleagues 57% 11% 32%
CM18 Knowledge ﬂow within my team 42% 11% 47%
CM19 Ability to make decisions as a team 22% 11% 66%
CM20 Feeling socially connected to my team 65% 7% 28%
Signiﬁcant Decrease Decrease About the Same Increase Signiﬁcant Increase Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding.
from the WFH-Survey show that communication is (1) often
affected by changes in team culture, (2) used by teams to
support their members, and (3) a common challenge teams face
in reaching milestones. Teams are often being conscious ofcommunication and working hard to make improvements, butit is still one of the biggest roadblocks to reaching milestones.
This suggests that while communication is a cornerstone
challenge for WFH teams, this is not a lack of communication
issue, but rather a quality of communication issue.
Numerous WFH-Survey respondents mentioned issues com-
municating in ways that used to be trivial, like brainstorming
with team members or the ability to collaborate with teammembers one-on-one. One survey participant described the
“explosion of meeting requests and heightened expectations
on availability and response time from emails and onlinemessages. It is much harder to interject in online meetings
due to lack of visual cues, so meetings and decisions end up
monopolized by a small set of people. ” (S397) Even though
most teams report they are still meeting regularly, there arequestions regarding the quality and ease of communication.
In the Team-Survey, we therefore sought to further explore
the prevalence of these challenges. When asked about WFHissues faced, 58% of the Team-Survey respondents reported
being less aware of colleagues’ work, and 47% said they had
difﬁculty communicating with colleagues.
Table I shows a visualization of the responses to the
question “How has communication with your team mem-
bers changed since working from home?” (Team-Q2).
The communication aspects that have decreased the mostarefeeling socially connected to team (65%, CM20),
3ability
to brainstorm with colleagues (57%, CM17), communication
ease with colleagues (51%, CM13), and knowledge ﬂow within
my team (42%, CM18). The communication aspects that have
increased the most are frequency of scheduled meetings (51%,
CM1), frequency of team member notiﬁcations (46%, CM2),
and frequency of ad-hoc meetings.
The fact that 65% of respondents reported that they had
experienced a decrease in feeling socially connected to their
team (CM20) is alarming. Previous research has shown that
team camaraderie is an important factor in developer produc-tivity [13]. The majority of respondents reported a decreaseincommunication ease with colleagues (51%, CM13) and
the same or a higher frequency of scheduled meetings (88%,
CM1). This supports the hypothesis that although communi-cation is occurring on teams, there are still issues regardingthe quality of the communication.
E. How have social interactions within teams changed during
WFH? (RQ5)
Based on the ﬁndings from the WFH-Survey, challenges
regarding social connection and social interaction appear to
be a common thread among developers, motivating our further
analysis. Many respondents are actively missing interactionswith their team members, speciﬁcally social interactions, and
numerous teams are using social engagements as a way toactively support their members. Nonetheless, plenty of re-spondents still reported deﬁciencies in social connection. In
3The labels CM# and SC# refer to the rows in Tables I and II respectively.
CM is short for Communication Method; SC is short for Social Connection.
629TABLE II
HOW HAS SOCIAL INTERACTION WITH YOUR TEAM MEMBERS CHANGED SINCE WORKING FROM HOME ?( T EAM -Q3, 608 RESPONSES )
Social Connection
SC1 Frequency of scheduled social activities 65% 17% 17%
SC2 Satisfaction with the social interaction from social activities 55% 7% 38%
SC3 Connection with team members 57% 7% 36%
SC4 Team’s overall sense of connection 59% 7% 34%
SC5 Social connection with team members 66% 6% 28%
SC6 Frequency of impromptu social activities 78% 5% 17%
SC7 Enjoyment of social activities 59% 5% 37%
Signiﬁcant Decrease Decrease About the Same Increase Signiﬁcant Increase Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding
TABLE III
CHANGES IN PERCEIVED TEAM PRODUCTIVITY .
WFH-Survey Team-Survey
Signiﬁcantly more productive 3% 2%
More productive 19% 18%
About the same 55% 56%
Less productive 21% 21%
Signiﬁcantly less productive 2% 2%
the Team-Survey, 74% of respondents reported missing social
interaction as a WFH challenge they experienced.
Many participants in the WFH-Survey also mentioned feel-
ing disconnected from their team members, and feeling likethey are not connecting with their team members remotely
in the same way they used to in person. The loss of teamlunches, which were a popular low-effort social event, was
commonly cited. One participant described how “we used
to have lunches together , and had good [camaraderie]. Nomore lunches together , less [camaraderie], and less incidental
‘water cooler’ information exchange. ” (S2049)
Table II shows the responses to the question “How has
social interaction with your team members changed since
working from home?” (Team-Q3). There is a large decrease
in social activities. Over half of the participants reported expe-riencing a decrease for all items in Team-Q3. The frequency of
impromptu social activities (78%, SC7)
3and scheduled social
activities (65%, SC1) decreased dramatically. Furthermore,
59% of respondents reported a decrease in enjoyment of social
activities (SC7) and 66% of respondents reported a decrease
insocial connections with their team members (SC5).
For the responses to the question “How do you stay
socially connected with your colleagues (in place of hall-
way conversations, coffee breaks, etc.?)” (Team-Q4, not
displayed in a table), we could observe that the most frequently
utilized social activities were relatively low-effort. The twomost frequently utilized social events were starting or ending
meetings with non-work conversations and sharing pictures
and memes, with 40% and 25% of teams respectively using
them at least 2-4 times weekly. Whereas, activities that require
more organization and coordination like external team bonding
activities and playing online games together were used lessfrequently, with 1% and 2% respectively using them at least
2-4 times weekly.
F . Which factors are associated with a change in team pro-
ductivity during WFH? (RQ6)
When we asked participants in the Team-Survey how their
team productivity has changed compared to working in the
ofﬁce, 20% reported an increase and 23% reported a decrease
(see Table III). The numbers were similar to the WFH-Survey.
To understand which factors are associated with a change in
team productivity, we built a regression model as described in
Section II-B based on the Team-Survey data. As a reminder,
the response variable, perceived change in team productivity
(Team-Q1), was a 5-point response from signiﬁcantly de-
creased tosigniﬁcantly increased. The responses were coded
as a numerical variable as follows: −2means signiﬁcantly
decreased, −1means decreased, 0means about the same, +1
means increased, and +2means signiﬁcantly increased. Table
IV shows the model coefﬁcients for the factors that had a
signiﬁcant relationship with change in team productivity. Table
V lists the ANOV A F-statistic and p-value for all factors in
the reduced model.
Interpreting Model Coefﬁcients. Since the response vari-
ables are categorical, each has n-1dummy variables where nis
the number of categories for a given variable. It is important tonote the dummy variable coefﬁcients do not represent absolute
change, but rather relative change to the baseline category (i.e.,the category that is not coded with a dummy variable). The
dummy variable coefﬁcients represent the difference betweenthe team productivity of a given category relative to the teamproductivity of the baseline category for that factor.
Baseline Categories. For questions on a 5-point Decreased-
Increased, or Disagree-Agree scale, the baseline categories are
about the same and neither agree nor disagree, respectively.
For questions on a 3-point issue scale, the baseline is not an
issue.F o r External Team Bonding Activities, the baseline is
rarely or never.
Next, we discuss some observations from Table IV.
Less Awareness of What Colleagues are Working On .
Experiencing
this issue was associated with a decrease in team
productivity. This is a concern because 58% of survey respon-
dents reported experiencing this issue. When experienced as a
630TABLE IV
FACTORS FROM MODEL THA T HAD STA TISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT
RELA TIONSHIP WITH CHANGE IN PERCEIVED TEAM PRODUCTIVITY
Factor Coef.
(Intercept) 0.10
Less Awareness of What Colleagues are Working On
Minor Issue -0.23***
Major Issue -0.40***
Ability To Brainstorm With Team Members
Signiﬁcantly Decreased -0.20*
Decreased -0.17**
Increased 0.09
Signiﬁcantly Increased 0.11
Difﬁcult to Communicate with Colleagues
Minor Issue -0.16*
Major Issue -0.35**
Impactful Contributions I Make to Team
Signiﬁcantly Decreased -0.35.
Decreased -0.12
Increased 0.23***
Signiﬁcantly Increased 0.79***
Ability to Make Decisions as Team
Signiﬁcantly Decreased -0.48**
Decreased -0.08
Increased 0.31**
Signiﬁcantly Increased 0.11
Frequency of Scheduled Social Activities
Signiﬁcantly Decreased 0.22*
Decreased 0.18*
Increased 0.24**
Signiﬁcantly Increased 0.11
Start or End Meetings with Non-Work Conversations
Monthly 0.06
Biweekly -0.01
Weekly -0.13.
2-4 times weekly -0.24**
Daily 0.04
Multiple times daily -0.15
External Team Bonding Activities
Monthly 0.16.
Biweekly 0.24.
Weekly 0.07
2-4 times weekly 0.52
Daily 1.47***
My Team Members are Supportive of New Ideas
Strongly disagree -0.87**
Disagree -0.04
Agree -0.18*
Strongly agree -0.20*
Adjusted R20.45
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05,.p<0.1
major issue, the drop in team productivity was roughly double
the drop when experienced as a minor issue.
Ability to Brainstorm with Team Members. A decrease in
the ability to brainstorm with team members was associatedwith a drop in team productivity, and similarly, an increase
in ability to brainstorm was associated with an increase inteam productivity. This is an important ﬁnding because 57%
of respondents reported a decrease in the ability to brainstorm
with team members (see Table I), and we can now report thatthis is also associated with a decrease in team productivity.
This is also relevant given several respondents made commentsTABLE V
FULL LIST OF FACTORS INCLUDED IN TEAM PRODUCTIVITY MODEL
Productivity Factors F-Statistic
Less awareness of what colleagues are working on 9.86***
Impactful Contributions I Make to Team 9.67***Ability to Make Decisions as Team 4.52**External Team Bonding Activities 3.97**My Team Members are Supportive of New Ideas 3.26*
Communication Breakdowns Within my Team 1.37
Difﬁcult to Communicate with Colleagues 5.89**
Ability to Brainstorm with Team Members 2.93*
Start/End Meetings with Non-Work Talk 2.94**
Frequency of Scheduled Social Activities 2.48*
My Manage is Highly Capable 1.86
Fun Informal Chats Non-Teams 1.73
Ability to Ask Questions in Group Meetings 1.63
Satisfaction with Social Interaction from Social Activities 1.04
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05,.p<0.1
in the WFH-Survey about challenges related to collaboration
work with team members, particularly brainstorming. As one
participant put it, “brainstorming activities that need white-
board and involve more passionate conversation progresses
slower than before and can be frustrating. ” (S1833)
Difﬁcult to Communicate with Colleagues. Experiencing
the issue of having difﬁculty communicating with colleagues
was associated with a drop in team productivity. From the RQ1
ﬁndings, we know difﬁculty with communication is commonamong those working from home, and from Table I we knowthat 46% of respondents reported experiencing this challenge.
Additional Signiﬁcant Factors. For the factors Impactful
Contributions I Make to Team and Ability to Make Decisions
as a Team, an increase was associated with an increase in teamproductivity. A decrease in these factors was associated with a
drop in team productivity. Other factors that had a statisticallysigniﬁcant relationship with change in team productivity were
frequency of scheduled social activities, starting or ending
meetings with non-work talk, external team bonding activities,
and my team is supportive of new ideas.
IV . T
HREA TS TO VALIDITY
We discuss several of the threats to the validity of our work.
The ﬁrst point is not a threat but an important disclaimer,this paper does not suggest causal inference of any kind. All
ﬁndings are based on survey data it’s statistical analysis. Our
ﬁndings show factors that are constructive when modelingperceived change in team productivity and factors that havea statistically signiﬁcant relationship with it, but we are not
implying causality of any manner.
External Validity. The participants for the surveys were all
from Microsoft, a large software company, and all respondents
were based in the United States. This limits the generalizabilityof our ﬁndings, which cannot be assumed to generalize to
all software developers, especially those who work at smaller
companies, in different regions, or in open source. At Mi-
crosoft, we collected a large random sample of developers
across multiple divisions (called organizations at Microsoft)
631who worked on a vast number of different kinds of projects
and use a variety of development techniques. Although our
ﬁndings cannot be generalized to all software developers, webelieve our ﬁndings are still of value to the community becauseit has been shown that historically single-case case studiescontribute to scientiﬁc discovery [24]. To help increase thegeneralizability of our work in the future, we have createda comprehensive replication package [9] that can be used toperform our survey and analysis at other companies.
Previous research has shown that people who are inclined
to participate in surveys may have different demeanor andpersonality traits than the entire population being sampledfrom [25], [26]. In an attempt to minimize the risk of non-
response and volunteer bias, we aimed to lower the opportunitycost of participating in the Team-Survey by making the ex-
pected completion time 10 minutes, incentivizing engagementwith a donation to a civil rights organization, and anonymizing
survey responses. In the WFH-Survey, we incentivized engage-
ment with entry into a rafﬂe for an Amazon gift card andanonymizing survey responses.
The time period when the participants took the survey may
have also impacted their perspective, which could potentiallyevolve over time. It is also important to note that pandemicWFH is not the same thing as WFH during normal times, so
there are limits on the generalizability of our ﬁndings.
Construct Validity. When measuring the change in pro-
ductivity, we used a single metric, self-reported perceived
change in productivity. It’s important to note that there is nosingle deﬁnitive metric for productivity and that we cannot
claim that our ﬁndings are true for productivity as a whole,because the factors that impact productivity inherently dependon the measures you are using to deﬁne productivity [27].
The team productivity scores are from the perspective of anindividual team member. Since the survey was anonymous and
no personal identiﬁable information was collected (to encour-age more candid responses), we were unable to triangulate
responses from members of the same team, which would have
further improved the validity of the ﬁndings. While thereare advantages and disadvantages to selecting self-reported
measures of productivity versus automated technical ones, ourchoice aligns similar recent work [7], [12], [28].
While we performed a thorough literature review, there may
be additional team culture factors that have an impact on team
productivity that we did not include in our survey. Our ﬁndings
are not meant to be an exhaustive list but to rather highlight
some of the team culture factors that are constructive when
modeling team productivity.
The ﬁrst iteration of qualitative analysis coding was done by
a single author, but were later reviewed by the other authors,and any responses the ﬁrst author was unsure of were decided
with discussion with another author.
The response variable for the model, change in team
productivity, was coded in the survey as a 5-point Likertscale. However, for the sake of the data analysis, it was
coded numerical values from -2 to 2. Since Likert scales are
ordinal categorical scales, there has been a debate within thestatistics community about whether it is appropriate to code
them as numerical values [29]. Norman stated that “parametricstatistics can be used with Likert data” [17], even when thesample sizes are small and the distributions are non-normal.It has also been suggested that higher p-values be used with
Likert scores [29], so all p-values have been included in our
model so readers can interpret results with both a standardp-value of α=0.05or a smaller one.
Internal Validity. Due to the nature of surveys, there is
a chance some participants found certain survey questions tobe ambiguous, confusing, or unclear. This means participantscould misunderstand what we’re asking about and respond in
a way that does not align with what we meant to ask. To helpprevent this possibility, we performed a small pilot study with
the ﬁrst 200 participants, which included a question at the endof the survey asking about whether there were any ambiguous
or unclear questions or other aspects of the survey.
Since the survey responses were anonymous, there is a
possibility that participants took the survey multiple times.
The structure of the surveys may have had an impact on
the ways the participants responded to questions and could
have potentially primed them. To prevent this from affectingperceived productivity, which was our response variable, we
put the productivity questions at the beginning of the survey.
V. R
ELA TED WORK
A. Working from Home
In 1973, Jack Niles, a NASA engineer, was sick of Los
Angeles trafﬁc. It was then that he coined the term “telecom-muting,” and the concept of remote work was conceived
[30]. Granted, his vision for telecommuting was different thanour reality today since his idea was from over a decade
before the public internet [31]. Nonetheless, the concept of
distributed workplaces was present in his proposal for telecom-muting [32], and that idea has evolved into the remote work
we know today.
Research on WFH has increased in the last few years [33]–
[36]. There are many beneﬁts to WFH for both the employee
and the employer. For example, employees can reduce oreliminate their commute to work and save money on gasoline.They can also control the environment they work in (e.g.,the air conditioning). Companies can beneﬁt in many ways,such as saving money from overhead and remote work allowscompanies to hire the best talent from any location.
However, employees sometimes ﬁnd that they are work-
ing increased hours when WFH [33]. This may mean they
work unsustainable schedules that may eventually lead toburnout [37]. Previous work has also shown that increased
work hours can increase the risk of developer disengage-ment [38]. Remote work can also make it more difﬁcult for
managers to manage their teams effectively. It can be chal-
lenging for managers to remain in touch with their employeesand stay on top of their progress [34].
Teamwork can be signiﬁcantly impacted by remote
work [39]–[42]. Wagstrom et al. found the temporal distribu-
632tion of teams had a signiﬁcant negative impact on communi-
cation response time, suggesting that teams bifurcated across
multiple time zones communicate signiﬁcantly slower [43].Also, Butler et al. explored the challenges faced by developers
working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic and theimpact that these challenges have had on job satisfaction [44].They found that having many meetings and feeling overworkedwere some of the biggest challenges faced.
In addition, WFH has been found to have an impact on
individual software development productivity. Kazekami found
that when remote work hours are too long, worker productivityis reduced [45]. In the GitHub Octoverse report, they found
that developers were working longer hours, in some cases up totwo additional 8-hour workdays per week [46]. It is importantto note that Bao et al. also performed a case study and found
that the effect of WFH on productivity varies depending onwhich productivity metrics are used and the characteristicsof a project [4] (e.g., its size). Finally, Ralph et al. ran a
large-scale international survey of developers and found that
“software professionals who are working from home during
the pandemic are experiencing diminished emotional well
being and productivity, which are closely related [5].” The
relationship between self-reported productivity and developersatisfaction was also discussed in previous research [7].
B. Developer Productivity
Software development is a complex process, and doing
it well, on budget, and on time can be hard [47]. Teams
may ﬁnd challenges in coordination and communication [48].Therefore, we must study developer productivity, which hasbeen of interest to researchers for decades [49]–[53].
One fundamental challenge in studying developer produc-
tivity is deﬁning and operationalizing factors that encapsulate
‘productivity’ [54]. Generally speaking, there are two overar-
ching types of productivity factors, technical and soft [13].
Some popular technical productivity metrics are the number
of lines of code [55], the number of builds [4], and the numberof commits per unit of time [4]. Soft factors that have been
shown to inﬂuence developer productivity include corporate
culture, workplace environment, and team culture factors [13].
However, there has been little work focused on team culture
factors, which are often more complex and nuanced.
Team culture factors are often directly impacted by the
distribution of teams [56], [57]. For example, we know thatcommunication for teams that are separated across multipletime zones is often slower than co-located teams [43]. And
previous research also suggests that coordination and commu-
nication are some of the biggest challenges faced by developerteams [48]. Tang et al. found that remote teams customize how
they work together based on their unique situations [58].
The majority of the related work explores individual de-
veloper productivity and individual challenges during theCOVID-19 pandemic. However, in our work, we speciﬁcally
directed our efforts on studying the impact that WFH has hadonsoftware development teams and their productivity.VI. D
ISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDA TIONS
Through our survey analysis, we learned that many devel-
opers are experiencing social connection and communication
challenges with their teams. While many of our respondentsreported challenges, some reported that the transition to WFHhad been a positive experience. Additionally, only 23% ofrespondents experienced a decrease in productivity during thistime. In this section, we discuss some of the positive WFHexperiences, implications for teams, and provide recommen-dations for improving social connection and communication.
A. Beneﬁts of Working from Home
There are multiple beneﬁts to WFH. For example, WFH
can be more accessible for workers with disabilities [59].
WFH can also help create an environment where traditionally
marginalized people (e.g., trans developers) can be empoweredand have more autonomy over workplace interactions [42].
In our survey, we found that one of the beneﬁts of WFH
included the increased inclusion of all team members.
/comment[Microsoft] Teams has forced people to be more inclu-
sive. Our in person meetings usually have multiple peoplespeaking over each other . Online meetings over Teams onthe other hand have enabled people to stop speaking over
each other since they cannot see the other person and peopleusually wait for the other person to complete. (S902)
Another one of the reported beneﬁts of WFH was increased
empathy for fellow team members, including increased empa-
thy for teammates who were remote before COVID-19.
/commentI already had several employees who didn’t work in
Redmond. This has enabled us to build more empathy with
working with distant co-workers. (S1840)
As many teams were no longer hybrid but fully remote,
teams were now collectively experiencing similar remote workand WFH problems. This placed teammates on the sameplaying ﬁeld during meetings and increased team bonding.
/commentFlexibility, forgiveness of missed meetings and challenges
in connectivity. More mutual bonding over shared difﬁcul-ties. Time taken to try to connect outside of work-relatedtasks. (S1000)
Overall, the beneﬁts of WFH provided an opportunity for
teams to respect one another’s perspective, build empathy, andunderstanding of unprecedented home challenges that arise—all characteristics that hopefully persist after the pandemic.
B. Recommendations
Based on our results, we provide the following recommen-
dations to improve social connection and communication.
Recommendations for improving social connection:
/squaresolidBuild and maintain team culture.
/squaresolidInclude social activities as part of “work.”
/squaresolidBe mindful of other people’s time.
/squaresolidActively work to be inclusive.
633Build and maintain team culture. Managers should strive
to create and maintain a team culture where small daily social
interactions are promoted. For example, taking 10 minutes at
the start and end of meetings for small talk to maintain socialconnection, as also recommended in [60], [61].
Include social activities as part of “work.” We recom-
mend adding regular social activities to “work.” We suggest
being creative with these social events; for example, an al-ternative to virtual lunch could be playing an online game or
holding a remote arts and crafts event.
Be mindful of other’s time. Developers are working more
hours [46], and many respondents reported meeting fatigue.Therefore, we recommend scheduling social events during
work hours and avoiding adding meetings during off-hours.
Be inclusive. We recommend that teams are mindful of
events that include hybrid participants. We suggest that hybrid
teams choose remote-centric activities to maintain accessibility
for team members who remain remote indeﬁnitely [62].
Recommendations for improving communication:
/squaresolidManagers should stay aware of contributions.
/squaresolidManagers should hold weekly 1:1 meetings.
/squaresolidHold regular team meetings.
/squaresolidCreate communication standards.
Managers stay aware of contributions. One commonly
cited WFH challenge was effectively communicating in groupmeetings. During meetings, we recommend managers remain
aware of each participant’s contributions and ensure all voicesare given an opportunity to speak.
Managers hold weekly 1:1 meetings. We found that many
respondents also reported appreciating check-in 1:1s withmanagers and team members, which could be a productiveway to increase direct communication. We recommend having
weekly 1:1s regularly scheduled with managers and their team.
Hold regular team meetings. We recommend that teams
meet regularly. These meetings should be at least once a weekand can even be held daily. We recommend that these arescheduled meetings that are reoccurring and put on the calen-dar in advance. We also recommend that during the meeting,
each team member provides status updates and discusses any
problems. These meetings allow teams and managers to be
aware of the progress and potentially address problems faster.
Create communication standards. We recommend that
teams collectively create standards around communication.
These standards include which communication tools to use
for speciﬁc types of communication and how long a teammate
should expect to wait for a response. This will also help new
hires onboarding remotely as they can be given clear guidance
on how to communicate with their new team [63].
VII. C
ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, through the two surveys of developers (2,265
+ 608 responses), we found that software development teamsworking from home during the COVID-19 pandemic have
experienced a radical shift in how they work together.Our ﬁrst survey, WFH-Survey, probed about a wide range
of topics related to WFH and provided rich insights onteam culture and collaboration factors. The second survey,
Team-Survey, investigated how team culture factors and team
productivity have been impacted by WFH. Using the teamfactors that emerged from our surveys and from related work,
we built a model to determine which team factors were most
useful when modeling changes in team productivity.
Just as previous research has associated understanding and
predicting individual developer productivity with social inter-
actions, we found that many of the factors associated with team
productivity were also of a social nature. Social connection and
communication were the most commonly cited team culture
factors. We found that 65% of respondents reported a decreasein feelings of social connectedness with their team, and 74%
of respondents citing missing social interaction as a WFHchallenge. In terms of communication, 51% cited a decrease in
communication ease with colleagues, and 57% said the ability
to brainstorm with colleagues has decreased.
In understanding team productivity, we note most respon-
dents from the Team-Survey reported that they perceived littleto no change in team productivity (56%), which is consistent
with the prior WFH-Survey. However, from those affected, we
were able to build a model of team productivity factors.
Our model of team productivity factors included the ability
to brainstorm with colleagues ,having less awareness of what
colleagues are working on, and having difﬁculty communi-
cating with colleagues, and these factors all have a signif-
icant relationship with changes in team productivity. Other
factors include satisfaction with social interaction from social
activities, while communication breakdowns on teams are also
important factors when modeling change in team productivity.
Understanding team productivity is a new avenue for re-
search and an important topic as developers are now more
distributed during the pandemic and likely will continue to be
so after it. Improving productivity is not just a concern forcompanies. It is also important from the individual developer
perspective as previous research has shown a relationship
between productivity and work satisfaction, and betweenproductivity and well-being. Although effective engineering
processes, collaboration and communication tools and workenvironments are important for productivity, understanding
the nuances of how developers socialize, communicate, andsupport each other [38] is just as critical.
S
UPPLEMENTAL MA TERIAL
A replication package with both surveys and the analysis
codebook is available on Zenodo [9].
 DOIDOI 10.5281/zenodo.445604110.5281/zenodo.4456041
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the survey participants.
Courtney Miller performed this work during a summer intern-
ship at Microsoft Research in the Software Analysis and In-
telligence Team (http://aka.ms/saintes). Paige Rodeghero and
Margaret-Anne Storey contributed to this work while being
visiting researchers at Microsoft.
634REFERENCES
[1] C. Duffy, “Big tech ﬁrms ramp up remote working orders
to prevent coronavirus spread,” March 2020, retrieved
August 17, 2020 from https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/10/tech/google-work-from-home-coronavirus/index.html.
[2] E. Baker, G. C. Avery, and J. Crawford, “Satisfaction and perceived
productivity when professionals work from home,” Research & Practice
in Human Resource Management, 2007.
[3] D. J. Neufeld and Y . Fang, “Individual, social and situational deter-
minants of telecommuter productivity,” Information & Management,
vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 1037–1049, 2005.
[4] L. Bao, T. Li, X. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, and X. Yang, “How does working
from home affect developer productivity?–a case study of baidu duringcovid-19 pandemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13167, 2020.
[5] P . Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V . Kovalenko, M. Kali-
nowski, N. Novielli, S. Y oo, X. Devroey, X. Tan et al., “Pandemic
programming: How covid-19 affects software developers and how their
organizations can help,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01127, 2020.
[6] S. Wagner and E. Murphy-Hill, “Factors that inﬂuence productiv-
ity: A checklist,” in Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering.
Springer, 2019, pp. 69–84.
[7] M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, J. Czerwonka, B. Murphy,
and E. Kalliamvakou, “Towards a theory of software developer job
satisfaction and perceived productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 2019.
[8] C. M. Hewson, D. Laurent, and C. M. V ogel, “Proper methodologies
for psychological and sociological studies conducted via the internet,”Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, vol. 28, no. 2,pp. 186–191, 1996.
[9] Supplementary Material for ”How Was Your Weekend?” Software
Development Teams Working From Home During COVID-19. Zenodo,
Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4456041
[10] E. Smith, R. Loftin, E. Murphy-Hill, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann,
“Improving developer participation rates in surveys,” in 2013 6th In-
ternational Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering (CHASE). IEEE, 2013, pp. 89–92.
[11] M. Schreier, Qualitative content analysis in practice. Sage publications,
2012.
[12] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Jaspan, C. Sadowski, D. Shepherd, M. Phillips,
C. Winter, A. Knight, E. Smith, and M. Jorde, “What predicts softwaredevelopers’ productivity?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
2019.
[13] S. Wagner and M. Ruhe, “A systematic review of productivity factors
in software development,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06475, 2018.
[14] “Black lives matter global network,” https://blacklivesmatter.com, ac-
cessed: 2021-01-21.
[15] J. Fox, Applied regression analysis and generalized linear models. Sage
Publications, 2015.
[16] D. C. Montgomery, E. A. Peck, and G. G. Vining, Introduction to linear
regression analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2012, vol. 821.
[17] G. Norman, “Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of
statistics,” Advances in health sciences education , vol. 15, no. 5, pp.
625–632, 2010.
[18] G. M. Sullivan and A. R. Artino Jr, “Analyzing and interpreting data
from likert-type scales,” Journal of graduate medical education, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 541–542, 2013.
[19] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation,” IEEE
transactions on automatic control, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, 1974.
[20] T. Yamashita, K. Yamashita, and R. Kamimura, “A stepwise aic method
for variable selection in linear regression,” Communications in Statis-
tics—Theory and Methods, vol. 36, no. 13, pp. 2395–2403, 2007.
[21] Y . Dodge, The concise encyclopedia of statistics. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2008.
[22] H. Scheffe, The analysis of variance. John Wiley & Sons, 1999, vol. 72.
[23] C. Sadowski and T. Zimmermann, Rethinking productivity in software
engineering.
Springer Nature, 2019.
[24] B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study research,” Qual-
itative inquiry, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 219–245, 2006.
[25] S. G. Rogelberg, J. M. Conway, M. E. Sederburg, C. Spitzm ¨uller,
S. Aziz, and W. E. Knight, “Proﬁling active and passive nonrespondentsto an organizational survey.” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 88,
no. 6, p. 1104, 2003.[26] B. Marcus and A. Sch ¨utz, “Who are the people reluctant to participate in
research? personality correlates of four different types of nonresponse as
inferred from self-and observer ratings,” Journal of personality, vol. 73,
no. 4, pp. 959–984, 2005.
[27] C. Jaspan and C. Sadowski, “No single metric captures productivity,” in
Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering. Springer, 2019, pp.
13–20.
[28] B. Johnson, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “The effect of work envi-
ronments on productivity and satisfaction of software engineers,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[29] J. Cariﬁo and R. Perla, “Resolving the 50-year debate around using and
misusing likert scales,” Medical education , vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1150–
1152, 2008.
[30] V . Gan, “The invention of telecommuting,” https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2015-12-01/what-telecommuting-looked-like-in-1973, ac-
cessed: 2021-01-21.
[31] B. M. Leiner, V . G. Cerf, D. D. Clark, R. E. Kahn, L. Kleinrock, D. C.
Lynch, J. Postel, L. G. Roberts, and S. Wolff, “A brief history of theinternet,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39,
no. 5, pp. 22–31, 2009.
[32] J. M. Niles, F. Carlson, P . Gray, and G. Hanneman, “The
telecommunications-transportation tradeoff,” John Willey, vol. 88, 1976.
[33] A. Felstead and G. Henseke, “Assessing the growth of remote working
and its consequences for effort, well-being and work-life balance,” New
Technology, Work and Employment, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 195–212, 2017.
[34] N. Bailey and N. B. Kurland, “The advantages and challenges of working
here, there, anywhere, and anytime,” Organizational dynamics, vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 53–68, 1999.
[35] J. M. Nilles, Making telecommuting happen: A guide for telemanagers
and telecommuters. V an Nostrand Reinhold, 1994.
[36] Y . Baruch, “Teleworking: beneﬁts and pitfalls as perceived by profes-
sionals and managers,” New technology, work and employment, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 34–49, 2000.
[37] C. Maslach and M. P . Leiter, “Early predictors of job burnout and
engagement.” Journal of applied psychology, vol. 93, no. 3, p. 498,
2008.
[38] C. Miller, D. G. Widder, C. K ¨astner, and B. V asilescu, “Why do people
give up ﬂossing? a study of contributor disengagement in open source,”
inIFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer,
2019, pp. 116–129.
[39] J. D. Herbsleb, A. Mockus, T. A. Finholt, and R. E. Grinter, “An
empirical study of global software development: distance and speed,”inProceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Software Engi-
neering. ICSE 2001. IEEE, 2001, pp. 81–90.
[40] J. D. Herbsleb and D. Moitra, “Global software development,” IEEE
software, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 16–20, 2001.
[41] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, P . Devanbu, H. Gall, and B. Murphy, “Does
distributed development affect software quality? an empirical case study
of windows vista,” in 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on
Software Engineering. IEEE, 2009, pp. 518–528.
[42] D. Ford, R. Milewicz, and A. Serebrenik, “How remote work can
foster a more inclusive environment for transgender developers,” in 2019
IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop on Gender Equality in Software
Engineering (GE).
 IEEE, 2019, pp. 9–12.
[43] P . Wagstrom and S. Datta, “Does latitude hurt while longitude kills?
geographical and temporal separation in a large scale software develop-ment project,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 199–210.
[44] J. L. Butler and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary
study of software engineers working from home during covid-19
pandemic,” Microsoft Research Symposium on the New Futureof Work. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/challenges-and-gratitude-a-diary-study-of-software-engineers-working-from-home-during-covid-19-pandemic/,August 2020.
[45] S. Kazekami, “Mechanisms to improve labor productivity by performing
telework,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 44, no. 2, p. 101868, 2020.
[46] N. Forsgren, “Octoverse spotlight: An analysis of developer productivity,
work cadence, and collaboration in the early days of covid-19,” May
2020, retrieved June 2, 2020 from https://github.blog/2020-05-
06-octoverse-spotlight-an-analysis-of-developer-productivity-work-
cadence-and-collaboration-in-the-early-days-of-covid-19/.
[47] M. Jorgensen and M. Shepperd, “A systematic review of software
development cost estimation studies,” IEEE Transactions on software
engineering, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 33–53, 2006.
635[48] F. P . Brooks Jr, The mythical man-month: essays on software engineer-
ing. Pearson Education, 1995.
[49] H. Sackman, W. J. Erikson, and E. E. Grant, “Exploratory experimental
studies comparing online and ofﬂine programming performance,” Com-
munications of the ACM, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 3–11, 1968.
[50] T. R. Lister and T. DeMarco, Peopleware: Productive projects and teams.
Dorset House New Y ork, 1987.
[51] W. D. Brooks, “Software technology payoff: Some statistical evidence,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 3–9, 1981.
[52] A. Meyer, E. T. Barr, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann, “Today was a
good day: The daily life of software developers,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2019.
[53] A. N. Meyer, L. E. Barton, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann, and
T. Fritz, “The work life of developers: Activities, switches and perceived
productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 43,
no. 12, pp. 1178–1193, 2017.
[54] S. Wagner and F. Deissenboeck, “Deﬁning productivity in software engi-
neering,” in Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering. Springer,
2019, pp. 29–38.
[55] P . Devanbu, S. Karstu, W. Melo, and W. Thomas, “Analytical and
empirical evaluation of software reuse metrics,” in Proceedings of IEEE
18th International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE, 1996,pp. 189–199.
[56] E. Carmel, “Global software teams: opportunities and challenges of
technology-enabled work,” LERA For Libraries, vol. 6, no. 2, 2002.
[57] J. A. Espinosa and E. Carmel, “The impact of time separation on co-
ordination in global software teams: a conceptual foundation,” SoftwareProcess: Improvement and Practice, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 249–266, 2003.
[58] J. C. Tang, C. Zhao, X. Cao, and K. Inkpen, “Y our time zone or mine? a
study of globally time zone-shifted collaboration,” in Proceedings of the
ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 2011,pp. 235–244.
[59] R. Spark, “Accessibility to work from home for the disabled: The need
for a shift in management style,” in Proceedings of the 14th Web for All
Conference on The Future of Accessible Work, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[60] D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila,
J. L. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan, “A tale of two cities: Software
developers working from home during the covid-19 pandemic,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.11147, 2020.
[61] L. Heisman, “Remote work: Reshaping the workplace experience,”
June 2020, retrived January 14, 2021 from https://github.blog/
2020-06-26-remote-work-reshaping-the-workplace-experience/.
[62] P . Rodeghero and T. Hernandez, “Empowering and supporting
remote software development team members through a culture
of allyship,” Microsoft Research Symposium on the New Future
of Work. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/empowering-and-supporting-remote-software-
development-team-members-through-a-culture-of-allyship-2/, August
2020.
[63] P . Rodeghero, T. Zimmermann, B. Houck, and D. Ford, “Please turn
your cameras on: Remote onboarding of software developers duringa pandemic,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43th International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track (ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, 2021.
636