Enabling Software Resilience in GPGPU
Applications via Partial Thread Protection
Lishan Yang
William & Mary
Williamsburg, V A
lyang11@email.wm.eduBin Nie
William & Mary
Williamsburg, V A
bnie@email.wm.eduAdwait Jog
William & Mary
Williamsburg, V A
ajog@wm.eduEvgenia Smirni
William & Mary
Williamsburg, V A
esmirni@cs.wm.edu
Abstract —Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are widely used
by various applications in a broad variety of ﬁelds to accelerate
their computation but remain susceptible to transient hardware
faults (soft errors) that can easily compromise application output.
By taking advantage of a general purpose GPU application
hierarchical organization in threads, warps, and cooperative
thread arrays, we propose a methodology that identiﬁes the
resilience of threads and aims to map threads with the same
resilience characteristics to the same warp. This allows engaging
partial replication mechanisms for error detection/correction at
the warp level. By exploring 12 benchmarks (17 kernels) from
4 benchmark suites, we illustrate that threads can be remapped
into reliable or unreliable warps with only 1.63% introduced
overhead (on average), and then enable selective protection
via replication to those groups of threads that truly need it.
Furthermore, we show that thread remapping to different warps
does not sacriﬁce application performance. We show how this
remapping facilitates warp replication for error detection and/or
correction and achieves an average reduction of 20.61% and
27.15% execution cycles, respectively comparing to standard
duplication/triplication.
Index Terms —Reliability, GPGPU application resilience, Tran-
sient faults, Thread remapping
I. I NTRODUCTION
As general purpose GPUs (GPGPUs) are becoming in-
creasingly susceptible to transient hardware faults (soft errors)
often from cosmic radiation [1] or from operating under low
voltage [2], their reliable operation is of critical importance.
With GPGPUs becoming omnipresent in ﬁelds such as high-
performance computing (HPC), artiﬁcial intelligence, deep
learning, virtual/augmented reality, and safety critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles [3]–[10], transient hardware
faults can lead to bit ﬂips in storage devices including the reg-
ister ﬁle and DRAM. Such bit ﬂips are increasing in frequency
as system scales increase especially in the HPC domain [11]–
[13]. If bit ﬂips occur during application execution, they may
result in application crashes/hangs or even worse in silent
data corruption (SDC) where the application successfully
completes execution but its output is incorrect. Executions
that result in SDC outcomes are the most undesirable as they
erroneously provide the user with the illusion of correct output,
although cases of SDC output that is within certain user-
acceptable ranges may exist [14]. To ensure reliable appli-
cation execution, several mechanisms are widely employed
including error correction codes (ECC) [15]–[17], but ECCcannot still provide protection to datapath errors that originate
from unprotected latches in functional units (e.g., arithmetic
logic and load-store units) [18].
Reliable execution of GPGPU applications requires high-
overhead protection mechanisms such as check-pointing [19],
[20] or software solutions that are based on replication. In the
GPU domain such replication can be done at different levels:
at the kernel, thread, or instruction level. At the thread level,
replication is based on using redundant copies of a thread (or
block of threads) and then on comparing their results [21].
Different compiler-based implementations of this idea [21],
[22] aim to reduce the unavoidable synchronization overhead
between the original and redundant threads. If replication
is done at the instruction level [23], then the overhead of
redundant multi-threading can still be signiﬁcant. In addition,
not all dynamic instructions are typically covered.
In this paper, we offer an orthogonal approach that is based
on the fact that thread resilience proﬁles within a GPGPU
application may differ signiﬁcantly – some threads are inher-
ently resilient, while some are not [24], thread resilience may
also depend on application input [25]. Application resilience
eventually depends on the thread organization of GPGPU
application software. In GPGPU applications threads are ar-
ranged at three levels: kernels, thread blocks (or cooperative
thread arrays (CTAs) in CUDA terminology), and warps. Each
GPU core schedules work at a granularity of warp, which is
usually a group of 32 threads. Each group executes the same
instruction in a lock-step manner. This is essentially the basis
of single-instruction-multiple-thread (SIMT) execution.
Our thesis is that GPGPU software resilience can be
achieved via selective warp replication provide that threads
remapped into warps such that warps consist of threads that
are either reliable or unreliable. Therefore, if warps consist of
threads that are inherently reliable, these warps (their threads
or their instructions) do not have to be replicated to increase
their resilience . Instead, only warps that contain unreliable
threads need to be replicated. The advantage here comes from
scheduling of warps in the single-instruction-multiple-data
(SIMD) paradigm: as threads within the warps are scheduled
in a lock-step way, it is a lot easier to replicate an entire warp
of unreliable threads rather than replicate individual threads
within warps (or instructions within threads) and reconcile
their outcome as the classic redundant multi-threading [21],
12482021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00114
[22] advocates.
The process of thread remapping at the warp level is
transparent to the software developer and offers a simple way
to reorganize code with minimal effort. We stress that the
application resilience proﬁle (i.e., the percentage of application
executions that result in crashes/hangs, SDC, and correct
executions in presence of bit ﬂips) strongly depends on branch
divergence and input data taken by different threads [26]. Since
application resilience is tied to input, it cannot possibly guide
software development. The remapping that we propose in this
paper allows the developer to improve application resilience in
a transparent way, either by changing the thread-warp mapping
to activate replication for a fully transparent approach to the
code developers, or by providing guidance to the developer
to simply reorganize threads in such a manner that facilitates
replication but does not interfere with the parallelization and
synchronization logic of the software.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
Based on individual thread resilience we categorize the
warps into three classes: a) Reliable warps where all
threads are resilient to single-bit errors, b) Unreliable
warps where all threads are unreliable, and c) Mixed
warps that contain both reliable and unreliable threads.
We show that mixed warps are abundant in kernels.
We propose a low-overhead partial thread protection
mechanism by remapping threads such that the number
of mixed warps is minimized. In other words, we change
the thread to warp mapping such that distinct reliable
and unreliable warp groups are formed. This facilitates
the need for protecting only unreliable warps as this
remapping maintains the per-thread resilience proﬁle.
We present experiments using 12 benchmarks (17 ker-
nels) from the AxBench, CUDA, PolyBench, and Ro-
dinia suites [27]–[30] and show that 7 of these kernels
can beneﬁt from remapping. We show that remapping
increases on the average the percentage of reliable warps
from 23.40% to 42.08%, while incurring only 1.63%
execution overhead due to increased number of stalls in
shared memory.
By duplicating or triplicating the warps, we can easily
detect when an error occurs (if duplication is used) or
correct the error via triplication [21], [22]. We show that
by selectively replicating warps that contain unreliable
threads after remapping (i.e., unreliable or mixed warps),
we achieve average performance savings 20.61% and
27.15%, for detection and protection, respectively.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II describes the background of GPU architecture and the
fault model used in this paper. Section III presents character-
ization regarding various thread resilience patterns observed
in the studied benchmarks. Inspired by the characterization
results, we propose a partial thread protection mechanism via
remapping; the details can be found in Section IV. Section V
evaluates the performance gains as well as the overhead of
remapping. Then, Section VI discusses related work, andeventually we conclude in Section VII.
II. B ACKGROUND
In this section, we provide a brief introduction on the
baseline GPU architecture and the GPGPU execution model.
We also discuss the fault model, fault injection method, and
application resilience proﬁle.
A. GPUs and GPGPU Application Structure
Baseline GPU Architecture. A GPU typically is equipped
with a large number of cores, also known as streaming-
multiprocessors (SMs) in NVIDIA terminology [15]. Each
core has its private L1 cache, software-managed scratchpad
memory, and a large register ﬁle. An interconnection network
connects all these cores to global memory, which consists of
various memory channels (partitions). Every memory channel
has a shared L2 cache, and its associated memory requests are
handled by a GDDR5 memory controller. There are various
protection techniques for single-bit faults in recent commer-
cial GPUs [15]–[17], including single-error-correction double-
error-detection (SEC-DED) error correction codes (ECCs)
that protect register ﬁles, L1/L2 caches, shared memory and
DRAM against soft errors. Other structures such as arithmetic
logic units (ALUs), thread schedulers, instruction dispatch
units, load/store units (LSUs), and interconnection network
are not protected [15]–[17].
Fig. 1. GPU Software Execution Model.
GPGPU Software Execution Model. Following the single-
instruction-multiple-thread (SIMT) philosophy [31], GPGPU
applications execute thousands of threads concurrently over
large amounts of data. This helps in masking the latency
and achieving high throughput. A typical GPGPU application
launches various kernels on the GPUs, see Figure 1. Each
kernel is divided into groups of threads, known as thread
blocks , which are called Cooperative Thread Arrays (CTAs) in
CUDA terminology. A CTA encapsulates all synchronization
and barrier primitives among a group of threads [31], [32].
This CTA formation enables the GPU hardware to relax the
execution order of the CTAs, for the purpose of maximizing
parallelism. Threads inside one CTA can be further divided
into groups of 32 individual threads, known as warps. As the
most ﬁne-grained level in terms of scheduling, warps execute
a single instruction on the functional units in lock step. This
1249TABLE I
SELECTED BENCHMARKS .
Suite Benchmark Kernel Name Kernel ID Pct. of reliable warps Pct. of reliable threads
AxBenchJmeint Jmeint kernel K1 0.00% 55.15%
Laplacian LaplacianFilter K1 49.38% 54.08%
MeanFilter AverageFilter K1 17.19% 26.55%
CUDAexecuteFirstLayer K1 100.00% 100.00%
NN executeSecondLayer K2 100.00% 100.00%
(NeuralNetwork) executeThirdLayer K3 100.00% 100.00%
executeFourthLayer K4 100.00% 100.00%
SCP scalarProdGPU K1 0.00% 0.00%
PolyBench2DCONV Convolution2D kernel K1 0.00% 12.11%
MVT mvt kernel1 K1 0.00% 0.00%
RodiniaGaussianFan1 K1 87.50% 90.62%
Fan2 K2 63.89% 95.87%
HotSpot calculate temp K1 25.00% 43.75%
NearestNeighbor euclid K1 0.56% 0.57%
PathFinder dynproc kernel K1 8.33% 19.79%
SRADreduce K3 100.00% 100.00%
srad K4 100.00% 100.00%
sub-division of warps is an architectural abstraction, which is
transparent to the application programmer.
B. Fault Model
We assume that register ﬁles and other components such
as caches and memory are protected by ECC (which is the
case in almost all GPUs). We simulate commonly occurring
computation-related errors due to transient faults (known as
soft errors) in ALUs/LSUs. These faults can lead to wrong
ALU output which would then be stored in destination regis-
ters, or corrupted variables loaded by an LSU. This erroneous
computing operation is what we emulate by injecting faults
directly to destination register values. This is a standard
experimental methodology for GPGPU reliability studies [18],
[24], [33]–[35].
The fault injection methodology used here closely follows
the one used in [24], [36]: we ﬂip a bit at a destination register
identiﬁed by the thread id, the instruction id, and a bit position.
We perform our reliability evaluations on GPGPU-Sim [37]
with PTXPlus mode. GPGPU-Sim is a widely-used cycle-
level GPU architectural simulator, and its PTXPlus mode pro-
vides a one-to-one mapping of instructions to actual ISA for
GPUs [36], [37]. Any fault injection tool or technique. (e.g.,
SASSIFI [18] or NVBitFI [38]) can be used for evaluating
the application reliability, i.e., the technique presented in this
paper does not depend on GPGPU-Sim.
GPGPU Application Resilience Proﬁle. For each fault injec-
tion experiment, there are three possible outcomes:
masked output: the application output is identical to that
of fault-free execution.silent data corruption (SDC) output: the fault injection
run exits successfully without any error, but the output is
incorrect.
other : the fault injection run results in a crash or hang.
To obtain the resilience proﬁle of an application run, we
conduct an experimental campaign using the state-of-the-art
fault injection methodology proposed by Nie et al. [24] that
aggressively prunes the fault space while achieving accuracy
that is remarkably close to the ground truth. Within the
pruned fault space, we conduct one run per fault location
(one single bit ﬂip) and evaluate the application outcome as
masked, SDC orother . We aggregate the outcome of all
experiments to obtain the application resilience proﬁle , i.e.,
what percentage of the runs are expected to result in masked,
SDC, or other outputs. The lower the SDC percentage, the
higher the application resilience. In this paper, we focus on
reducing the percentage of SDC outputs. Faults that lead to
masked outputs can be ignored, while faults that lead to a
crash or hang are easily detected.
In this work we focus on how to improve application
resilience protection when a single bit fault occurs. The
proposed methodology can be readily extended to multi-bit
fault models [39].
III. C HARACTERIZATION
We conducted experiments across 12 benchmarks (17 ker-
nels) selected from 4 benchmark suites [27]–[30], listed in
Table I. The selected benchmarks cover different application
domains including 3D gaming, image processing, and scien-
tiﬁc computations. Past work has established that different
1250Fig. 2. All the threads are reliable in SRAD K3. Gray solid lines separate
different warps, and yellow dashed lines separate different CTAs. Due to space
constraint, here we only show the ﬁrst 3 CTAs in the kernel. There are in
total 8 CTAs in SRAD K3.
GPU threads have different resilience proﬁles and that the
thread dynamic instruction count (iCnt) can be used as a proxy
of individual thread resilience [24], [33]. Indeed, fault site
pruning [24] is based on this exact concept: it demonstrates
that threads with the same dynamic instruction count have the
same resilience proﬁle, therefore it is sufﬁcient to select one
thread from each group with the same iCnt for fault injection
and extrapolate the thread resilience of the entire group
from a single thread. Our experiments further corroborate
here what past work has also shown: different threads have
typically different resilience. Understanding the patterns of
thread resilience is helpful for scheduling purposes to improve
application resilience. We categorize benchmarks into three
cases: reliable, unreliable, and mixed, based on the thread
resilience within each warp. We focus on warps because a
warp is the smallest scheduling unit. In addition, it is not
desirable to change the thread-CTA mapping. If done so, it
breaks the synchronization and thread communication within
a CTA, requiring signiﬁcant effort in redesigning the parallel
software logic.
The percentage of SDC outcomes across the various num-
bers of experiments can characterize one thread as reliable
or unreliable. For example, if the percentage of fault-injected
runs that result in SDC outcomes is smaller than a small
number (typically in the range from zero to 5%, essentially
if its resilience coverage is 95%), then we characterize the
thread as reliable, otherwise it is deemed unreliable. In the
following, we show some example cases.
1. All threads are reliable. Some applications are very
resilient to faults. Figure 2 shows the resilience scatter plot
of different threads in SRAD K3. Threads are organized in
thread launching order. We use the gray solid lines to separate
different warps, and use yellow dashed lines to separate
different CTAs. Due to space constraint, here we only show
the ﬁrst 3 CTAs in SRAD K3, but the same pattern repeats
across all CTAs: all threads in SRAD K3 are reliable. Similar
to SRAD K3, SRAD K4 and all NN kernels are highly resilient
to soft errors.
2. All threads are unreliable. Some applications have
a high probability of SDC outputs when faults are injected.
Figure 3 shows the percentage of SDC outputs per thread
Fig. 3. All threads are unreliable in SCP. Gray solid lines separate different
warps, and yellow dashed lines separate different CTAs. There are 128 CTAs
in total, but due to space constraint, we only show the ﬁrst 6 CTAs.
for SCP. Here, all threads have more than 40% SDC outputs.
An application with similar resilience behavior is MVT, with
63.82% SDC outputs for all of its threads.
3. Mixed Reliable and Unreliable Threads within Warps.
Reliable and unreliable threads can co-exist in the same
warp (and consequently CTA), see Figure 4. Reliable threads
are marked with a green ‘+’, while red ‘x’ represents unreliable
threads and marks their SDC probability. We start from
two simple benchmarks: Gaussian K1 and NearestNeighbor
(Figure 4(a) and (b), respectively). For Gaussian K1, there
are in total 512 threads organized in one CTA only. The
ﬁrst 48 threads are unreliable, and the remaining threads
are very resilient (their percentage of SDC outputs is 0%).
NearestNeighbor shows a similar resilience pattern: threads
at the beginning are unreliable, those that are launched later
are reliable. There are in total 168 CTAs in NearestNeighbor.
Due to the space constraint, here we only show the last 6
CTAs which can best express the idea of well-organized warps.
For both Gaussian K1 and NearestNeighbor, reliable threads
and unreliable threads are already organized separately within
different warps (with the exception of a single warp either at
the start for Gaussian or at the tail for NearestNeighbor that
contains both reliable and unreliable threads).
However, there are benchmarks where their threads are
not that well-organized. For HotSpot, shown in Figure 4(c),
reliable and unreliable threads are mixed within different
warps. Due to space constraint, here we only show the ﬁrst 6
CTAs at the beginning for HotSpot. As shown in Table I, the
percentage of reliable warps (warps containing only reliable
threads) is 25% for HotSpot, but there are in total 43.75%
reliable threads.
Similarly, in Jmeint, there is no reliable warp, because all of
the warps have both reliable and unreliable threads, as shown
in Figure 4(c). For Jmeint more than half (55.15%) of the
threads are reliable. However, since they are mixed in CTAs
with the remaining 44.85% unreliable threads, protecting via
replication would require replication of the entire kernel, i.e.,
every warp. Similar observations apply to Laplacian, MeanFil-
ter, 2DCONV , Gaussian K2, and PathFinder, see Figure 4(e)-
(h).
Figure 4 clearly illustrates that there is ample scope for
partial protection: If we group threads judiciously, then we can
1251(a) Gaussian K1.
 (b) NearestNeighbor (last 6 CTAs).
(c) HotSpot (ﬁrst 6 CTAs).
 (d) Jmeint (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(e) Laplacian (ﬁrst 5 CTAs).
 (f) MeanFilter (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(g) 2DCONV .
 (h) Gaussian K2 (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(i) PathFinder.
Fig. 4. Reliable and unreliable threads exist together in the same warp. Due to space constraints, we only show the a part of the CTAs for NearestNeighbor,
HotSpot, Jmeint, Laplacian, MeanFilter, and Gaussian K2.
increase the percentage of reliable warps, and avoid redundant
protection of warps (threads) that are anyway resilient. Table II
summarizes the benchmark categorization.
Summary. From the reliability perspective, there is no
need to protect reliable threads. Benchmarks where all threads
are reliable, result in reliable kernel executions. Similarly, for
benchmarks that have warps that are all unreliable, protectionneeds to be applied to the entire kernel. Approaching kernel
reliability from the scheduling perspective, threads are grouped
and scheduled in units of warps, which is transparent to
software developers. For benchmarks that consist of both
reliable and unreliable threads, we explore ways to remap
threads into warps such that warps consist of only reliable
or unreliable threads. If this is done, then it is not necessary
1252TABLE II
BENCHMARK CATEGORIES
Category Benchmark
All threads are reliableNN K1, NN K2, NN K3,
NN K4, SRAD K3, SRAD K4
All threads are unreliable SCP, MVT
Mixed
warpsWell-organized Gaussian K1, NearestNeighbor
Need RemappingJmeint, MeanFilter, 2DCONV ,
HotSpot, Gaussian K2,
PathFinder, Laplacian
Fig. 5. Workﬂow.
to protect the application fully but instead focus on protecting
unreliable warps only.
IV. R ESILIENT SOFTWARE PROTECTION VIA REMAPPING
In [24], threads are identiﬁed as the most important GPGPU
component, and the resilience pattern of an application can
be derived from thread resilience. Here, we propose a low-
overhead partial protection mechanism that leverages thread
resilience patterns via remapping. The main idea is to remap
threads to warps for the purpose of separating reliable and
unreliable threads, as scheduling of threads can be done at the
warp granularity. By addressing the problem at the warp level,
we propose to recompute warps that contain unreliable threads,
essentially offering partial protection to a subset of warps
and not the entire kernel, without compromising application
reliability.
Figure 5 shows the workﬂow of the proposed protection
mechanism. There are two components: 1) Ofﬂine analysis,
to obtain the resilience-aware thread order, and 2) Online
protection, which uses this resilience-aware thread order to
achieve low-overhead protection.
1)Ofﬂine Analysis. For any target kernel and for a speciﬁc
input, the resilience of each thread needs to be ﬁrst
obtained. There is no restriction on which method of re-
liability analysis is used. Fault injection campaigns [18],
[24], [33], ACE (Architecturally Correct Execution)analysis, or a combined method leveraging both fault
injection and ACE analysis [40] can be used. The only
requirement is that the resilience of every thread needs to
be evaluated. This is not difﬁcult to do, despite the fact
that most GPGPU applications have tens of thousands of
threads, because for most benchmarks threads with the
same DI count have the same resilience behavior [24],
[33]. This reduces the number of experiments that need
to be done to obtain the thread resilience proﬁle. In this
work, we evaluate thread and kernel resilience using the
fault site pruning technique [24].
We ﬁrst identify the resilience proﬁle of threads in
their launching order (see Figure 4). Then, threads are
re-ordered into warps following the remapping logic:
threads with similar resilience are remapped into the
same warp. Detailed explanation is in Subsection IV-A.
2)Online Protection. Based on the resilience-aware
thread order obtained from ofﬂine analysis, we can
remap threads before execution. The actual remapping
idea can be implemented in various ways. In this
work, we directly change the thread-warp mapping
(see Subsection IV-A for implementation details). Af-
ter remapping, threads are executed, and error detec-
tion/correction is applied to unreliable warps only. Error
detection/correction can be implemented and applied
in various ways. Here, we use warp duplication for
error detection, and warp triplication for error correction.
Details are given in Subsection IV-B.
A. Remapping
CTAs are collections of threads deﬁned by the CUDA
programmer. The thread to warp mapping is done linearly by
default (i.e., threads are allocated to warps in groups of 32
as shown in Figure 6(a)). To change the mapping between
thread to warp, we ﬁrst identify reliable/unreliable threads
in ofﬂine analysis, then remap threads, see Figure 6(b). By
changing the linear thread order, we can group threads with
the same resilience (i.e., percentage of SDC outputs) into the
same warp, and use different resilience protection at the warp
level according to their reliability proﬁle. Note that remapping
is done within each CTA, but not across CTAs. This is be-
cause synchronization is ensured inside each CTA. Remapping
across different CTAs can affect their synchronization, hence
introduce errors in the software logic.
We use GPGPU-Sim [37] to implement the above. At the
initialization phase, CTAs are constructed. Without remapping,
threads are launched linearly. With remapping, we ﬁll each
CTA according to its resilience-based launching order. This
resilience-based launching order is decided based on ofﬂine
proﬁling. We start fetching threads from the beginning of the
linear launching order, and put reliable threads into a warp.
Meanwhile, we organize unreliable threads into another warp,
if any. When a warp is ﬁlled (32 threads), the warp is ready for
execution, and a new warp is formed for the upcoming threads.
When all the threads are remapped into warps, if there are any
partially ﬁlled reliable or unreliable warps, they are combined
1253(a) Thread-warp mapping.
(b) Remapping.
(c) Remapping and protection.
Unreliable warps are replicated once for detection.
If applying error correction, there are two replicas.
Fig. 6. Logic of mapping, remapping, and protection.
into one mixed warp and ready for execution. It is important to
note that thread remapping to different warps does not affect
their reliability proﬁle because thread resilience is typically
determined by branch divergence and input data and not the
order of thread execution [41].
B. Partial Protection
In addition to remapping, error detection/correction can
be applied to unreliable warps. Here, we use warp replica-
tion/triplication, to demonstrate how partial protection works.
During remapping, when an unreliable warp is ﬁlled (32
threads), we replicate it into another warp and send both warps
to execute. After these two warps ﬁnish execution, thread
outputs (usually the outputs are the computation results to
be written into memory by store instructions) are compared
to detect whether there is any difference, see Figure 6(c).
Since warps are the smallest unit for scheduling at the GPU
level, duplication at the warp level is transparent for the
programmer to handle than at the thread level. Duplication
at the CTA level would require redoing the logic of communi-
cation/synchronization among threads, a far more challengingsoftware effort. This is fully avoided by handling replication
at the warp level.
If error correction is applied, then each unreliable warp is
triplicated, according to triple modular redundancy (TMR).
In Figure 6(c), warp-2 is triplicated into warp-2’ as well as
warp-2” for error correction. Since reliable warps do not need
error detection/correction, they are not replicated/triplicated.
Note that, mixed warps that have both reliable and unreliable
threads also need to be duplicated or triplicated for error
detection/correction.
V. E VALUATION
In this section we present a detailed evaluation of thread
remapping (Section V-A). Then, we discuss the overhead mag-
nitude when applying protection via remapping (Section V-B).
A. Effectiveness of Thread Remapping
We ﬁrst show the resilience pattern of different benchmarks
after remapping, see Figure 7. In this ﬁgure, if a thread has
an SDC probability less or equal to 5%, it is considered
reliable, and remapping is performed based on this 5% SDC
threshold, i.e., our goal is a 95% reliability coverage. Gray
solid lines in Figure 7 separate different warps, and yellow
dashed lines separate different CTAs. For HotSpot, in the ﬁrst
CTA, originally all the reliable threads in Figure 4(c) are
distributed across all warps. After remapping, these reliable
threads are gathered and scheduled in the ﬁrst and last warp
of the CTA. We end up with 1, 5, 1, and 5 reliable warps
for the second, third, fourth, and sixth CTA, respectively.
There is a mixed warp at the end of the third CTA. Since
there are still unreliable threads in this mixed warp, it still
needs protection. For the ﬁfth CTA, all threads are unreliable,
therefore the thread resilience pattern is the same before and
after remapping. The resilience patterns after remapping for
Jmeint, Laplacian, MeanFilter, 2DCONV , Gaussian K2, and
PathFinder are shown in Figure 7(b)-(f).
The improvement in terms of the percentage of reliable
warps for applications is shown in Figure 8. On average,
originally the percentage of reliable warps is 23.40%. By
remapping, the percentage increases to 42.08%. The biggest
improvement happens on Jmeint, where there are 52% reliable
warps after remapping from the original 0%.
Changing the SDC tolerance threshold can result in different
remappings. Figure 9 shows how remapping changes the
resilience pattern when different SDC thresholds are applied
in Jmeint. If the SDC threshold is set to 2%, there are a few
reliable threads to be remapped, see Figure 9(a). For increased
SDC thresholds, remapping results in more reliable warps, see
the changes of resilience patterns in Figure 9(a) to (d).
For Hotspot, even for SDC threshold equal to 0%, there are
still several reliable warps (two warps in Figure 10(a) within
the ﬁrst 6 CTAs and in total 25% for the whole kernel). With
the SDC threshold increasing, see Figure 10(b)-(d), remapping
changes the resilience pattern, and more reliable threads are
gathered together.
1254(a) HotSpot (ﬁrst 6 CTAs).
 (b) Jmeint (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(c) Laplacian (ﬁrst 5 CTAs).
 (d) MeanFilter (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(e) 2DCONV .
 (f) Gaussian K2 (ﬁrst 3 CTAs).
(g) PathFinder.
Fig. 7. Resilience patterns after remapping. If a thread has SDC probability less or equal to 5%, it is considered reliable. Due to space constraint, we only
show the ﬁrst several CTAs for HotSpot, Jmeint, Laplacian, MeanFilter, and Gaussian K2.
Fig. 8. Percentage of reliable warps before and after remapping.
Figure 11 shows how the percentage of SDC outputs
changes when the SDC threshold increases for all 7 bench-
marks eligible for remapping. Jmeint and PathFinder are the
ﬁrst two benchmarks reaching 100% reliable warps, with SDC
threshold less than 20%. Gaussian K2 has 94% reliable warps
when the SDC threshold is 3.6% only. This is because theSDC percentage of its major thread group is 3.6%. HotSpot
reaches 100% reliable when SDC threshold is about 50%, and
2DCONV requires SDC threshold to be 80% to get 100%
reliable warps. MeanFilter is the most complicated benchmark,
and it reaches 100% reliable only when SDC threshold is set
to 100%, because 15% of the threads have 100% SDC outputs.
In general, we see that if we set the SDC threshold to 5% only,
there is still ample room for remapping for most benchmarks,
as shown in Figure 8.
B. Overhead Introduced by Remapping and Protection
Thread remapping (and protection) may affect the perfor-
mance of program execution. Because of the shared cluster
environment we are using, pure timing measurement is not
accurate. Instead, we use the number of instruction cycles
measured using GPGPU-Sim performance mode to reﬂect the
execution performance.
1255(a) threshold = 2%
(b) threshold = 5%
(c) threshold = 12%
(d) threshold = 15%
Fig. 9. Remapped resilience patterns of Jmeint under different SDC threshold.
Due to space constraint, we only show the ﬁrst 3 CTAs.
For overhead analysis, we ﬁrst present the performance
overhead due to remapping. The remapping overhead of each
benchmark kernel is shown in Figure 12. On average, the
remapping overhead is only 1.63%. Note that there are some
benchmarks with negative overhead in Figure 12, such as
Laplacian, 2DCONV , HotSpot, and PathFinder, in these cases
execution cycles reduce with remapping.
To better understand why remapping may result in better
performance, we look into various performance measures that
are normalized over the original thread mapping. Figure 13
shows the normalized L1 data cache miss rate and the number
of stalls caused by accessing shared memory. The numbers
are normalized by the execution without remapping. On the
one hand, from Figure 13(a), we observe that the L1 data
cache miss rate is decreasing. On the other hand, Figure 13(b)
shows that the number of stalls increases for 2DCONV ,
Jmeint, HotSpot, and PathFinder; for Laplacian, MeanFilter,
(a) threshold = 0%
(b) threshold = 5%
(c) threshold = 22%
(d) threshold = 25%
Fig. 10. Remapped resilience patterns of HotSpot under different SDC
threshold. Due to space constraint, we only show the ﬁrst 6 CTAs.
Fig. 11. Percentage of reliable warps grows as the SDC tolerance threshold
increases.
and Gaussian K2, the number of stalls decreases. Trends are
not consistent across benchmarks, therefore some gain and
some lose performance with remapping. In sum, we claim
that remapping does not signiﬁcantly affect performance which
1256Fig. 12. Overhead of remapping.
(a) L1 Data Cache Miss Rate
 (b) Number of Stalls
Fig. 13. Detailed metrics of remapping overhead. All numbers are normalized
by the execution without remapping.
remains in the same ballpark as the original cases.
Last but not least, we show the performance savings of
applying error detection/correction after remapping. In the case
of error detection, we compare our technique with RMT (Re-
dundant Multi-Threading), where all the threads (all warps) are
duplicated for error detection. Figure 14 shows the execution
performance of our remapping technique in execution cycles,
comparing to RMT. We also present the percentage of saved
execution cycles at the top of each application bar. On average,
the percentage of saved execution cycles for error detection
is 20.61%, while Gaussian K2 achieves a signiﬁcant 42.39%
savings.
In addition, we compare partial protection via remapping
with TMR (Triple Modular Redundancy), results are shown
in Figure 15. The average saving in terms of execution cycles
is 27.15%, and again, Gaussian K2 has the highest savings
of 60.02%. Generally performance results are similar for
both error detection and correction, and the saving of error
correction is always higher for every benchmark. This is
expected, since partial protection using triplication avoids the
execution of two copies for all reliable warps, while for error
detection with duplication, we only save one copy execution
of reliable warps. The per benchmark savings are related to
the benchmark resilience proﬁle, i.e., the percentage of reliable
threads in each CTA. Since 95.87% of threads in Gaussian K2
is reliable, this benchmark achieves the highest savings.
Summary. We show the effectiveness of remapping by
analyzing the percentage of reliable warps, which increases on
Fig. 14. Comparison of execution performance using duplication for error
detection between remapping and RMT.
Fig. 15. Comparison of execution performance using triplication for error
correction between remapping and TMR.
average from 23.40% to 42.08% with remapping. Remapping
introduces moderate to insigniﬁcant overhead. After applying
remapping with protection, an average saving of 20.61% and
27.15% execution cycles for error detection (duplication of
CTAs without remapping) and correction (triplication of CTAs
without remapping), respectively.
VI. R ELATED WORK
Several works address reliability within the software engi-
neering domain. Chiminey [42] provides a reliable platform
for cloud computing. Bleser et al. [43] presents an automated
approach to analyze the resilience of actor programs in dis-
tributed systems. Chan et al. [44] uses invariants to study error
propagation in multi-threading applications using software
fault injection. Yang et al. [45] uses a software fault injection
tool to evaluate different anomaly detectors. However, none of
these works are applied in the context of GPUs.
Redundancy-based solutions are used to protect GPGPU
applications from errors. Such solutions rely on double execu-
tion [21], [23], [46] for error detection, called dual-modular
redundancy (DMR) and triple execution [47], [48] for error
correction, called triple-modular redundancy (TMR). Dimitrov
et al. [46] ﬁrst evaluate the overhead of introduced redundancy
at kernel level, thread level, and instruction level and show
that at all levels the overhead can be over 90%. Wadden et
al. [21] take a deeper look at two different ways of applying
redundant multithreading (RMT) at the granularity of CTAs
(i.e., intergroup RMT and intragroup RMT) and present the
trade-off between overhead and resilience coverage. Mahmoud
et al. [23] choose instruction-level redundancy as it is trans-
parent to programmers and propose SInRG, a collection of
1257several software and hardware optimizations, to further reduce
overhead. In addition to those works targeting error detection,
researchers also propose various solutions to correct errors
with reduced overhead [47], [48] as compared to a naive
implementation of TMR with triple overhead.
While the aforementioned solutions all focus on comparing
and analyzing various redundancy-based protection solutions
and seeking opportunities to reduce redundancy overhead,
the “partial protection” methodology approaches this problem
from a totally different perspective by focusing on reducing the
portion of threads that require protection and on organizing the
threads in such a manner that result in more reliable software.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
We presented a methodology to remap threads into warps
according to their resilience proﬁle. Looking into 12 bench-
marks (17 kernels) from four benchmark suites, we identiﬁed
that 7 of them are amenable to remapping for resilience.
The proposed solution reduces overhead by identifying the
portion of threads that are unreliable and by applying any
detection/protection mechanism only on them instead of the
entire kernel. In other words, our solution reduces overhead
by identifying the portion of threads that are unreliable and
by organizing them into warps that consist of threads that are
either reliable or unreliable. Then, any detection/protection
technique (including RMT and TMR) can be applied upon
the identiﬁed unreliable warps only, instead of the entire
kernel. Even with the simplest error detection and correction
technique (warp duplication and triplication), we achieve an
average saving of 20.61% and 27.15% execution cycles for
error detection and error correction, respectively.
DATA AVAILABILITY
This paper is based on already available open-source bench-
mark data and existing fault injection tools. The proposed
technique offers a methodology for re-organizing threads af-
ter evaluating thread resilience using the fault site pruning
methodology [24]. Any resilience evaluation technique in the
literature can be also used to derive thread resilience [18],
[33], [36], [38] to guide remapping.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments. This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) grant (#1717532). This
work was performed in part using computing facilities at
William & Mary which were provided by contributions from
NSF, the Commonwealth of Virginia Equipment Trust Fund,
and the Ofﬁce of Naval Research.
REFERENCES
[1]V . Fratin, D. A. G. de Oliveira, C. B. Lunardi, F. Santos, G. Rodrigues,
and P. Rech, “Code-dependent and architecture-dependent reliability
behaviors,” in DSN , pp. 13–26, 2018.
[2]S. Ganapathy, J. Kalamatianos, B. M. Beckmann, S. Raasch, and L. G.
Szafaryn, “Killi: Runtime fault classiﬁcation to deploy low voltage
caches without MBIST,” in 25th IEEE International Symposium on
High Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA 2019, Washington,
DC, USA, February 16-20, 2019 , pp. 304–316, IEEE, 2019.[3]A. Eklund, P. Dufort, D. Forsberg, and S. M. LaConte, “Medical
image processing on the GPU–past, present and future,” Medical image
analysis , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1073–1094, 2013.
[4]G. Pratx and L. Xing, “GPU computing in medical physics: A review,”
Medical physics , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2685–2697, 2011.
[5]S. S. Stone, J. P. Haldar, S. C. Tsao, W. mei W. Hwu, B. P. Sutton, and
Z.-P. Liang, “Accelerating advanced MRI reconstructions on GPUs,” J.
Parallel Distrib. Comput. , vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 1307–1318, 2008.
[6]R. Foster, “How to harness big data for improving public health,”
Government Health IT , 2012.
[7]I. Schmerken, “Wall street accelerates options analysis with GPU
technology,” Wall Street Technology , vol. 11, 2009.
[8]NVIDIA, “Computational ﬁnance.”
[9]NVIDIA, “Researchers deploy GPUs to build world’s largest artiﬁcial
neural network.”
[10]J.-H. Park, M. Tada, D. Kuzum, P. Kapur, H.-Y . Yu, K. C. Saraswat,
et al. , “Low temperature ( 380 c) and high performance ge cmos
technology with novel source/drain by metal-induced dopants activation
and high-k/metal gate stack for monolithic 3d integration,” in Electron
Devices Meeting, 2008. IEDM 2008. IEEE International , pp. 1–4, IEEE,
2008.
[11]B. Nie, D. Tiwari, S. Gupta, E. Smirni, and J. H. Rogers, “A large-
scale study of soft-errors on gpus in the ﬁeld,” in High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2016 IEEE International Symposium
on, pp. 519–530, IEEE, 2016.
[12]B. Nie, J. Xue, S. Gupta, C. Engelmann, E. Smirni, and D. Tiwari,
“Characterizing temperature, power, and soft-error behaviors in data
center systems: Insights, challenges, and opportunities,” in 25th IEEE
International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of
Computer and Telecommunication Systems, MASCOTS 2017, Banff, AB,
Canada, September 20-22, 2017 , pp. 22–31, 2017.
[13]B. Nie, J. Xue, S. Gupta, T. Patel, C. Engelmann, E. Smirni, and
D. Tiwari, “Machine learning models for GPU error prediction in a large
scale HPC system,” in 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN 2018, Luxembourg City,
Luxembourg, June 25-28, 2018 , pp. 95–106, 2018.
[14]B. Nie, A. Jog, and E. Smirni, “Characterizing accuracy-aware resilience
of GPGPU applications,” in 20th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing, CCGRID 2020, Melbourne,
Australia, May 11-14, 2020 , pp. 111–120, IEEE, 2020.
[15]“NVIDIA Fermi Architecture Whitepaper.”
[16]“NVIDIA Kepler GK110 Architecture Whitepaper.”
[17]“GP100 Pascal Whitepaper.”
[18]S. K. S. Hari, T. Tsai, M. Stephenson, S. W. Keckler, and J. Emer,
“SASSIFI: Evaluating resilience of GPU applications,” in Proceedings
of the Workshop on Silicon Errors in Logic-System Effects , 2015.
[19]H. Takizawa, K. Sato, K. Komatsu, and H. Kobayashi, “Checuda: A
checkpoint/restart tool for cuda applications,” in 2009 International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, Applications and
Technologies , pp. 408–413, IEEE, 2009.
[20]S. Laosooksathit, N. Naksinehaboon, C. Leangsuksan, A. Dhungana,
C. Chandler, K. Chanchio, and A. Farbin, “Lightweight checkpoint
mechanism and modeling in gpgpu environment,” Computing (HPC
Syst) , vol. 12, no. 2010, 2010.
[21]J. Wadden, A. Lyashevsky, S. Gurumurthi, V . Sridharan, and K. Skadron,
“Real-world design and evaluation of compiler-managed GPU redundant
multithreading,” ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News , vol. 42,
no. 3, pp. 73–84, 2014.
[22]M. Gupta, D. Lowell, J. Kalamatianos, S. Raasch, V . Sridharan,
D. Tullsen, and R. Gupta, “Compiler techniques to reduce the syn-
chronization overhead of gpu redundant multithreading,” in 2017 54th
ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) , pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2017.
[23]A. Mahmoud, S. K. S. Hari, M. B. Sullivan, T. Tsai, and S. W. Keck-
ler, “Optimizing software-directed instruction replication for gpu error
detection,” in SC18: International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pp. 842–853, IEEE,
2018.
[24]B. Nie, L. Yang, A. Jog, and E. Smirni, “Fault site pruning for
practical reliability analysis of gpgpu applications,” in 2018 51st Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) ,
pp. 749–761, IEEE, 2018.
1258[25]L. Yang, B. Nie, A. Jog, and E. Smirni, “Sugar: Speeding up gpgpu
application resilience estimation with input sizing,” Proc. ACM Meas.
Anal. Comput. Syst. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1:1–1:29, 2021.
[26]G. Li and K. Pattabiraman, “Modeling input-dependent error propagation
in programs,” in 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN 2018, Luxembourg City,
Luxembourg, June 25-28, 2018 , pp. 279–290, IEEE Computer Society,
2018.
[27]A. Yazdanbakhsh, D. Mahajan, H. Esmaeilzadeh, and P. Lotﬁ-Kamran,
“Axbench: A multiplatform benchmark suite for approximate comput-
ing,” IEEE Design & Test , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 60–68, 2016.
[28]“CUDA-GDB.”
[29]S. Grauer-Gray, L. Xu, R. Searles, S. Ayalasomayajula, and J. Cavazos,
“Auto-tuning a high-level language targeted to gpu codes,” in Innovative
Parallel Computing (InPar), 2012 , pp. 1–10, IEEE, 2012.
[30]S. Che, M. Boyer, J. Meng, D. Tarjan, J. W. Sheaffer, S.-H. Lee, and
K. Skadron, “Rodinia: A benchmark suite for heterogeneous computing,”
in2009 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization
(IISWC) , pp. 44–54, Ieee, 2009.
[31]D. B. Kirk and W. H. Wen-Mei, Programming massively parallel
processors: a hands-on approach . Morgan kaufmann, 2016.
[32]A. Jog, O. Kayiran, N. Chidambaram Nachiappan, A. K. Mishra, M. T.
Kandemir, O. Mutlu, R. Iyer, and C. R. Das, “OWL: cooperative thread
array aware scheduling techniques for improving GPGPU performance,”
inACM SIGPLAN Notices , vol. 48, pp. 395–406, ACM, 2013.
[33]B. Fang, K. Pattabiraman, M. Ripeanu, and S. Gurumurthi, “GPU-Qin: A
methodology for evaluating the error resilience of GPGPU applications,”
inPerformance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS), 2014 IEEE
International Symposium on , pp. 221–230, IEEE, 2014.
[34]G. Li, K. Pattabiraman, C.-Y . Cher, and P. Bose, “Understanding error
propagation in GPGPU applications,” in High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC16: International Conference for ,
pp. 240–251, IEEE, 2016.
[35]B. Sangchoolie, K. Pattabiraman, and J. Karlsson, “One bit is (not)
enough: An empirical study of the impact of single and multiple bit-
ﬂip errors,” in 47th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN 2017, Denver, CO, USA, June
26-29, 2017 , pp. 97–108, IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
[36]S. Tselonis and D. Gizopoulos, “Guﬁ: A framework for gpus reliability
assessment,” in Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS),
2016 IEEE International Symposium on , pp. 90–100, IEEE, 2016.
[37]A. Bakhoda, G. L. Yuan, W. W. Fung, H. Wong, and T. M. Aamodt,
“Analyzing CUDA workloads using a detailed GPU simulator,” in
Performance Analysis of Systems and Software, 2009. ISPASS 2009.
IEEE International Symposium on , pp. 163–174, IEEE, 2009.
[38]“Nvbitﬁ.” https://github.com/NVlabs/nvbitﬁ.
[39]L. Yang, B. Nie, A. Jog, and E. Smirni, “Practical resilience analysis of
gpgpu applications in the presence of single-and multi-bit faults,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers , vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 30–44, 2021.
[40]A. Vallero and S. Di Carlo, “Combining cluster sampling and ace
analysis to improve fault-injection based reliability evaluation of gpu-
based systems,” in 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Defect and
Fault Tolerance in VLSI and Nanotechnology Systems (DFT) , pp. 8138–
8143, IEEE, 2019.
[41]G. Li and K. Pattabiraman, “Modeling input-dependent error propagation
in programs,” in 2018 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) , pp. 279–290, IEEE, 2018.
[42]I. I. Yusuf, I. E. Thomas, M. Spichkova, S. Androulakis, G. R. Meyer,
D. W. Drumm, G. Opletal, S. P. Russo, A. M. Buckle, and H. W.
Schmidt, “Chiminey: Reliable computing and data management platform
in the cloud,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference
on Software Engineering , vol. 2, pp. 677–680, IEEE, 2015.
[43]J. De Bleser, D. Di Nucci, and C. De Roover, “A delta-debugging
approach to assessing the resilience of actor programs through run-time
test perturbations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 1st International
Conference on Automation of Software Test , pp. 21–30, 2020.
[44]A. Chan, S. Winter, H. Saissi, K. Pattabiraman, and N. Suri, “Ipa: Error
propagation analysis of multi-threaded programs using likely invariants,”
in2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation
and Validation (ICST) , pp. 184–195, IEEE, 2017.
[45]Y . Yang, Y . Wu, K. Pattabiraman, L. Wang, and Y . Li, “How far have
we come in detecting anomalies in distributed systems? an empirical
study with a statement-level fault injection method,” in 2020 IEEE 31stInternational Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) ,
pp. 59–69, IEEE, 2020.
[46]M. Dimitrov, M. Mantor, and H. Zhou, “Understanding software ap-
proaches for gpgpu reliability,” in Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on
General Purpose Processing on Graphics Processing Units , pp. 94–104,
ACM, 2009.
[47]A. Milluzzi and A. George, “Exploration of TMR fault masking with
persistent threads on tegra gpu socs,” in 2017 IEEE Aerospace Confer-
ence, pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2017.
[48]J. Chen, S. Li, and Z. Chen, “GPU-ABFT: Optimizing algorithm-
based fault tolerance for heterogeneous systems with GPUs,” in 2016
IEEE International Conference on Networking, Architecture and Storage
(NAS) , pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2016.
1259