Fast and Precise On-the-ﬂy Patch Validation for All
Lingchao Chen
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
lxc170330@utdallas.eduYicheng Ouyang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
yicheng.ouyang@utdallas.eduLingming Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
lingming@illinois.edu
Abstract —Generate-and-validate (G&V) automated program
repair (APR) techniques have been extensively studied during
the past decade. Meanwhile, such techniques can be extremely
time-consuming due to the manipulation of program code to
fabricate a large number of patches and also the repeated test
executions on patches to identify potential ﬁxes. PraPR, a recent
G&V APR technique, reduces such costs by modifying program
code directly at the level of compiled JVM bytecode with on-
the-ﬂy patch validation , which directly allows multiple bytecode
patches to be tested within the same JVM process. However,
PraPR is limited due to its unique bytecode-repair design, and is
basically unsound/imprecise as it assumes that patch executions
do not change global JVM state and affect later patch executions
on the same JVM process. In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed
patch validation framework, named UniAPR, to perform the
ﬁrst empirical study of on-the-ﬂy patch validation for state-of-
the-art source-code-level APR techniques widely studied in the
literature; furthermore, UniAPR addresses the imprecise patch
validation issue by resetting the JVM global state via runtime
bytecode transformation. We have implemented UniAPR as a
publicly available fully automated Maven Plugin. Our study
demonstrates for the ﬁrst time that on-the-ﬂy patch validation
can often speed up state-of-the-art source-code-level APR by over
an order of magnitude, enabling all existing APR techniques
to explore a larger search space to ﬁx more bugs in the near
future. Furthermore, our study shows the ﬁrst empirical evidence
that vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation can be imprecise/unsound,
while UniAPR with JVM reset is able to mitigate such issues with
negligible overhead.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Software bugs are inevitable in modern software systems,
costing trillions of dollars in ﬁnancial loss and affecting
billions of people [5]. Meanwhile, software debugging can
be extremely challenging and costly, consuming over half of
the software development time and resources [44]. Therefore,
a large body of research efforts have been dedicated to
automated debugging techniques [49], [36], [12]. Among the
existing debugging techniques, Automated Program Repair
[14] (APR) techniques hold the promise of reducing debug-
ging effort by suggesting likely patches for buggy programs
with minimal human intervention, and have been extensively
studied in the recent decade. Please refer to the recent surveys
on APR for more details [36], [12].
Generate-and-validate (G&V) APR refers to a practical
category of APR techniques that attempt to ﬁx the bugs by ﬁrst
generating a pool of patches and then validating the patches
via certain rules and/or checks [12]. A patch is said to be
plausible if it passes all the checks. Ideally, we would apply
formal veriﬁcation [40] techniques to guarantee correctness ofgenerated patches. However, in practice, formal speciﬁcations
are often unavailable for real-world projects, thus making for-
mal veriﬁcation infeasible. In contrast, testing is the prevalent,
economic methodology of getting more conﬁdence about the
quality of software [1]. Therefore, the vast majority of recent
G&V APR techniques leverage developer tests as the criteria
for checking correctness of the generated patches [12], i.e.,
test-based G&V APR.
Two main costs are associated with such test-based G&V
APR techniques: (1) the cost of manipulating program code
to fabricate/generate patches based on certain transformation
rules; (2) repeated executions of all the developer tests to
identify plausible patches for the bugs under ﬁxing. Since the
search space for APR is inﬁnite and it is impossible to triage
the elements of this search space due to theoretical limits, test-
based G&V APR techniques usually lack clear guidance and
often act in a rather brute-force fashion: they usually generate a
huge pool of patches to be validated and the larger the program
the larger the set of patches to be generated and validated.
This suggests that the speed of patch generation and validation
plays a key role in scalability of the APR techniques, which
is one of the most important challenges in designing prac-
tical APR techniques [8]. Therefore, apart from introducing
new and/or more effective transformation rules, some APR
techniques have been proposed to mitigate the aforementioned
costs. For example, JAID [6] uses mutation schema to fabricate
meta-programs that bundle multiple patches in a single source
ﬁle, while SketchFix [15] uses sketches [23] to achieve a
similar effect. However, such techniques mainly aim to speed
up the patch generation time, while patch validation time
has been shown to be dominant during APR [35]. Most
recently, PraPR [13] aims to reduce both patch generation
and validation time by modifying program code directly at
the bytecode level with on-the-ﬂy patch validation , which
directly allows multiple bytecode-level patches to be tested
within the same JVM process. However, bytecode-level APR
is not ﬂexible (e.g., large-scope changes can be extremely hard
to implement at the bytecode level) and fails to ﬁx many bugs
that can be ﬁxed at the source-code level [13]; furthermore,
PraPR requires decompilation (which may be imprecise or
even fail) to decompile the bytecode-level patches for manual
inspection. In fact, all other popular general-purpose G&V
APR techniques ﬁx at the source code level.
In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed test-based patch val-
idation framework, named UniAPR, to empirically study the
11232021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00104
impact of on-the-ﬂy patch validation for state-of-the-art source-
code-level APR techniques. While existing source-code-level
APR usually restarts a new JVM process for each patch, our
on-the-ﬂy patch validation aims to use a single JVM process
for patch validation, as much as possible, and leverages
JVM’s dynamic class redeﬁnition feature (a.k.a. the HotSwap
mechanism and Java Agent technology [7]) to only reload
the patched bytecode classes on-the-ﬂy for each patch. In
this way, UniAPR not only avoids reloading (also including
linking and initializing) all used classes for each patch (i.e.,
only reloading the patched bytecode ﬁles), but also can avoid
the unnecessary JVM warm-up time (e.g., the accumulated
JVM proﬁling information across patches enables more and
more code to be JIT-optimized and the already JIT-optimized
code can also be shared across patches).
UniAPR has been implemented as a fully automated
Maven [11] plugin (available at [47]), to which almost all
existing state-of-the-art Java APR tools can be attached in the
form of patch generation add-ons . We have constructed add-
ons for representative APR tools from different APR families.
Speciﬁcally, we have constructed add-ons for CapGen [48],
SimFix [17], and ACS [50] that are modern representatives of
template-/pattern-based [9], [21], heuristic-based [2], [22], and
constraint-based [51], [39] techniques. Our empirical study
shows for the ﬁrst time that on-the-ﬂy patch validation can
often speed up state-of-the-art APR systems by over an order
of magnitude, enabling all existing APR techniques to explore
a larger search space to ﬁx more bugs in the near future.
Furthermore, our study (Section V-A2) shows the ﬁrst
empirical evidence that when sharing JVM across multiple
patches, the global JVM state may be polluted by earlier patch
executions, making later patch execution results unreliable.
For example, some patches may modify some static ﬁelds,
which are used by some later patches sharing the same JVM.
Therefore, we further propose the ﬁrst solution to address
such imprecision problem by isolating patch executions via
resetting JVM states after each patch execution using runtime
bytecode transformation. Our experimental results show that
our UniAPR with JVM reset is able to the avoid impreci-
sion/unsoundness of vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation with
negligible overhead.
We envision a future wherein all existing APR tools (like
SimFix [17], CapGen [48], and ACS [50]) and major APR
frameworks (like ASTOR [33] and Repairnator [38]) are
leveraging this framework for patch validation. In this way,
researchers will only need to focus on devising more effective
algorithms for better exploring the patch search space, rather
than spending time on developing their own components for
patch validation, as we can have a uniﬁed, generic, and much
faster framework for all. In summary, this paper makes the
following contributions:
Framework. We introduce the ﬁrst uniﬁed on-the-ﬂy
patch validation framework, UniAPR, to empirically
study the impact of on-the-ﬂy patch validation for state-
of-the-art source-code-level APR techniques.Technique. We show the ﬁrst empirical evidence that on-
the-ﬂy patch validation can be imprecise/unsound, and
introduce a new technique to reset the JVM state right
after each patch execution to address such issue.
Implementation. We have implemented on-the-ﬂy patch
validation based on the JVM HotSwap mechanism and
Java Agent technology [7], and implemented the JVM-
reset technique based on the ASM bytecode manipulation
framework [41]; the overall UniAPR tool has been imple-
mented as a practical Maven plugin [47], and can accept
different APR techniques as patch generation add-ons.
Empirical Study. We conduct a large-scale study of the
effectiveness of UniAPR on its interaction with state-of-
the-art APR systems from three different APR families,
demonstrating that UniAPR can often speed up state-of-
the-art APR by over an order of magnitude (without vali-
dation imprecision/unsoundness). Furthermore, the study
results also indicate that UniAPR can serve as a uniﬁed
platform to naturally support hybrid APR to directly
combine the strengths of different APR tools.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we ﬁrst discuss the current status of auto-
mated program repair (Section II-A); then, we introduce Java
Agent and HotSwap, on which UniAPR is built (Section II-B).
A. Automatic Program Repair
Automatic program repair (APR) aims to suggest likely
patches for buggy programs to reduce the manual effort during
debugging. The widely studied generate-and-validate (G&V)
techniques attempt to ﬁx bugs by ﬁrst generating a pool of
patches and then validating the patches via certain rules and/or
checks [22], [39], [48], [13], [17], [33], [30], [29]. Generated
patches that can pass all the tests/checks are called plausible
patches. However, not all plausible patches are the patches
that the developers want. Therefore, these plausible patches
are further manually checked by the developers to ﬁnd the
ﬁnal correct patches (i.e., the patches semantically equivalent
to developer patches). G&V APR techniques [22], [39], [48],
[13], [17], [33], [31], [16] have been extensively studied in
recent years, since it can substantially reduce developer efforts
in bug ﬁxing. According to a recent work [27], researchers
have designed various APR techniques based on heuristics
[28], [22], [17], constraint solving [51], [10], [39], [34], and
pre-deﬁned templates [20], [13], [26]. Besides automated bug
ﬁxing, researchers have also proposed Uniﬁed Debugging [32],
[4] to leverage various off-the-shelf APR techniques to help
with manual bug ﬁxing. In this way, the application scope of
APR techniques has been extended to all possible bugs, not
only the bugs that can be automatically ﬁxed.
Meanwhile, despite the spectacular progress in designing
and applying new APR techniques, very few techniques have
attempted to reduce the time cost for APR, especially the patch
validation time which dominates repair process. For example,
JAID [6] uses patch schema to fabricate meta-programs that
bundle several patches in a single source ﬁle, while SketchFix
1124[15] uses sketches [23] to achieve a similar effect. Although
they can potentially help with patch generation and compila-
tion, they still require validating each patch in a separte JVM,
and have been shown to be rather costly during patch valida-
tion [13]. More recently, PraPR [13] uses direct bytecode-level
mutation and HotSwap to generate and validate patches on-
the-ﬂy, thereby bypassing expensive operations such as AST
manipulation/compilation on the patch generation side as well
as process creation and JVM warm-up on the patch validation
side. This makes PraPR substantially faster than state-of-the-
art APR (including JAID and SketchFix). However, PraPR
is limited to only the bugs that can be ﬁxed via bytecode
manipulation, and can also return imprecise patch validation
results due to potential JVM pollution.
B. Java Agent and HotSwap
A Java Agent [7] is a compiled Java program (in the form
of a JAR ﬁle) that runs alongside of the JVM in order to
intercept applications running on the JVM and modify their
bytecode. Java Agent utilizes the instrumentation API [7]
provided by Java Development Kit (JDK) to modify existing
bytecode that is loaded in the JVM. In general, developers
can both (1) statically load a Java Agent using -javaagent
parameter at JVM startup, and (2) dynamically load a Java
Agent into an existing running JVM using the Java Attach
API. For example, to load it statically, the manifest of
the JAR ﬁle containing Java Agent must contain a ﬁeld
Premain-Class to specify the name of the class deﬁning
premain method. Such a class is usually referred to as an
Agent class. The Agent class is loaded before any class in
the application class is loaded and the premain method
is called before the main method of the application class is
invoked. The premain method usually has the following
signature: public static void premain(String
agentArgs, Instrumentation inst) . The second
parameter is an object of type Instrumentation created
by the JVM that allows the Java Agent to analyze or
modify the classes loaded by the JVM (or those that are
already loaded) before executing them. Speciﬁcally, the
redefineClasses method of Instrumentation ,
given a class deﬁnition (which is essentially a class name
paired with its “new” bytecode content), even enables
dynamically updating the deﬁnition of the speciﬁed class,
i.e., directly replacing certain bytecode ﬁle(s) with the new
one(s) during JVM runtime. This is typically denoted as the
JVM HotSwap mechanism. It is worth mentioning that almost
all modern implementations of JVM (especially, so-called
HotSpot JVMs) have these features implemented in them.
By obtaining Instrumentation object, we have a pow-
erful tool using which we can implement a HotSwap Agent.
As the name suggests, HotSwap Agent is a Java Agent and is
intended to be executed alongside the patch validation process
to dynamically reload patched bytecode ﬁle(s) for each patch.
In order to test a generated patch during APR, we can pass
the patched bytecode ﬁle(s) of the patch to the agent, which
swaps it with the original bytecode ﬁle(s) of the corresponding
…
❷Incrementalcompilation❼Sourceretrieval
Bytecodepatches
Originalbytecodefiles…
Buggyproject
ClassLoadersHotSwapAgentJVM
PatchDB❻SocketAPRToolsAPRToolsAPRTools…Source-codepatches
Bytecode-levelAPR❸Compilation❶Source-levelAPR
❹Loading❺PatchexecutionsFig. 1: UniAPR workﬂow
class(es). Then, we can continue to run tests which result in
executing the patched class(es), i.e., validating the correspond-
ing patch. Note that subsequent requests to HotSwap Agent for
later patch executions on the same JVM are always preceded
by replacing previously patched class(es) with its original
version. In this way, we can validate all patches (no matter
generated by source-code/bytecode APR) on-the-ﬂy sharing
the same JVM for much faster patch validation.
III. A PPROACH
Figure 1 depicts an the overall ﬂow of our UniAPR
framework. According to the ﬁgure, given a buggy project,
UniAPR ﬁrst leverages any of the existing APR tools (in-
tegrated as UniAPR add-ons) to generate source-code level
patches (marked with ¶). Then, UniAPR performs incremental
compilation to compile the patched source ﬁle(s) by each patch
into bytecode ﬁle(s) (marked with ·). Note that, UniAPR is
a uniﬁed framework and can also directly take the bytecode
patches generated by the PraPR [13] (and future) bytecode
APR technique (marked with the dashed line directly connect-
ing APR tools into bytecode patches). In this way, UniAPR
has a pool of bytecode patches for patch validation. Also note
that besides constructed before patch validation, the patch
pool can also be continuously generated during the patch-
validation process1; in either way, UniAPR’s reduction on
patch-validation time is also not affected.
During the actual patch validation, UniAPR ﬁrst compiles
the entire buggy project into bytecode ﬁles (i.e., .class
ﬁles), and then loads all the bytecode ﬁles into the JVM
through JVM class loaders (marked with ¸and¹in the
ﬁgure). Note that these two steps are exactly the same as
executing the original tests for the buggy project. Since all
the bytecode ﬁles for the original project are loaded within
the JVM, when validating each patch, UniAPR only reloads
the patched bytecode ﬁle(s) by that particular patch via the
Java Agent technology and HotSpot mechanism, marked with
º(as the other unpatched bytecode ﬁles are already within
1If patches are continuously generated, the patch-validation component
needs to obtain the live stream of patch information from the running patch-
generation component (e.g., via lightweight socket connections).
1125the JVM). Then, the test driver can be triggered to execute
the tests to validate against the patch without restarting a
new JVM. After all tests are done for this patch execution,
UniAPR will replace the patched bytecode ﬁle(s) with the
original one(s) to revert to the original version. Furthermore,
UniAPR also resets the global JVM states to prepare a clean
JVM environment for the next patch execution (marked with
the short dashed lines). The same process is repeated for each
patch. Finally, the patch validation results will be stored into
the patch execution database via socket connections (marked
with»). Note that for any plausible patch that can pass all the
tests, UniAPR will directly retrieve the original source-level
patch for manual inspection (marked with ¼) in case the patch
was generated by source-level APR.
We have already constructed add-ons for three different
APR tools representing three different families of APR tech-
niques. These add-ons include CapGen [48] (representing
pattern/template-based APR techniques), SimFix [17] (repre-
senting heuristic-based techniques), and ACS [50] (represent-
ing constraint-based techniques). Of course, users of UniAPR
can also easily build new patch generation add-ons for other
APR tools. For existing APR tools, this can be easily done
by modifying their source code so that the tools abandon
validation of patches after generating/compiling them.
Next, we will talk about our detailed design for fastpatch
validation via on-the-ﬂy patching (Section III-A) as well as
precise patch validation via JVM reset (Section III-B).
A. Fast Patch Validation via On-the-ﬂy Patching
Algorithm 1 is a simpliﬁed description of the steps that
vanilla UniAPR (without JVM-reset) takes in order to validate
candidate patches on-the-ﬂy. The algorithm takes as inputs the
original buggy program P, its test suite T, and the set of
candidate patches Pgenerated by any APR technique2. The
output is a map, R, that maps each patch into its corresponding
execution result. The overall UniAPR algorithm is rather
simple. UniAPR ﬁrst initializes all patch execution results as
unknown (Line 2). Then, UniAPR gets into the loop body and
obtains the set of patches still with unknown execution results
(Line 4). If there is no such patches, the algorithm simply
returns since all the patches have been validated. Otherwise, it
means this is the ﬁrst iteration or the earlier JVM process gets
terminated abnormally (e.g., due to timeout or JVM crash). In
either case, UniAPR will create a new JVM process (Line 7)
to evaluate the remaining patches (Line 8).
We next talk about the detailed validate function, which
takes the remaining patches, the original test suite, and a new
JVM as input. For each remaining patch P0, the function
ﬁrst obtains the patched class name(s) Cpatched and patched
bytecode ﬁle(s) Fpatched within P0(Lines 11 and 12). Then,
the function leverages our HotSwap Agent to replace the
bytecode ﬁle(s) under the same class name(s) as Cpatched
with the patched bytecode ﬁle(s) Fpatched ; it also stores the
2Note that here we assume that Pis available before patch validation for the
ease of presentation, but our overall approach is general and can also easily
handle the case where Pis continuously constructed during patch validation.Algorithm 1: Vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation
Input: Original buggy program P, test suiteT, and set of candidate patches P
Output: Validation status
R:P!f PLAUSIBLE ;NON PLAUSIBLE ;ERRORg
1begin
2R PfUNKNOWNg;// initialize result function
3 while True do
4 Pleft fP0jP02P^R (P0) =UNKNOWNg// get all
the left patches not yet validated
5 ifPleft =;then
6 returnR// return if no left patches
7JVM createJVMProcess ()// create a new JVM
8 validate (Pleft;T;JVM ))// validate the left
patches on the new JVM
9function validate (Pleft;T;JVM ):
10 forP0inPleft do
11Cpatched patchedClassNames (P0)
12Fpatched patchedBytecodeFiles (P0)
// Swap in the patched bytecode files
13Forig HotSwapAgent :swap (JVM ;Cpatched ;Fpatched )
14 fortinTdo
15 try:
16 ifrun(JVM ; t)=FAILING then
17 status NON PLAUSIBLE
18 else
19 status PLAUSIBLE
20 catch TimeOutException, MemoryError :
21 status ERROR
22R R[fP0!statusg
23 ifstatus =NON-PLAUSIBLE then
24 break // continue with the next patch
when current one is falsified
25 ifstatus =ERROR then
26 return // restart a new JVM when this
current one timed out or crashed
// Swap back the original bytecode files
27 HotSwapAgent :swap (JVM ;Cpatched ;Forig )
replaced bytecode ﬁle(s) as Forigto recover it later (Line 13).
Note that our implementation will explicitly load the corre-
sponding class(es) to patch (e.g., via Class.forName() )
if they are not yet available before swapping. In this way,
the function can now execute the tests within this JVM to
validate the current patch since the patched bytecode ﬁle(s) has
already been loaded (Lines 14-26). If the execution for a test
ﬁnishes normally, its status will be marked as Plausible or
Non-Plausible (Lines 16-19); otherwise, the status will be
marked as Error , e.g., due to timeout or JVM crash (Lines
20-21). Then, P0’s status will be updated in R(Line 22).
If the current status is Non-Plausible , the function will
abort the remaining test executions for the current patch since
it has been falsiﬁed, and move on to the next patch (Line
24); if the current status is Error , the function will return to
the main algorithm (Line 26), which will restart the JVM.
When the validation for the current patch ﬁnishes without
theError status, the function will also recover the patched
bytecode ﬁle(s) into the original one(s) to facilitate the next
patch validation (Line 27).
B. Precise Patch Validation via JVM Reset
1) Limitations for vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation: The
vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation presented in Section III-A
works for most patches of most buggy projects. The basic
process can be illustrated via Figure 2. In the ﬁgure, each
1126Examplechallenge:monitor/resetJVM
P1P2P3P4…write:C.f=3;ObjswritereadObjswritereadread:assertEquals(C.f,1)
public classC{static int f;staticObject o;<clinit>(){f=1;o=newObject();}}Fig. 2: Imprecision under vanilla UniAPR
// org.joda.time.TestYearMonthDay_Constructors.java
public class TestYearMonthDay_Constructors extends TestCase
{
private static final DateTimeZone PARIS = DateTimeZone.
forID("Europe/Paris");
private static final DateTimeZone LONDON = DateTimeZone.
forID("Europe/London");
private static final Chronology GREGORIAN_PARIS =
GregorianChronology.getInstance(PARIS);
...
Fig. 3: Static ﬁeld dependency
patch (e.g., from P1toP4) gets executed sequentially on
the same JVM. It would be okay if every patch accesses and
modiﬁes the objects created by itself, e.g., P1andP2will not
affect each other and the vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation
results for P1andP2will be the same as the ground-truth
patch validation results. However, it will be problematic if one
patch writes to some global space (e.g., static ﬁelds) and later
on some other patch(es) reads from that global space. In this
way, earlier patch executions will affect later patch executions,
and we call such global space pollution sites . To illustrate, in
Figure 2, P3write to some static ﬁeld C.f, which is later on
accessed by P4. Due to the existence of such pollution site,
the execution results for P4will no longer be precise, e.g., its
assertion will now fail since C.f is no longer 1, although it
may be a correct patch.
2) Technical challenges: We observe that accesses to static
class ﬁelds are the main reason leading to imprecise on-the-ﬂy
patch validation. Ideally, we only need to reset the values for
the static ﬁelds that may serve as pollution sites right after each
patch execution. In this way, we can always have a clean JVM
state to perform patch execution without restarting the JVM
for each patch. However, it turns out to be rather challenging:
First, we cannot simply reset the static ﬁelds that can
serve as pollution sites. The reason is that some static ﬁelds
arefinal and cannot be reset directly. Furthermore, static
ﬁelds may also be data-dependent on each other; thus, we
have to carefully maintain their original ordering, since oth-
erwise the program semantics may be changed. For example,
shown in Figure 3, final ﬁeldGREGORIAN_PARIS is data-
dependent on another final ﬁeld, PARIS , under the same
class within project Joda-Time [18] from the widely studied
Defects4J dataset [19]. The easiest way to keep such ordering
and reset final ﬁelds is to simply re-invoke the original class
initializer. However, according to the JVM speciﬁcation, only// org.joda.time.TestDateTime_Basics.java
public class TestDateTime_Basics extends TestCase {
private static final ISOChronology ISO_UTC =
ISOChronology.getInstanceUTC();
...
// org.joda.time.chrono.ISOChronology.java
public final class ISOChronology extends AssembledChronology
{
private static final ISOChronology[] cFastCache;
static {
cFastCache = new ISOChronology[FAST_CACHE_SIZE];
INSTANCE_UTC = new ISOChronology(GregorianChronology.
getInstanceUTC());
cCache.put(DateTimeZone.UTC, INSTANCE_UTC);
}
...
Fig. 4: Static initializer dependency
JVM can invoke such static class initializers.
Second, simply invoking the class initializers for all classes
with pollution sites may not work. For example, a naive way to
reset the pollution sites is to simply trace the classes with pol-
lution sites executed during each patch execution; then, we can
simply force JVM to invoke all their class initializers after each
patch execution. However, it can bring side effects because the
class initializers may also depend on each other. For example,
shown in Figure 4, within Joda-Time, the static initializer of
class TestDateTime_Basics depends on the static ini-
tializer of ISOChronology . IfTestDateTime_Basics
is reinitialized earlier than ISOChronology , then ﬁeld
ISO_UTC will no longer be matched with the newest
ISOChronology state. Therefore, we have to reinitialize all
such classes following their original ordering as if they had
been executed on a new JVM.
Based on the above analysis, we basically have two choices
to implement such system: (1) customizing the underlying
JVM implementation, and (2) simulating the JVM customiza-
tions at the application level. Although it would be easier to
directly customize the underlying JVM implementation, the
system implementation will not be applicable for other stock
JVM implementations. Therefore, we choose to simulate the
JVM customizations at the application level.
3) JVM reset via bytecode transformation: We now present
our detailed approach for resetting JVM at the the application
level. Inspired by prior work on speeding up traditional regres-
sion testing [3], we perform runtime bytecode transformation
to simulate JVM class initializations for patch execution
isolation for the ﬁrst time. The overall approach is illustrated in
Figure 5. We next present the detailed three phases as follows.
Static Pollution Analysis. Before all the patch executions,
our approach performs lightweight static analysis to iden-
tify all the pollution sites within the bytecode ﬁles of all
classes for the project under repair, including all the ap-
plication code and 3rd-party library code. Note that we
do not have to analyze the JDK library code since JDK
usually provides public APIs to reset the pollution sites
within the JDK, e.g., System.setProperties(null)
can be used to reset any prior system properties and
System.setSecurityManager(null) can be lever-
aged to reset prior security manager. The analysis basically
1127P1P2P3P4…public classC {static int f;staticObject o;<clinit>(){f=1;o=newObject();}}RuntimeBytecodeTransformationStaticPollutionAnalysispublic voidresetJVM(){for(Class c :statusMap.keySet())statusMap.put(c, false);resetJDKSystemProperties();…}DynamicStateResetpublicstaticbooleancheck(Classc){if(!statusMap.get(c)){statusMap.put(c,true);returnfalse;}returntrue;}public classC {static int f;staticObject o;<clinit>(){uniapr_clinit()}public static void uniapr_clinit(){synchronized(C.class){if(!UniAPR.check(C.class)){f=1;o=newObject();}}}}Fig. 5: On-the-ﬂy patch validation via JVM reset
returns all classes with non- final static ﬁelds or final
static ﬁelds with non-primitive types (their actual object
states in the heap can be changed although their actual
references cannot be changed), since the states for all such
static ﬁelds can be changed across patches. Shown in Figure 5,
the blue block denotes our static analysis, and class Cis
identiﬁed since it has static ﬁelds fandothat can be mutated.
C1 Tis a class and an instance of Tis created
C2 Tis a class and a static method declared by Tis invoked.
C3 A static ﬁeld declared by Tis assigned
C4 A static ﬁeld declared by Tis used and the ﬁeld is not a constant variable
C5 Tis a top level class, and an assert statement lexically nested in Tis executed
TABLE I: Class initialization conditions
Runtime Bytecode Transformation. According to Java Lan-
guage Speciﬁcation (JSL) [42], static class initializers get
invoked when any of the ﬁve conditions shown in Table I gets
satisﬁed. Therefore, the ideal way to reinitialize the classes
with pollution sites is to simply follow the JSL design. To
this end, we perform runtime bytecode transformation to add
class initializations right before any instance that falls in to the
ﬁve conditions shown in Table I. Note that our implementation
also handles the non-conventional Reﬂection-based accesses to
such potential pollution sites. Since JVM does not allow class
initialization at the application level, following prior work on
speeding up traditional regression testing [3], we rename the
original class initializers (i.e., <clinit>() ) to be invoked
into another customizable name (say uniapr_clinit() ).
Meanwhile, we still keep the original <clinit>() initializ-
ers since JVM needs that for the initial invocation; however,
now<clinit>() initializers do not need to have any content
except an invocation to the new uniapr_clinit() . Note
that we also remove potential final modiﬁers for pollution
sites during bytecode transformation to enable reinitializations
offinal non-primitive static ﬁelds. Since this is done at the
bytecode level after compilation, the original compiler will
still ensure that such final ﬁelds cannot be changed during
the actual compilation phase.
Now, we will be able to reinitialize classes via invoking the
corresponding uniapr_clinit() methods. However, JVM
only initializes the same class once within the same JVM,
while now uniapr_clinit() will be executed for each
instance satisfying the ﬁve conditions in Table I. Therefore, we
need to add the dynamic check to ensure that each class only
gets (re)initialized once for each patch execution. Shown inFigure 5, the orange blocks denote different patch executions.
During each patch execution, the classes with pollution sites
will be transformed at runtime. For example, class Cwill be
transformed into the code block connected with the P3patch
execution in Figure 5; the yellow line in the transformed code
denotes the dynamic check to ensure that Cis only initialized
once for each patch. The pseudo code for the dynamic check
is shown in the top-right of the ﬁgure: the check maintains
aConcurrentHashMap for the classes with pollution sites
and their status ( true means the corresponding class has been
reinitialized). The entire initialization is also synchronized
based on the corresponding Class object to handle concur-
rent accesses to class initializers; in fact, JVM also leverages
a similar mechanism to avoid class reinitializations due to
concurrency (despite implementing that at a different level).
(Note that this simpliﬁed mechanism is just for illustration
purpose; our actual implementation manipulates arrays with
optimizations for faster and safe tracking/check.) In this way,
when the ﬁrst request for initializing class Carrives, all the
other requests will be blocked. If the class has not been
initialized, then only the current access will get the return
value of false to reinitialize C, while all other other requests
will get the true value and skip the static class initialization.
Furthermore, the static class initializers get invoked following
the same order as if they were invoked in a new JVM.
Dynamic State Reset. After each patch execution, our
approach will reset the state for the classes within the
status ConcurrentHashMap . In this way, during the
next patch execution, all the used classes within the
ConcurrentHashMap will be reinitialized (following the
check in Figure 5). Note that besides the application and
3rd-party classes, the JDK classes themselves may also have
pollution sites. Luckily, JDK provides such common APIs
to reset such pollution sites without the actual bytecode
transformation. In this way, our implementation also invokes
such APIs to reset potential JDK pollution sites. Please also
note that our system provides a public interface for the users
to customize the reset content for different projects under
repair. For example, some projects may require preparing
speciﬁc external resources for each patch execution, which
can be easily added to our public interface. In Figure 5, the
green strips denote the dynamic state reset, and the example
reset code after P3’s execution simply resets the status for
all classes within the status map as false and also resets
potential JDK pollution sites within classes.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Research Questions
To thoroughly evaluate our UniAPR framework, in this
study, we aim to investigate the following research questions:
RQ1: How does vanilla on-the-ﬂy patch validation per-
form for automated program repair?
RQ2: How does on-the-ﬂy patch validation with jvm-reset
perform for automated program repair?
1128Sub. Name #Bugs #Tests LoC
Chart JFreeChart 26 2,205 96K
Time Joda-Time 27 4,130 28K
Lang Apache commons-lang 65 2,245 22K
Math Apache commons-math 106 3,602 85K
Closure Google Closure compiler 133 7,927 90K
Total 357 20,109 321K
TABLE II: Defects4J V1.0.0 statistics
For both RQs, we study both the effectiveness of UniAPR
in reducing the patch validation cost, and the precision of
UniAPR in producing precise patch validation results.
B. Benchmarks
We choose the Defects4J (V1.0.0) benchmark suite [19],
since it contains hundreds of real-world bugs from real-world
systems, and has become the most widely studied dataset for
program repair [13], [10], [6], [17], [48] or even software
debugging in general [24], [25], [4]. Table II presents the
statistics for the Defects4J dataset. Column “Sub.” presents the
project IDs within Defects4J, while Column “Name” presents
the actual project names. Column “#Bugs” presents the num-
ber of bugs collected from real-world software development
for each project, while Columns “#Tests” and “LoC” present
the number of tests (i.e., JUnit test methods) and the lines of
code for the HEAD buggy version of each project.
C. Studied Repair Tools
Being a well-developed ﬁeld, APR offers us a cornucopia
of choices to select from. According to a recent study [27],
there are 31 APR tools targeting Java programs considering
two popular sources of information to identify Java APR tools:
the community-led program-repair.org website and the
living review of APR by Monperrus [37]. 17 of those Java
APR tools are found to be publicly available and applicable to
the widely used Defects4J benchmark suite (without additional
manually collected information, e.g., potential bug locations)
as of July 2019. Note that all such tools are source-level
APR, since the only bytecode-level APR tool PraPR was
only available after July 2019. Table III presents all such
existing Java-based APR tools, which can be categorized
into three main categories according to prior work [27]:
heuristic-based [22], [17], [28], constraint-based [51], [10],
and template-based [26], [48] repair techniques. In this work,
we aims to speed up all existing source-level APR techniques
via on-the-ﬂy patch validation. Therefore, we select one rep-
resentative APR tool from each of the three categories for
our evaluation to demonstrate the general applicability of our
UniAPR framework. All the three considered APR tools, i.e.,
ACS [50], SimFix [17], and CapGen [48] are highlighted in
bold font in the table. For each of the selected tools, we
evaluate them on all the bugs that have been reported as ﬁxed
(with correct patches) by their original papers to evaluate: (1)
UniAPR effectiveness, i.e., how much speedup UniAPR can
achieve, and (2) UniAPR precision, i.e., whether the patch
validation results are consistent with and without UniAPR.Tool Category Tools
Constraint-based ACS, Nopol, Cardumen, Dynamoth
Heuristic-based SimFix ,Arja, GenProg-A, jGenProg, jKali,
jMutRepair, Kali-A, RSRepair-A
Template-based CapGen ,TBar, A V ATAR, FixMiner, kPar
TABLE III: Available Java APR tools for Defects4J [27]
D. Implementation
UniAPR has been implemented as a publicly available fully
automated Maven plugin [47], on which one can easily inte-
grate any patch generation add-ons. The current implementa-
tion involves over 10K lines of Java code. As a Maven plugin,
the users simply need to add the necessary plugin information
into the POM ﬁle. In this way, once the users ﬁre com-
mand: mvn org.uniapr:uniapr-plugin:validate ,
the plugin will automatically obtain all the necessary infor-
mation for patch validation. It will automatically obtain the
test code, source code, and 3-rd party libraries from the
underlying POM ﬁle for the actual test execution. Furthermore,
it will automatically load all the patches from the default
patches-pool directory (note that the patch directory name
and patch can be conﬁgured through POM as well) created by
the APR add-ons for patch validation. The current UniAPR
version assumes the patch directory generated by the APR
add-ons to include all available patches represented by their
patched bytecode ﬁles, i.e., the patch pool is constructed before
patch validation. Note that, each patch may involve more than
one patched bytecode ﬁle, e.g., some APR tools (such as
SimFix [17]) can ﬁx bugs with multiple edits.
During patch validation, UniAPR forks a JVM and passes
all the information about the test suites and the subject
programs to the child process. The process runs tests on each
patch and reports their status. We use TCP Socket Connections
to communicate between processes. UniAPR repeats this pro-
cess of forking and receiving report results until all the patches
are executed. It is worth noting that it is very easy for UniAPR
to fork two or more processes to take maximum advantage of
today’s powerful machines. However, for a fair comparison
with existing work, we always ensure that only one JVM is
running patch validation at any given time stamp.
E. Experimental Setup
For each of the studied APR tools, we perform the following
experiments on all the bugs that have been reported as ﬁxed
in their original papers:
First, we execute the original APR tools to trace their orig-
inal patch-validation time and detailed repair results (e.g., the
number of patches executed and plausible patches produced).
Note that the only exception is for CapGen: digging into the
decompiled CapGen code (CapGen source code is not avail-
able), we observed that CapGen excluded some (expensive)
tests for certain bugs via unsafe test selection. Such unsafe
test selection is inconsistent with the original paper [48], and
can be dangerous (i.e., it may fail to falsify incorrect patches).
Therefore, to enable a fair and realistic study, for CapGen,
we build a variant for vanilla UniAPR that simply restarts a
1129new JVM for each patch (same as CapGen) to simulate the
original CapGen performance. Note that if we had presented
the performance comparison between UniAPR and the original
CapGen using the same reduced tests, the UniAPR speedup
can be even larger because UniAPR mainly reduces the JVM-
restart overhead — similar reduction on JVM overhead would
yield larger overall speedup given shorter test-execution time
(as the overall patch-validation time includes JVM overhead
and test-execution time). For example, the average speedup
achieved by UniAPR with JVM-reset on Chart bugs is 15.7X
compared with the original CapGen (on the same set of
reduced tests) and 8.4X compared with our simulated CapGen.
Next, we modify the studied tools and make them conform
to UniAPR add-on interfaces, i.e., dumping all the generated
patches into the patch directory format required by UniAPR.
Then, we launch our UniAPR to validate all the patches
generated by each of the studied APR tools on all the available
tests, and trace the new patch validation time and results. Note
that we repeat this step for both variants of UniAPR (i.e.,
vanilla UniAPR and UniAPR with JVM reset) to evaluate their
respective performance.
To evaluate our UniAPR variants, we include the following
metrics: (1) the speedup compared with the original patch
validation time, measuring the effectiveness of UniAPR, and
(2) the repair results compared with the original patch vali-
dation, measuring the precision of our patch validation (i.e.,
checking whether UniAPR fails to ﬁx any bugs that can be
ﬁxed via traditional patch validation). All our experimentation
is done on a Dell workstation with Intel Xeon CPU E5-2697
v4@2.30GHz and 98GB RAM, running Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS
and Oracle Java 64-Bit Server version 1.7.0 80.
V. R ESULT ANALYSIS
A. RQ1: Vanilla On-the-ﬂy Patch Validation
1) Effectiveness: For answering this RQ, we evaluated
vanilla UniAPR (i.e., without JVM-reset) that is conﬁgured
to use the add-on corresponding to each studied APR tool.
The main experimental results are presented in Figure 6. In
each sub-ﬁgure, the horizontal axis presents all the bugs that
have been reported to be ﬁxed by each studied tool, while the
vertical axis presents the time cost (s); the solid and dashed
lines present the time cost for traditional patch validation and
our vanilla UniAPR, respectively.
From the ﬁgure, we can observe that the vanilla UniAPR can
substantially speed up the existing patch validation component
for all state-of-the-art APR tools with almost no slowdowns.
For example, when running ACS on Math-25, the traditional
patch validation costs 698s, while on-the-ﬂy patch validation
via vanilla UniAPR takes only 2.3s to produce the same
patch validation results, i.e., 304.89X speedup; when running
SimFix on Lang-60, the traditional patch validation costs 924s,
while vanilla UniAPR takes only 4s to produce the same
patch validation results, i.e., 229.96X speedup; when running
CapGen on Math-80, the traditional patch validation costs
18,991s, while vanilla UniAPR takes only 1582s to produce
the same patch validation results, i.e., 12.00X speedup. NoteTool # All # Mismatch Ratio (%)
CapGen 22 3 13.64%
SimFix 34 1 2.94%
ACS 18 0 0.00%
All 74 4 5.41%
TABLE IV: Inconsistent ﬁxing results
that we have further marked various peak speedups in the
ﬁgure to help better understand the effectiveness of UniAPR.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study demonstrating that on-
the-ﬂy patch validation can also substantially speed up state-
of-the-art source-level APR.
2) Precision: We further study the number of bugs that
vanilla UniAPR does not produce the same repair results as
the traditional patch validation (that restarts a new JVM for
each patch). Table IV presents the summarized results for
all the studied APR tools on all their ﬁxable bugs. In this
table, Column “Tool” presents the studied APR tools, Column
“# All” presents the number of all studied ﬁxable bugs for
each APR tool, Column “# Mismatch” presents the number of
bugs that vanilla UniAPR has inconsistent ﬁxing results with
the original APR tool, and Column “Ratio (%)” presents the
ratio of bugs with inconsistent results. From this table, we
can observe that vanilla UniAPR produces imprecise results
for 5.41% of the studied cases overall. To our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst empirical study demonstrating that on-the-ﬂy patch
validation may produce imprecise/unsound results compared
to traditional patch validation. Another interesting ﬁnding is
that 3 out of the 4 cases with inconsistent patching results
occur on the CapGen APR tool. One potential reason is that
CapGen is a pattern-based APR system and may generate far
more patches than SimFix and ACS. For example, CapGen
on average generates over 1,400 patches for each studied bug,
while SimFix only generates around 150 on average. In this
way, CapGen has way more patches that may affect the correct
patch execution than the other studied APR tools. Note that
SimFix has only around 150 patches on average since we only
studied its ﬁxed bugs; if we had considered all Defects4J bugs
studied by the original SimFix paper (including the bugs that
cannot be ﬁxed by SimFix), SimFix will produce many more
patches, exposing more imprecise/unsound patch validation
issues as well as leading to much larger UniAPR speedups.
B. RQ2: On-the-ﬂy Patch Validation via JVM-Reset
1) Effectiveness: We now present the experimental results
for our UniAPR with JVM-reset. The main experimental
results are presented in Figure 7. In each sub-ﬁgure, the
horizontal axis presents all the bugs that have been reported to
be ﬁxed by each studied tool, while the vertical axis presents
the time cost (s); the solid and dashed lines present the time
cost for traditional patch validation and UniAPR with JVM
reset, respectively. From the ﬁgure, we can observe that for
all the studied APR tools, UniAPR with JVM reset can also
substantially speed up the existing patch validation component
with almost no performance degradation. For example, when
running ACS on Math-25, the traditional patch validation
costs 698s, while on-the-ﬂy patch validation via UniAPR
1130(a) ACS
 (b) SimFix
 (c) CapGen
Fig. 6: Speedup achieved by vanilla UniAPR
(a) ACS
 (b) SimFix
 (c) CapGen
Fig. 7: Speedup achieved by UniAPR with JVM reset
(a) ACS
 (b) SimFix
 (c) CapGen
Fig. 8: JVM-reset overhead over vanilla UniAPR
with JVM reset takes only 2.6s to produce the same patch
validation results, i.e., 264.47X speedup. Note that we have
also marked various peak speedups in the ﬁgure to help
better understand the effectiveness of UniAPR with JVM reset.
While we observe clear speedups for the vast majority of
the bugs (and almost no slowdowns), the achieved speedups
vary a lot for all the studied APR tools on all the studied
bugs. The reason is that the speedups are impacted by many
different factors, such as the number of patches executed, the
number of bytecode ﬁles loaded for each patch execution, the
individual test execution time, and so on. For example, we
observe that UniAPR even slows down the patch validation
for ACS slightly on one bug (i.e., for 1min). Looking into the
speciﬁc bug (i.e., Math-3), we ﬁnd that ACS only produces one
patch for that bug, and there is no JVM sharing optimization
opportunity for UniAPR on-the-ﬂy patch validation. To further
conﬁrm our ﬁnding, we perform the Pearson Correlation
Coefﬁcient analysis [43] between the number of patches for
each studied bug and its corresponding speedup for ACS.
Shown in Figure 9, the horizontal axis denotes the number ofpatches, while the vertical axis denotes the per-patch speedup
(X) achieved; each data point represents one studied bug for
ACS. From this ﬁgure, we can observe that UniAPR tends
to achieve signiﬁcantly larger speedups for bugs with more
patches with a clear positive coefﬁcient Rof 0.51 and a pvalue
of 0.031 (which is statistically signiﬁcant at the signiﬁcance
level of 0.05), demonstrating that UniAPR with JVM reset can
also substantially outperform existing patch validation, with
larger speedups for larger systems with more patches.
Meanwhile, we observe that UniAPR with JVM reset has
rather close performance compared with the vanilla UniAPR
(shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7), indicating that UniAPR
with JVM reset has negligible overhead compared with the
vanilla UniAPR on all the studied bugs for all the studied APR
systems. To conﬁrm our ﬁnding, Figure 8 further presents the
time cost comparison among the two UniAPR variants on the
three APR systems. In the ﬁgure, the horizontal axis presents
all the bugs studied for each system while the vertical axis
presents the time cost; the solid and dashed lines present the
time cost for UniAPR with JVM-reset and vanilla UniAPR,
1131Fig. 9: Correlation between patch number and speedup
achieved by UniAPR with JVM reset
Fig. 10: Correlation between patch number and overhead
incurred by JVM-reset over vanilla UniAPR
respectively. Shown in the ﬁgure, JVM reset has incurred
negligible overhead among all the studied bugs for all three
systems on UniAPR, e.g., on average 8.33%/7.81%/1.72%
overhead for ACS/CapGen/SimFix. The reason is that class
reinitializations only need to be performed at certain sites
for only the classes with pollution sites. Also, we have
various optimizations to speed up JVM reset. For example,
although our basic JVM-reset approach in Figure 5 performs
runtime checks on a ConcurrentHashMap , our actual im-
plementation uses arrays for faster class status tracking/check.
Furthermore, we observe that the overhead does not change
much regardless of the bugs studied, e.g., our UniAPR with
JVM-reset has stable overhead across bugs with different
number of patches. To further conﬁrm our ﬁnding, we perform
the Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient analysis [43] between the
number of patches for each studied bug and the corresponding
JVM-reset overhead (over vanilla UniAPR) on the ACS tool
with the highest overhead. Shown in Figure 10, the horizontal
axis denotes the number of patches, while the vertical axis
denotes the overhead (%) incurred; each data point represents
one studied bug for ACS. From this ﬁgure, we can observe
that there is no clear correlation (at the signiﬁcance level of
0.05), i.e., JVM-reset overhead is not affected by the numbers
of patches. In summary, UniAPR with JVM-reset only incurs
negligible and stable overhead (e.g., less than 8.5% for all
studied tools) compared to the vanilla UniAPR, demonstrating
the scalability of UniAPR with JVM-reset.
2) Precision: According to our experimental results,
UniAPR with JVM-rest produces exactly the same APR results
as the traditional patch validation, i.e., UniAPR with JVM-reset
successfully ﬁxed all the bugs that vanilla UniAPR failed to
ﬁx, mitigating the imprecision/unsoundness of vanilla UniAPR.
We now discuss all 4 bugs that UniAPR with JVM reset can
ﬁx while vanilla UniAPR without JVM reset cannot ﬁx:
Figure 11 presents the test that fails on the only plausible
(also correct) patch of Lang-6 (using CapGen) when running// org.apache.commons.lang3.StringEscapeUtilsTest.java
public void testUnescapeHtml4() {
for (int i = 0; i < HTML_ESCAPES.length; ++i) {
String message = HTML_ESCAPES[i][0];
String expected = HTML_ESCAPES[i][2];
String original = HTML_ESCAPES[i][1];
// assertion failure: ampersand expected:<bread &[]
butter> but was:<bread &[amp;] butter>
assertEquals(message, expected, StringEscapeUtils.
unescapeHtml4(original));
...
Fig. 11: Test failed without JVM-reset on Lang-6
UniAPR without JVM-reset. Given the expected resulting
string ‘‘bread &[] butter’’ , the actual returned one
is‘‘bread &[amp;] butter’’ . Digging into the code,
we realize that class StringEscapeUtils has a static ﬁeld
named UNESCAPE_HTML4 , which is responsible for perform-
ing the unescapeHtml4() method invocation. However,
during earlier patch executions, the actual object state of that
ﬁeld is changed, making the unescapeHtml4() method
invocation return problematic result with vanilla UniAPR.
In contrast, when running UniAPR with JVM-reset, ﬁeld
UNESCAPE_HTML4 will be recreated before each patch ex-
ecution (if accessed) and will have a clean object state for
performing the unescapeHtml4() method invocation.
// org.apache.commons.math3.EventStateTest.java
public void testIssue695() {
FirstOrderDifferentialEquations equation = new
FirstOrderDifferentialEquations() {
...
double tEnd = integrator.integrate(equation, 0.0, y,
target, y);
...
private static class ResettingEvent implements
EventHandler {
private static double lastTriggerTime = Double.
NEGATIVE_INFINITY;
public double g(double t,double [] y) {
// assertion error
Assert.assertTrue(t >= lastTriggerTime);
return t - tEvent;
}
...
Fig. 12: Test failed without JVM-reset on Math-30/41
Figure 12 shows another test that fails on the only plausible
(and correct) patch of Math-30 when running vanilla UniAPR
with CapGen patches, and fails on the only plausible (and
correct) patch of Math-41 when running vanilla UniAPR
with SimFix patches. Looking into the code, we ﬁnd that
the invocation of integrate() in the test will ﬁnally call
the method g() in class ResettingEvent (in the bot-
tom). The static ﬁeld lastTriggerTime of class Reset-
tingEvent should be Double.NEGATIVE_INFINITY in
Java, which means the assertion should not fail. Unfortunately,
the earlier patch executions pollute the state and change the
value of the ﬁeld. Thus, the test failed when running with
vanilla UniAPR on the two plausible patches. In contrast,
UniAPR with JVM-reset is able to successfully recover that.
There are four plausible CapGen patches on Math-5 (one
is correct) when running with the traditional patch validation.
1132// org.apache.commons.math3.genetics.UniformCrossoverTest.
java
public class UniformCrossoverTest {
private static final int LEN = 10000;
private static final List<Integer> p1 = new ArrayList<
Integer>(LEN);
private static final List<Integer> p2 = new ArrayList<
Integer>(LEN);
public void testCrossover() {
performCrossover(0.5);
...
private void performCrossover( double ratio) {
...
// assertion failure: expected:<0.5> but was
:<5.5095>
Assert.assertEquals(1.0 - ratio, Double.valueOf((
double ) from1 / LEN), 0.1);
...
Fig. 13: Test failed without JVM-reset on Math-5
// org.apache.commons.math3.complex.ComplexTest.java
public class ComplexTest {
private double inf = Double.POSITIVE_INFINITY;
...
public void testMultiplyNaNInf() {
Complex z = new Complex(1,1);
Complex w = z.multiply(infOne);
// assertion failure: expected:<-Infinity> but was
:<Infinity>
Assert.assertEquals(w.getReal(), inf, 0);
...
Fig. 14: Another test failed without JVM-reset on Math-5
With vanilla UniAPR, all the plausible patches failed on some
tests. Figure 13 shows the test that fails on three plausible
patches (including the correct one) on Math-5. The expected
value of the assertion should be 0.5, but the actual value turned
to 5.5095 due to the change of variable from1 . After inspect-
ing the code, we found the value of from1 is decided by two
static ﬁelds p1andp2in class UniformCrossoverTest .
The other earlier patch executions pollute the ﬁeld values,
leading to this test failure when running with vanilla UniAPR.
Figure 14 presents another test that fails on one plausi-
ble patch on Math-5. The expected value from invocation
w.getReal() should be Infinity , which should be the
same as ﬁeld inf deﬁned in class ComplexTest ; however,
the actual result from the method invocation is -Infinity .
The root cause of this test failure is similar to the previous
ones, the static ﬁelds NaN andINF in class Complex are
responsible for the result of method invocation getReal() .
In this way, getReal() returns a problematic result because
the earlier patch executions changed the corresponding ﬁeld
values. In contrast, using UniAPR with JVM-reset, all the four
plausible patches are successfully produced.
C. Discussion
Having single JVM session for validating more than one
patch has the immediate beneﬁt of skipping costly JVM restart,
reload, and warm-up. As shown by our empirical study, this
offers substantial speedups in patch validation. On the other
hand, this approach might have the following limitations:
First, the execution of the patches might interfere with each
other, i.e., the execution of some tests in one patch might haveside-effects affecting the execution of other tests on another
patch. UniAPR mitigates these side-effects by resetting static
ﬁelds to their default values and resetting JDK properties.
Although our experimental results demonstrate that such JVM
reset can ﬁx all bugs ﬁxed by the traditional patch validation
and opens a new dimension for fast&precise patch validation,
such in-memory JVM state reset for only class ﬁelds might
not be sufﬁcient to handle all cases. Also, the side-effects
could propagate via operating system or the network. Our
current implementation provides a public interface for the
users to resolve such issue between patch executions (note
that no subject systems in our evaluation require such manual
conﬁguration). In the near future, we will study more subject
programs to fully investigate the impact of such side effects
and design solutions to address them fully automatically.
Second, HotSwap-based patch validation does not support
patches that involve changing the layout of the class, e.g.
adding/removing ﬁelds and/or methods to/from a class. Luck-
ily, the existing APR techniques mainly target patches within
ordinary method bodies, and our UniAPR framework is able
to reproduce all correct patches for all the three studied state-
of-the-art techniques. Another thing worth discussion is that
HotSwap originally does not support changes in static initializ-
ers; interestingly, our JVM-reset approach can naturally help
UniAPR overcome this limitation, since the new initializers
can now be reinvoked based on our bytecode transformation to
reinitialize the classes. In the near future, we will further look
into other promising dynamic class redeﬁnition techniques
for implementing our on-the-ﬂy patch validation, such as
JRebel [46] and DCEVM [45].
VI. C ONCLUSION
Automated program repair (APR) has been extensively
studied in the last decade, and various APR systems/tools
have been proposed. However, state-of-the-art APR tools still
suffer from the efﬁciency problem largely due to the expensive
patch validation process. In this work, we have proposed a
uniﬁed on-the-ﬂy patch validation framework for all JVM-
based APR systems. Compared with the existing on-the-ﬂy
patch validation work [13] which only works for bytecode
APR, this work generalizes on-the-ﬂy patch validation to all
existing state-of-the-art APR systems at the source code level.
This work shows the ﬁrst empirical results that on-the-ﬂy patch
validation can speed up state-of-the-art representative APR
systems, including CapGen, SimFix, and ACS, by over an
order of magnitude. Furthermore, this work also shows the
ﬁrst empirical evidence that on-the-ﬂy patch validation can
incur imprecise/unsound patch validation results, and further
introduces a new technique for resetting JVM state for precise
patch validation with negligible overhead.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by National Sci-
ence Foundation under Grant Nos. CCF-1763906 and CCF-
1942430, and Alibaba.
1133REFERENCES
[1] Paul Ammann and Jeff Offutt. Introduction to software testing . Cam-
bridge University Press, 2016.
[2] Earl T. Barr, Yuriy Brun, Premkumar T. Devanbu, Mark Harman, and
Federica Sarro. The plastic surgery hypothesis. In FSE, FSE’14, pages
306–317, 2014.
[3] Jonathan Bell and Gail Kaiser. Unit test virtualization with vmvm. In
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing, pages 550–561, 2014.
[4] Samuel Benton, Xia Li, Yiling Lou, and Lingming Zhang. On the
effectiveness of uniﬁed debugging: An extensive study on 16 program
repair systems. In 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , pages 907–918, 2020.
[5] CO Boulder. University of cambridge study: Failure to adopt
reverse debugging costs global economy $41 billion annually.
https://bit.ly/2T4fWnq, 2013. Accessed: August, 2020.
[6] Liushan Chen, Yu Pei, and Carlo A Furia. Contract-based program
repair without the contracts. In 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , pages 637–647.
IEEE, 2017.
[7] Oracle Corporation. Java instrumentation api, 2020. Accessed: August,
2020. URL: https://bit.ly/3czmzFV.
[8] Xuan Bach D Le. Overﬁtting in Automated Program Repair: Challenges
and Solutions . PhD thesis, Singapore Management University, 2018.
[9] V . Debroy and W. E. Wong. Using mutation to automatically suggest
ﬁxes for faulty programs. In ICST , pages 65–74, April 2010.
[10] Thomas Durieux and Martin Monperrus. Dynamoth: dynamic code
synthesis for automatic program repair. In AST, pages 85–91, 2016.
[11] Apache Software Foundation. Apache maven, 2020. Accessed: August,
2020. URL: http://maven.apache.org/.
[12] Luca Gazzola, Daniela Micucci, and Leonardo Mariani. Automatic
software repair: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
45(1):34–67, 2017.
[13] Ali Ghanbari, Samuel Benton, and Lingming Zhang. Practical program
repair via bytecode mutation. In ISSTA , pages 19–30, 2019.
[14] Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Automated
program repair. Communications of the ACM , 62(12):56–65, 2019.
[15] Jinru Hua, Mengshi Zhang, Kaiyuan Wang, and Sarfraz Khurshid.
Towards practical program repair with on-demand candidate generation.
InProceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engi-
neering , pages 12–23, 2018.
[16] Jiajun Jiang, Luyao Ren, Yingfei Xiong, and Lingming Zhang. Inferring
program transformations from singular examples via big code. In
2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) , pages 255–266, 2019.
[17] Jiajun Jiang, Yingfei Xiong, Hongyu Zhang, Qing Gao, and Xiangqun
Chen. Shaping program repair space with existing patches and similar
code. In ISSTA , pages 298–309. ACM, 2018.
[18] JodaOrg. Joda time, 2020. Accessed: August, 2020. URL:
https://github.com/JodaOrg/joda-time.
[19] Ren ´e Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D Ernst. Defects4j: A database
of existing faults to enable controlled testing studies for java programs.
InProceedings of the 2014 International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis , pages 437–440, 2014.
[20] Dongsun Kim, Jaechang Nam, Jaewoo Song, and Sunghun Kim. Auto-
matic patch generation learned from human-written patches. In ICSE ,
pages 802–811. IEEE Press, 2013.
[21] Xuan Bach D Le, David Lo, and Claire Le Goues. History driven
program repair. In SANER , volume 1, pages 213–224. IEEE, 2016.
[22] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley
Weimer. Genprog: A generic method for automatic software repair.
IEEE TSE , 38(1):54–72, 2012.
[23] A Solar Lezama. Program synthesis by sketching . PhD thesis, PhD
thesis, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, 2008.
[24] Xia Li, Wei Li, Yuqun Zhang, and Lingming Zhang. Deepﬂ: Integrating
multiple fault diagnosis dimensions for deep fault localization. In ISSTA ,
pages 169–180, 2019.
[25] Xia Li and Lingming Zhang. Transforming programs and tests in
tandem for fault localization. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages , 1(OOPSLA):1–30, 2017.
[26] Kui Liu, Anil Koyuncu, Dongsun Kim, and Tegawend ´e F Bissyand ´e.
Tbar: revisiting template-based automated program repair. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis , pages 31–42, 2019.[27] Kui Liu, Shangwen Wang, Anil Koyuncu, Kisub Kim, Tegawend ´e
Franc ¸ois D Assise Bissyande, Dongsun Kim, Peng Wu, Jacques Klein,
Xiaoguang Mao, and Yves Le Traon. On the efﬁciency of test suite
based program repair: A systematic assessment of 16 automated repair
systems for java programs. In 42nd ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2020.
[28] Xuliang Liu and Hao Zhong. Mining stackoverﬂow for program repair.
In2018 IEEE 25th International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) , pages 118–129. IEEE, 2018.
[29] Fan Long and Martin Rinard. Staged program repair with condition
synthesis. In FSE, FSE’15, pages 166–178, 2015.
[30] Fan Long and Martin Rinard. Automatic patch generation by learning
correct code. In POPL , POPL’16, pages 298–312, 2016.
[31] Yiling Lou, Junjie Chen, Lingming Zhang, Dan Hao, and Lu Zhang.
History-driven build failure ﬁxing: how far are we? In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis , pages 43–54, 2019.
[32] Yiling Lou, Ali Ghanbari, Xia Li, Lingming Zhang, Haotian Zhang,
Dan Hao, and Lu Zhang. Can automated program repair reﬁne fault
localization? a uniﬁed debugging approach. In ISSTA , 2020. to appear.
[33] Matias Martinez and Martin Monperrus. Astor: A program repair library
for java (demo). In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis , ISSTA 2016, pages 441–444, 2016.
[34] Sergey Mechtaev, Jooyong Yi, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Angelix:
Scalable multiline program patch synthesis via symbolic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 38th international conference on software engineer-
ing, pages 691–701, 2016.
[35] Ben Mehne, Hiroaki Yoshida, Mukul R Prasad, Koushik Sen, Divya
Gopinath, and Sarfraz Khurshid. Accelerating search-based program
repair. In 2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on Software Testing,
Veriﬁcation and Validation (ICST) , pages 227–238. IEEE, 2018.
[36] Martin Monperrus. Automatic software repair: a bibliography. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 51(1):1–24, 2018.
[37] Martin Monperrus. The living review on automated program repair.
Technical report, 2020.
[38] Martin Monperrus, Simon Urli, Thomas Durieux, Matias
Martinez, Benoit Baudry, and Lionel Seinturier. Repairnator
patches programs automatically. Ubiquity , 2019(July), July 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3349589 doi:10.1145/3349589.
[39] Hoang Duong Thien Nguyen, Dawei Qi, Abhik Roychoudhury, and
Satish Chandra. Semﬁx: Program repair via semantic analysis. In 2013
35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pages
772–781. IEEE, 2013.
[40] Flemming Nielson and Hanne Riis Nielson. Formal Methods . Springer,
2019.
[41] Objectweb. Asm bytecode manipulation framework, 2020. Accessed:
August, 2020. URL: https://asm.ow2.io/.
[42] Oracle. The java language speciﬁcation, 2020. Accessed: August, 2020.
URL: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/.
[43] K Pearson. Notes on regression and inheritance in the case of two
parents proceedings of the royal society of london, 58, 240-242, 1895.
[44] Undo Software. Increasing software development productivity with
reversible debugging. https://bit.ly/3c8ccbn, 2016. Accessed: August,
2020.
[45] DCEVM Team. Dynamic code evolution vm for java, 2020. Accessed:
August, 2020. URL: http://dcevm.github.io/.
[46] JRebel Team. Jrebel, 2020. Accessed: August, 2020. URL:
https://bit.ly/3fQox6Y.
[47] UniAPR team. Uniapr webpage, 2020. Accessed: August, 2020. URL:
https://github.com/UniAPR/UniAPR.
[48] Ming Wen, Junjie Chen, Rongxin Wu, Dan Hao, and Shing-Chi Cheung.
Context-aware patch generation for better automated program repair. In
2018 IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing (ICSE) , pages 1–11. IEEE, 2018.
[49] W. Eric Wong, Ruizhi Gao, Yihao Li, Rui Abreu, and Franz Wotawa. A
survey on software fault localization. IEEE TSE , 42(8):707–740, August
2016.
[50] Yingfei Xiong, Jie Wang, Runfa Yan, Jiachen Zhang, Shi Han, Gang
Huang, and Lu Zhang. Precise condition synthesis for program repair.
InICSE , ICSE’17, pages 416–426. IEEE Press, 2017.
[51] Jifeng Xuan, Matias Martinez, Favio Demarco, Maxime Clement, Se-
bastian R. Lamelas Marcote, Thomas Durieux, Daniel Le Berre, and
Martin Monperrus. Nopol: Automatic repair of conditional statement
bugs in java programs. IEEE TSE , 43(1):34–55, 2017.
1134