Technical Leverage in a Software Ecosystem:
Development Opportunities and Security Risks
Fabio Massacci
University of Trento (IT), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (NL)
fabio.massacci@ieee.orgIvan Pashchenko
University of Trento (IT)
ivan.pashchenko@unitn.it
Abstract —In ﬁnance, leverage is the ratio between assets
borrowed from others and one’s own assets. A matching situation
is present in software: by using free open-source software
(FOSS) libraries a developer leverages on other people’s code
to multiply the offered functionalities with a much smaller own
codebase. In ﬁnance as in software, leverage magniﬁes proﬁts
when returns from borrowing exceed costs of integration, but it
may also magnify losses, in particular in the presence of security
vulnerabilities. We aim to understand the level of technical
leverage in the FOSS ecosystem and whether it can be a potential
source of security vulnerabilities. Also, we introduce two metrics
change distance andchange direction to capture the amount and
the evolution of the dependency on third-party libraries.
The application of the proposed metrics on 8494 distinct
library versions from the FOSS Maven-based Java libraries
shows that small and medium libraries (less than 100KLoC)
have disproportionately more leverage on FOSS dependencies
in comparison to large libraries. We show that leverage pays off
as leveraged libraries only add a 4% delay in the time interval
between library releases while providing four times more code
than their own. However, libraries with such leverage (i.e., 75%
of libraries in our sample) also have 1.6 higher odds of being
vulnerable in comparison to the libraries with lower leverage.
We provide an online demo for computing the proposed
metrics for real-world software libraries available under the
following URL: https://techleverage.eu/.
Index Terms—software security, dependencies, vulnerabilities,
leverage, technical debt, empirical analysis, maven, free open
source software
I. I NTRODUCTION
Finance and software have always found interesting cor-
respondences between concepts [1]. For example, the notion
oftechnical debt captures the short-term developers’ action
(actually inaction to ﬁx) that may lead to a later cost of
maintenance [2]. Most academic studies (see a review in [3])
only consider poorly written own code of a project as a source
of a technical debt for a software project. At the Dagstuhl
Seminar 16162, researchers reviewed and consolidated the
view on technical debt [2] to clearly limit its scope to the
“internal system qualities” of a software project.
Nowadays developers often import functionality from third-
party free open-source software (FOSS) libraries by including
them into their projects as dependencies [4]–[6]. Such software
engineering practice allows developers to use FOSS libraries
as building blocks, and therefore, reduce development cost
and time [7]. Even for proprietary software, the fraction of
homegrown code decreased to 5% [8]. Industry reports showthat third party code inherited through dependencies is four
times larger than the size of the own code base as an industry
average [9]. It can be up to four orders of magnitude in our
FOSS sample.
To capture this phenomenon, we introduce the notion of
technical leverage to assess the dependence on third-party
functionalities. Similarly to the ﬁnancial ratio between debt
(other people’s money) and equity (one’s own money), lever-
age is the ratio between third party code and one’s own code.
Additionally, we introduce the change distance andchange
direction metrics to measure the qualitative changes of a li-
brary between two consecutive versions. These metrics capture
the polar coordinates of the changes in the plane described
by the sizes of own code and third party code. An angle of
90 degrees means that in the new version the developer is
improving its own ‘capital’ (i.e., code) while keeping the same
third party code on which is old version is leveraged.
Since developers have different strategies [10], we are
interested to check whether the proposed metrics characterizes
in some way the FOSS ecosystem. For example, developers
of a small library may want to increase functionality of their
library as fast as possible, while developers of a mature and
large library (i.e., with more than 100KLoC) might likely focus
on ﬁxing bugs and vulnerabilities and reﬁning functionalities.
RQ1: Is there a difference in leverage, distance and direction
of changes between small and large libraries?
The next two research questions focus on the trade-off
between risk and opportunity that leverage may bring. For
example, a large leverage means that several libraries are used
and they might require integration and update costs. Indeed,
developers often decide not to update the third party libraries
they are using [11], [12] due to the possibility of introducing
incompatible, breaking changes [10]. Thus leverage might
signiﬁcantly delay the releases of one’s own code. If that
happened, the opportunity of leverage would turn out to be
not a real opportunity but only an illusion since the time
interval between library releases is linked to proﬁtability [13]
and costs [14].
RQ2 - Opportunity: do leverage, distance, and direction of
changes impact the time interval between library re-
leases?
On the risk side, using many libraries increases the attack
surface, and third-party libraries are known to introduce func-
tionality bugs and security vulnerabilities into the projects that13862021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00125
use them [12], [15]. In some cases, dependent projects keep
using outdated components for a decade or more [16] thus
increasing also the window of possible exploitations.
RQ3 - Risk: does leverage, distance and direction of changes
impact the risk of including vulnerabilities?
To answer the RQs above, we applied the proposed metrics
to more than 10K distinct library instances used in the FOSS
Java Maven-based ecosystem distinguishing between large
libraries (over 100KLoC) and small-medium libraries.
Summary of Findings Our analysis suggests that small-
medium libraries (less than 100KLoC) have a high leverage
on third-party FOSS dependencies and their developers prefer
to adopt new dependencies (change direction at 0 degrees).
Large libraries have far smaller leverage and their developers
mostly increase their own code. The proposed metrics also
partly explain the time interval between library releases but
even a large leverage (more than 4 times one’s own code,
which is present in 75% of the small and medium libraries
in our sample) yield a very minimal change to such interval
(less than 4%). Leverage is thus a concrete opportunity for the
developers of a library. Yet, a large leverage also increases the
odds ratio of shipping code with vulnerabilities by 60%. So
leverage is an equally concrete risk for the users of the library.
Such ﬁndings bring new challenges for empirical software
engineering (your ‘software’ and hence its quality depends
way more from your choices of third party libraries than your
coding) and software security economics (code users bear the
risk while code developers reap the beneﬁts).
II. T ERMINOLOGY
We rely on the terminology established among practitioners
(e.g., the users of Apache Maven) and consolidated in [12]:
Alibrary is a separately distributed software component,
typically consisting of a logically grouped set of classes
(objects) or methods (functions). To avoid ambiguity, we
refer to a speciﬁc version of a library as a library instance.
Adependency is a library instance whose functionalities
are used by another library instance (dependent instance).
Adirect dependency is directly invoked from the depen-
dent library instance.
Adependency tree is a representation of a library instance
where each node is a library instance and edges connect
dependent library instances to their direct dependencies.
Atransitive dependency of a library instance at a root of
a dependency tree is connected to the root library through
a path with more than one edge.
Aproject is a set of libraries developed and/or maintained
together by a group of developers. Dependencies belong-
ing to the same project of the dependent library instance
areown dependencies, while library instances maintained
by other projects are third-party dependencies.
Additionally, for each library instance in our sample we
identify the following dimensions that characterize a library:
Own code size (`own) as the number of lines of own code
in the ﬁles of a library.Dependency code size (`dep) as the sum of the lines
of code of third-party direct dependencies (` dir) and
transitive dependencies (` trans ) of a library
Total code size (`total) as the sum of the two.
The qualiﬁer ‘third party’ is important as noted by Pashchenko
et al. [12]: for convenience, developers might have decided to
structure their own code in separate libraries. They might be
mistakenly counted as other people’s code while in reality is
developed within the same project and by the same developers,
hence, should be counted as own code. As an example one
could refer to Scala libraries.
Software projects always leverage some functionality from
standard libraries of the programming language, so that one
should consider also the size of the the baseline of program-
ming language libraries `std.
III. T ECHNICAL LEVERAGE
To capture the effect of software dependencies on the depen-
dent projects, we introduce the notion of technical leverage:
Deﬁnition. Thetechnical leverage of a library is the ratio
between the size of code imported from third-party libraries
besides the baseline of programming language libraries `std
and the own code size of the library:
=`dir+`trans +`std`own(1)
In our empirical analysis, the programming
language/platform is the same over all libraries (Java
and Maven) so `std=const. If one wanted to compare
libraries across different ecosystems (e.g. Python vs C
libraries) the difference can be signiﬁcant. Further, standard
libraries are typically more mature than a third party library
and splitting leverage by type might be needed for a more
ﬁne grained analysis. This is also done in ﬁnance where one
distinguishes between different type of debts.
Similarly to Allman [17], who drew parallels between
technical and monetary debts, we illustrate the similarities
between ﬁnancial and technical leverages in Table I.
Additionally, the project maintenance routine requires devel-
opers to assess whether they have to update dependencies of
their project, i.e., to evaluate the difference between different
versions of the same library. To facilitate this process and help
developers to have more meaningful comparison of changes
occurred between two library versions, we propose to use
change velocity vectors (Figure 1).
Deﬁnition. Change Velocity Vector h`dep;`ownicharac-
terizes how a library changes between releases r0andr1with
respect to the size of its dependencies and its own size:
h`dep;`owni=h`dep(r1) `dep(r0);`own(r1) `own(r0)i
(2)
In particular, the library development behavior can be
qualitatively described using polar coordinates of the change
velocity vector and. We use them to introduce the notions
of change direction and change distance.
1387TABLE I
FINANCIAL LEVERAGE VS TECHNICAL LEVERAGE
Financial leverage Technical leverage
Financial leverage is used to undertake some investment or
project with the help of borrowed money (debt)Software developers reuse already existing functionality from dependencies to focus
only on new features in their projects
Financial leverage decreases the corporate income tax liability
and increases its after-tax operating earning [18]Using dependencies reduce the time (and thus, cost) to develop new projects [19], [20]
and sometimes increase project performance (e.g., numpy orpandas in Python)
The debt implies an interest rate [18] and must be eventually
paid or reﬁnanced (an observation not present in [17])Dependencies have to be monitored and updated (the concept similar to reﬁnancing
one’s monetary debt) unless one introduces security vulnerabilities [12], [15]
Financial leverage multiplies losses as well, which might lead
to a crisis [21]If the amount of work required for the dependent project to update its dependencies
become too high, the developers might decide to stop updating dependencies and
experience serious technical difﬁculties [10]
Fig. 1. Library change types depending on the angle of a change velocity vector
Deﬁnition. The change distance characterizes the amount of
change in code size between two consecutive library version.
=q
`2own+ `2
dep(3)
Albeit still measured in KLoC, this is obviously different
than the pure change in the code base captured by `own.
Table II and Table IV, later in Section IV, show that is on
average larger than the library total size `own.
Deﬁnition. The change direction characterizes the type of
evolution of a library between two consecutive versions.1
= arccos`dep


+1 `own>0
 1 otherwise(4)
Considering different values of , we identify four main
directions of a library evolution (Figure 1):
Dependency adopting ( 0o) - software developers
increase the size of library dependencies, while not
changing its own size: `dep>0;`own!0
Own size increasing ( 90o) - developers do not
change the dependency size, while increasing its own
size: `dep!0;`own>0
Dependency removing ( 180o) - software developers
decrease the dependency size, while not changing its own
size: `dep<0;`own!0
Own code removing ( 270o) - developers do not
change the dependency size, while decreasing own size
of their libraries: `dep!0;`own<0
Combination of these library evolution directions can de-
scribe every change of a library. For example, if both own
1Formally, when = 0 we assume that = 0. Experimentally, is never
zero as some changes are always present when one releases a new version.and dependency sizes increase between two library releases
(2(0o; 90o)), one may say that its developers both adopt new
dependencies and perform self-development of this library.
Hence, we qualitatively classify developers’ actions as follows:
2(315o; 45o][(135o; 225o]– developers mostly
operate with dependencies: `dep>`own (grey area
in Figure 1)
2(45o; 135o][(225o; 315o]– developers mostly change
own code: `own>`dep(dotted area in Figure 1)
Moreover, the change velocity angle indicates whether
developers increase or decrease the total size of their libraries:
2(315o; 135o]– developers increase total size `total"
2(135o; 315o]– developers decrease total size `total#
IV. D ATA SELECTION
For the study of the FOSS ecosystem, we have selected the
Maven ecosystem. We use the information directly available
from the dependency management system. The FOSS libraries
distributed via Apache Maven are published on the Maven
Central Software Repository2, that keeps all the publicly
released versions of its libraries, i.e., their packages (for
example, jar), project object model ﬁles (pom-ﬁles), and, often,
some extra information, such as source code of a library or its
documentation (JavaDoc). Maven also provides a Dependency
plug-in, that allows us to retrieve a list of dependencies of a
particular library instance.
In this study, we use only direct dependencies, since devel-
opers have a habit of reacting to the issues connected with the
own code of their libraries or their direct dependencies [10],
2https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/
1388TABLE II
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE LIBRARY SAMPLE
We consider 8464 distinct library versions (GAVs - Group, Artifact, Version
coordinate in Maven Terminology) starting from the 200 most popular FOSS
Java libraries (GA) used by a multinational software development company in
its customers or internal production-level software and removing the library
versions that have no source code in Maven Central.
mean st.dev min Q25% medianQ75% max
#lib versions 55 49 1 15 35 87 248
#direct deps 4 7 0 0 2 6 51
`own (KLoC) 37 56 2 5 15 42 350
`dep (KLoC) 591 764 0 69 302 828 4489
relinterval (days) 41 94 0 1 22 47 2235
[22]. Moreover, including the analysis of transitive dependen-
cies increases the chance of introducing additional biases as
transitive vulnerabilities are known to be overcounted [12],
[23]. We do notpreclude the analysis of transitive dependen-
cies as they are known to introduce security vulnerabilities
to some extent [9], [15], [24]. Proper understanding of their
effects requires networks and contagion analysis [25], an
interesting challenge for future work (Section X).
To identify the relevant ‘main libraries’ and compute their
leverage one needs a reference point (anchor) selected from
the outside of the analysed ecosystem. Indeed, just using the
number of usages of within Maven itself would have been
severely biased as it would not correspond to the popularity
of the software in the world (which is what makes the study
interesting), but only to the internal use. Hence, selecting an
anchor from within an ecosystem, we would have some im-
portant libraries (e.g., Apache Tomcat) underrepresented in the
library sample, while several service libraries (which nobody
really uses) would have been disproportionately selected.
Hence, we follow [26] and started from the top 200
FOSS Maven-based libraries used by a large software man-
ufacturer across over 500 Java projects (actual customers
products or production-level software developed by the com-
pany for internal use). The resulting set corresponds to
10905 library instances when considering all versions and
includes widely used libraries such as org.slf4j:slf4j-api and
org.apache.httpcomponents:httpclient.
Algorithm 1 is used to identify the own size of a library
instance. To calculate the size of library dependencies, we
recursively apply the Algorithm 1 to each dependency and
then sum the resulting number of lines of code (LoCs).
For some library instances (or their dependencies) there
was no source code available, so we removed them from our
analysis. We have also removed 555 library versions with own
size<100 lines of code as these library versions do not
carry actual functionality but only serve as APIs or docu-
mentations for other libraries. The ﬁnal list comprises 8464
library instances. Table II presents the descriptive statistics of
the selected library sample.
Developers of some libraries maintain several versions of
the library at the same time3. For example, the developers
of Apache Tomcat4project supported four versions (7.0.x,
3In our sample, 570 libraries supported several versions simultaneously for
a total of 15814 chains.
4http://tomcat.apache.org/Algorithm 1: Extract own size of a library version
input : A folderdirwith the source code of a library
output: The number of lines of code in a library numlocs
1filelist getAllFileNames (dir)// Get the list of
all file names in the folder dir
2numlocs 0;
3forfilejfile2filelist do
// Counting the number of lines in a file
4lines readAllLines(file) // Load content of a
file
5 ifisCodeFile(file) then
// Including only code containing files
6 forline2lines do
// Counting only lines that are not
empty and are not comments
7 ifline<>;andisNotComment (line) then
8 numlocs numlocs+ 1;
9 end
10 end
11 end
12end
Algorithm 2: Extract consecutive release chains from
a library set
input : A set of library names libraries
output: A set of lists of consecutive releases releases
1releases [];
2forlibrary2libraries do
3curlib=library:getGA() // Use
groupId:artifactId as identificator for
the current library
4releases [curlib] [];
5branches []// Prepare a list for storing
library branches
6 fori2range (0;len(library ))do
7libversion library [i]// get i-th library
instance of a library
8 ifreleases [curlib] ==;then
9 releases [curlib] [libversion ];
10 end
11libvid=curlib+libversion [0]// Calculate
id of a library version
12 iflibvid2branches then
13 releases [libvid]:append (libversion );
14 else
15 iflibversion<releases [curlib][ 1] then
16 branches:append (libvid);
17 releases [libvid] = [libversion ];
18 else
19 releases [curlib]:append(lib version );
20 end
21 end
22 end
23end
8.0.x, 8.5.x, and 9.0.x) of org.apache.tomcat:tomcat-catalina
library for the last three years (starting from March, 2016).
These parallel versions might introduce errors into the analysis
results if date ordering of library releases is used. Ordering
versions by date we obtain: 8.5.30->9.0.7->7.0.86->8.0.51-
>9.0.8->8.5.31 because versions are released in groups (typ-
ically a simultaneous ﬁx of bugs): 8.5.30 and 9.0.7 were
released within 17 minutes. Hence, before the analysis we
have distinguished release chains according to Algorithm 2.
To estimate security risks, we use the presence of a se-
1389TABLE III
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE VULNERABILITIES IN THE SAMPLE
mean st.dev min Q25% medianQ75% max
#vulns/own 2 5 0 0 0 1 43
#vulns/dep 8 10 0 0 3 13 63
TABLE IV
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE PROPOSED METRICS
We report the values of the introduced metrics for the 8464 library instance
in our sample for which source code could be extracted and had at least 100
lines of own code (i.e. where not clearly just APIs for other libraries).
mean median st.dev min max Q25%Q75%
dir 2489 22 21775 0 373195 4 74
(KLoC) 98 8 284 0 3480 0.71 66
(degrees) 81 31 91 -45 315 0 180
curity vulnerability that affects the analysed library. Here,
we consider only vulnerabilities that affect the own code of
analysed libraries for the quality assessment and not the one
coming through transitive dependencies. In other words, when
claiming that a library is vulnerable we will only count the
library own vulnerabilities and the vulnerabilities of the direct
dependencies (which would be own vulnerabilities for each
dependency). At ﬁrst, this avoids double counting (as the same
library may be transitively included several times). Second,
the presence of vulnerabilities in the direct dependencies is a
knowledge available to a developer. Thus, there is a potentially
deliberate choice of selecting a new vulnerable direct depen-
dency or keeping vulnerable dependencies outdated [10].
To identify whether the own code of a library is affected by
vulnerabilities, we used the Snyk database5that is constantly
updated and for August 2020 contains data about more than
3900 vulnerabilities on the Maven based libraries. Each entry
in the database contains the information about a security
vulnerability; the library, which own code is affected by
the vulnerability; and the range of affected library versions.
Table III shows the descriptive statistics of vulnerabilities per
individual library in the selected library sample.
Finally, Table IV shows the descriptive statistics of the
proposed metrics for the selected library sample. In the Sec-
tion VII, we will use a leverage of four as a running example
for the impact of direct leverage on small and medium libraries
which is the reported value for industry average [9], it is the
value for Q25% in our sample (Table IV), and corresponds to
the log-mid point between a leverage of 1 (almost all libraries
are above it) and 16 (over half of the the libraries are above
it) as visible from Figure 2. The equivalent number for big
libraries would be 12.5% (log mid point between the median
direct leverage of 50% and the bottom line of 1%).
V. RQ1: D IFFERENCE IN DIRECT LEVERAGE AND
DIRECTION OF CHANGES BETWEEN LIBRARIES
Several studies [27]–[29] suggested that a software project
might have different development practices depending on its
size. Hence, we present results separately for small-medium
libraries whose code size does not exceed 100K lines of code
(KLoCs) and large libraries that have more than 100 KLoCs.
5https://snyk.io/vulnAs we observe from Table II, FOSS developers widely
adopt dependencies to reduce their development effort. This
especially applies for the small-medium libraries with a code
base less than 100 KLoCs (Figure 2): we observe that library
instances use a large code base of direct dependencies that
may 10.000 times exceed their own size and 50% of small-
medium libraries rely on 14.65 times bigger code base of their
direct dependencies ( median small libs = 14:65), which is bigger
than the direct technical leverage of any library in our sample
with own size exceeding 100 KLoCs.
The increase of the own size of a library obviously leads
to a decrease in its leverage: the Pearson correlation test [30]
suggests that there exists linear negative correlation between
log(dir)andlog(`own)(r= 0:629;p-value10 4).
From the selected library sample, 50% of big libraries have
direct technical leverage less than half of their own size
(median big libs = 0:48), including several libraries that have
10.000 times smaller size of software dependencies.
Considering the kernel density estimation (KDE) plot for
the change velocity angle for the libraries in our sample
(Figure 3), we observe the following:
small-medium libraries (` own100KLoCs )(Fig-
ure 3a): the developers mostly prefer to adopt third-
party dependencies (the pick around 0o), rather than
focus only on increasing the code of their own libraries
(the KDE for 90ois less than 0.005). Sometimes
developers also reduce the size of their dependencies
and/or optimize the size of their libraries (the KDE for
180oand for315oare higher 0.005).
large libraries (` own>100KLoCs )(Figure 3b): the
developers tend to increase the size of their libraries (the
KDE for90ois 0.010), however, the maximum KDE
value for the large libraries is more than 2 times lower
than the maximum KDE for the small-medium libraries.
Moreover, we observe that the developers also sometimes
adopt new dependencies but they simultaneously increase
own code of their libraries (the KDE for 45ois
around 0.005). Sometimes developers of big libraries also
optimize their libraries by reducing their own code and
the code of their dependencies (a pick around 250o).
Discussion: Both analysis of direct leverage and change
direction suggest that the developers of small and medium
libraries rely on functionality of third-party FOSS dependen-
cies. This corresponds to a general intuition since the third-
party dependencies allow small libraries to grow faster. Too
many dependencies might become difﬁcult to manage, which
exposes dependent libraries to bugs and security vulnerabilities
introduced by library dependencies. Hence, developers of big-
ger (and consequently more mature) libraries tend to decrease
the direct leverage of their libraries on third-party dependen-
cies: the negative linear correlation between log(dir)and
log(`own)(Figure 2) and a shift of development preferences
from dependency adopting in small and medium libraries to
mostly increasing the own code for large libraries (Figure 3).
1390Developers of relatively small software libraries (with own size smaller than 100 KLoCs) almost always ship more code than their own direct leverage >1).
For the majority, their own code is only a small fraction of the overall codebase (less than 6%, corresponding to a median direct leverage of 15). In other
words, they ship mostly somebody else code. The direct leverage of large libraries (> 100 KLoCs) is typically much smaller than the size of their own code
and hardly exceed 2, corresponding to at least 33% of own code.
Fig. 2. The direct leverage in comparison to the own size of a library
Key Takeaway: small-medium libraries by far ship
other people’s code, and at each round they add more.
VI. RQ2: D OES DIRECT LEVERAGE IMPACT TIME
INTERVAL BETWEEN LIBRARY RELEASES ?
Big software projects typically involve developers working
in parallel [29] to increase the speed of development. To
capture this phenomena, we will use log(relinterval + 1)
as the dependent variable for the regression. We add ‘+1’
to a time interval between library releases to correct for the
approximate granularity in the measurement as in some cases
releases happen on the same day (although at different times).
A large direct leverage means that a library mostly relies
on the work of other developers. So we expect that direct
leverage and library release time interval have a proportional
relation rather than a linear one. Since we deﬁne as a
fraction of dependency and own size of a library, we could
usedirdirectly in the regression. However, this would mean
that moving direct leverage by a factor of 10 would yield an
exponential jump in a time interval between library releases.
However, we observe that direct leverage spans eight orders
of magnitude (Fig 2) while the leverage coefﬁcient in Table V
suggests that a change in magnitude in direct leverage (aka,
‘effect of scale’) does not determine a proportional change in
the time interval between library releases, only a small linear
change. Therefore, we use log(dir)for the regression.
We expect that the change distance in own and dependency
sizes will mostly require an increase of the time to test the
added functionality into a new library version, i.e. a ‘returns
to scale’ effect. Hence, we use log() for the regression. Notice
that>0as a new release always implies some changes.
Change direction indicates (i) how developers change the
total size of their libraries (increase or decrease) and (ii)
whether they mostly change a library’s own code or its
dependencies. To capture the effect of change in the total code
size, we consider the following:
= 135oand= 315ocorrespond to 0change in`total,
while= 45oand= 225oindicates max change in
`total`total increases when 2(315o; 45o)[(135o; 225o)and
decreases when 2(225o; 315o)[(45o; 135o).
To consider these effects into the regression, we introduce
thecos( 45o)transformation of the change direction metric.
If developers change own code of their libraries they have
to both develop and test their projects. On the other hand,
the change of library dependencies in most cases require
only testing of dependent projects. To capture these effects
into the regression, we consider the values of that indicate
whether developers work with dependencies or own code of
their libraries and introduce the sin( )transformation of the
change direction metric6.
Finally, we consider the time interval between the previous
release and its preceding one with the corresponding trans-
formations as for the current time interval between library
releases into the regression to capture the impact of project
release practices (e.g., bi-/weekly/daily releases).
We use the multivariate linear regression model [32] to
check the correlation between the proposed metrics and the
time interval between library releases. The previous discussion
clariﬁes how the transformations above may help towards a
linear regression model as the direct relation between the
proposed metrics and the estimated parameters might not be
necessarily linear (e.g., consider the example of Figure 2).
The resulted linear regression model has the following form:
log(relinterval + 1)1 + log(relintervalprev + 1)+
+ log(dir) + log() + cos( 45o) + sin()(5)
Table V shows the estimates, standard errors, t-statistics,
and p-values for both small-medium and large libraries. We
observe that for the libraries with own code smaller than 100
KLoCs all metrics have signiﬁcant impact on the time interval
between library releases (p-value < 0:05), Direct leverage,
the change in total code, and previous release have positive
correlation with the release time interval of a library, while the
6One might argue that cos( )andsin( )correlate, and therefore, could
not be used as variables into a linear regression. However, Eubak and
Speckman [31] proved that cos( )andsin( )can be used simultaneously
in a linear regression model and cos( +d)can be transformed in a linear
combination of cos( )andsin( ).
1391(a)for Small and Medium libraries: The picks at the KDE for the angles of library evolution plots suggest that developers of libraries with own code size
smaller than 100 KLoCs tend to operate with their dependencies: they mostly adopt new dependencies and sometimes consolidate them.
(b)for Large libraries: The KDE of the library evolution vectors for the libraries bigger than 100 KLoCs suggest that developers of such libraries tend to
increase the size of own code while importing some functionality from new dependencies (both adopting new dependencies and upgrading currently used ones).
Fig. 3. Kernel density estimation plots for angles of library evolution vectors
change distance and change in own code correlate negatively
with such interval. For large libraries, the change distance
and time interval between the previous and its preceding
releases have signiﬁcant impact on time interval between
library releases (p-value< 0:05).
Discussion. The increase of change distance corresponds to
a slight decrease in the time interval between library releases.
Such change is minor in quantity: when change distance
doubles, such interval decreases only by 7%. Since the size
ofis mostly determined by dependencies, this observation
shows that adopting dependencies speed up the evolution of a
library in spite of large (implicit) changes to the code base.
What makes the difference is the type of changes. For
small libraries, changing `total(cos( 45o)in the regression)
lengthen the time interval between library releases. Most
likely, we observe such an effect, since the change in total code
base means the major functionality changes (e.g., addition
of new functionality). In contrast, when developers focus on
own code of their libraries, such interval reduces by 35% –
the developers are likely ﬁxing bugs and vulnerabilities in
their libraries, which might be of a higher priority due to
the necessity to ship the ﬁxed version to the library users. A
qualitative study might yield more insights into such changes.A. Does direct technical leverage pay off?
To understand the practical implication of direct technical
leverage, we analyze further the impact of the coefﬁcient of
direct technical leverage in (5).
Since the log(dir)coefﬁcient is positive, having a large
direct leverage increases the time interval between releases
of a small-medium library: having too many dependencies
might require additional time for the library developers to
manage them. However, the value of the coefﬁcient is small,
and therefore, a more precise estimation is needed.
Let therelinterval0and therelinterval be two release
time intervals of libraries that are separated by a leverage
factor of , i.e.0= . From the regression we can
reconstruct the following (approximate) relation:
log(relinterval0+ 1) log(relinterval + 1) =
=(log() log())
which can be simpliﬁed to
relinterval0+ 1
relinterval + 1= (6)
Considering the estimates in Table V, for a library with own
code<100KLoCs and direct technical leverage of four (the
1392TABLE V
LINEAR MODEL FIT TO CHECK THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ;; dir AND RELEASE TIME INTERVAL
These are the result of the regressions log(relinterval +1)1+log(dir)+log()+cos( 45o)+sin( )+log(relintervalprev +1). For small
and medium libraries with own size smaller than 100 KLoCs there is root mean squared error = 1.68; R2= 0:038 andR2= 0:036. For large libraries
with own size greater than 100 KLoCs the root mean squared error = 1.53, R2= 0:058, andR2= 0:044.
release time interval Small-Medium Libraries Large Libraries >100KLoC
log(relinterval + 1) coefﬁcients estimate std.err. tStat p-value estimate std.err. tStat p-value
intercept 1 2,847 0,1 28,413 0 3,849 0,389 9,886 0
direct leverage log( dir) 0,059 0,012 4,849 0 -0,002 0,041 -0,041 0,968
change distance log() -0,072 0,01 -7,022 0 -0,147 0,036 -4,091 0
change in total code cos( 45o) 0,492 0,07 7,011 0 -0,182 0,219 -0,829 0,408
change in own code sin( ) -0,355 0,075 -4,709 0 0,237 0,244 0,97 0,333
previous release interval log(relintervalprev + 1) 0,083 0,016 5,033 0 -0,131 0,055 -2,36 0,019
size of its direct dependencies is four times bigger than its own
size), the delay in the time interval between library releases
in days will be less than 4%. So, leveraging on third-party
libraries pays off: you add 4x more code at the price of a
small delay in your release time interval (around two days on
average). Even if you have many dependencies (e.g. ,  = 16,
slightly above the median for small libraries, and your own
code is essentially 6% of the total code size), the time interval
between library releases only increases by 17% (around a week
considering the average time interval in Table II).
Key Takeaway: Direct leverage pays off. Shipping an
overall project four times larger than your own code
base will only take a couple of extra days (on average).
VII. RQ3: D OES DIRECT LEVERAGE INCREASE SECURITY
RISK ?
In medicine, the effect of a parameter on a rare disease is
described by the odds ratioOR of a disease [33]. We use the
OR to have a ﬁrst understanding of the impact of leverage
on the security risk7of using a library, by mapping (i) the
fact that at least one vulnerability affects a software library
onto ‘Disease’ and (ii) the condition that the direct technical
leverage exceeds our running example value for leverage (four
for small libraries) onto the state of ‘Exposure’:
OR=jHighLeverageLibs \VulnLibsj
jHighLeverageLibs \:VulnLibsj
jLowLeverageLibs \VulnLibsj
jLowLeverageLibs \:VulnLibsj(7)
Table VI shows the contingency table where we use our run-
ning example = 4for small and medium libraries (own code
100KLoCs - median direct leverage around 16) and dir=
12:5% for large libraries (own code >100KLoCs - median
direct leverage around 50%). The corresponding library groups
have the following odds ratio: OR small libs = 1:6, conﬁdence
interval [1:3 2:0]. For big libraries the OR big libs = 0:43 with
conﬁdence interval [0:22 0:84]. Fisher Exact test [35] for both
small-medium and big libraries rejects h0(p-value small libs
0:05,p-value big libs = 0:013). These results conﬁrm our
intuition: the more you increase your total code size, the
more likely you are to step into a vulnerability. The major
7As we only know reported vulnerabilities for the dependencies in our
sample (as vulnerabilities might be present but might not have been found
yet), we cannot use the risk ratio. However, since vulnerabilities are rare, the
OR approximates the risk ratio [34].TABLE VI
CONTINGENCY TABLE FOR VULNERABLE /LEVERAGED LIBRARIES
For small and medium libraries, the larger the direct leverage the larger the
risk of being vulnerable (OR small libs = 1:61). For large libraries (own code
>100KLoCs ), the risk is inverted, the more own code the more likely to
be vulnerable (OR small libs = 0:43).
Small libraries Big libraries
vuln not vuln vuln not vuln
dir>4 716 2154 dir>0:125 194 74
dir4 121 587 dir0:125 73 12
difference is that for small and medium libraries some of
these vulnerabilities are most likely in other people’s code
and therefore out of control of the developer.
Since a vulnerable library has normally more than one
vulnerability (see Table III), it is interesting to understand
whether the number of vulnerabilities change with leverage8.
Further, a library may have different level of leverage from
version to version while the number of vulnerabilities may
remain unchanged. These two facts are due to the phenomenon
that some vulnerabilities are in the third party code (in
dependencies) that requires developers of these dependencies
to release a ﬁxed version of a dependency. In other words,
developers might have added a new library (left-most peak in
Figure 3) while keeping an old version of another dependency.
Figure 4 shows the distributions of maximum direct leverage
per library in time grouped by the number of vulnerabilities
that affect that library (intended as a GA). Our running
example threshold (leverage equal to four) provides clear
visual separation of the exposed and not exposed libraries
(i.e., libraries with high direct leverage are more likely to be
exposed to a security vulnerability. The exception in Figure 4
are the libraries with a high number of vulnerabilities (extreme
right) but a direct leverage lower than 4. They are the big
libraries (` own>100K LoCs) which are anyway exposed
to the big number of vulnerabilities due to the large own
size. Hence, the direct leverage metric has a potential to be
used as an indicator for a library to be exposed to security
vulnerabilities. Further investigations are worth pursuing.
Figure 5 shows the relation between direct leverage and di-
rection of library changes ( ). We observe that small-medium
libraries (own code 100 KLoCs) with 2[ 45; 45][
[135; 225] are more likely to be vulnerable. Such libraries
8From a user’s perspective the library (GA in Maven’s terminology) is the
‘same’, it is just a ‘different version‘ (GA V in Maven’s terminology).
1393Direct leverage equal to 4 allows visual separation between the libraries exposed to high number of vulnerabilities vs libraries exposed to a small number
of security vulnerabilities in our library sample. The only excpetion are the handful of libraries at the extreme right. They are libraries with large own code
base100K LoCs which are always affected by security vulnerabilities just because of their size.
Fig. 4. Max direct leverage per library vs Number of vulnerabilities in a library version
either include/remove functionality from software dependen-
cies or increase their own code base, and therefore, are likely
to be under active development. In contract, there are less
vulnerable small libraries with 2(225; 315) . Such libraries
decrease the size of their own code, and therefore, they are
likely to review the already developed functionality instead of
developing new features (i.e., to be mature). Visual analysis of
the direct leverage–change direction relation plots for libraries
with own code >100KLoCs suggests that in case of a
big library there always exists a chance that its own code is
affected by a security vulnerability.
Discussion: We observe that the fact of being affected by a se-
curity vulnerability for small-medium libraries correlates with
direct leverage and change distance, while for big libraries the
signiﬁcant effect comes from change in own and total code.
Most likely, this happens due to the different strategies fol-
lowed by library developers: the developers of small libraries
tend to quickly increase the functionality of their libraries,
and therefore, adopt new dependencies (which increase the
total code size of their libraries), while the developers of big
libraries focus on changes in their own code. While changes
in own code may increase the attack surface, they normally
also include eliminating bugs and security vulnerabilities in
software libraries. In contrast, adding libraries only eliminates
security vulnerabilities as a side effect if a version (or a whole
library) without vulnerabilities is selected.Key Takeaway: Direct leverage increases the security
risk. Shipping four times your code base will increase
the risk of shipping a vulnerable version by 60%.
VIII. R ELATED WORKS
Several technical studies [11], [12], [15], [24], [36] showed
that FOSS dependencies, although being widely used by both
commercial and FOSS projects, are not often maintained
properly: a large share of projects (up to 81%) have outdated
dependencies. Several of them (69%) are not aware that some
of those dependencies introduce serious bugs and security
vulnerabilities [15]. As Allman [17] drew parallels between
technical and monetary debts, one may relate dependencies inFOSS to the well-studied ﬁnancial leverage instruments. How-
ever, we do not ﬁnd a study that would try to quantitatively
assess the technical debt introduced by software dependencies.
Manikas and Hansen [37] presented a systematic literature
review of 90 papers on the studies regarding software ecosys-
tems. Although the number of software ecosystem research
papers is increasing, the majority of studies are report papers.
Hence, the authors reported the lack of analytic studies of
software ecosystems. This statement is supported by another
extensive literature review of 213 papers on software ecosys-
tems [38]. Similar results are found by Manikas [39] in a
more recent literature review of 56 empirical studies spanning
over 55 software ecosystems: there exists a lack of deeper
investigation of technical and collaborative aspects.
Boucharas et al. [40] proposed a standards-setting ap-
proach to software product and software supply network mod-
elling. Although this allows developers to anticipate upcoming
changes in the software ecosystems, the approach aims at
development within one company, and therefore, does not suit
the purpose of modelling FOSS infrastructure.
Bonaccorsi and Rossi [41] proposed a simple model to helps
software developers to decide whether to include FOSS com-
ponents into their projects. Their model estimates the value of
FOSS libraries based on the possibility of receiving additional
support from the developers of an FOSS community.
Hence, our study ﬁlls an important gap in the state of the
art by providing instruments for evaluation of the impact of
technical leverage in the software ecosystems.
IX. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
The internal validity may be inﬂuenced by the fact that we
have based the FOSS library selection for this study on their
popularity from within a company. We surveyed the usage
data of the selected sample from MVNRepository.com9and
the number of users from BlackDuck Openhub10. Since both
sources showed that libraries in our sample are also popular
9https://mvnrepository.com/
10https://www.openhub.net/
1394Fig. 5. Direct leverage vs change direction for safe libraries (blue, left) and vulnerable libraries (red, right) with own size100KLoCs
among the FOSS developers, we believe, the internal validity
threat of our study is minimal.
The generalization of these results may be exposed to an
external validity threat since we considered only Maven based
libraries. However, since Maven has the largest share of users
between the developers in the Java ecosystem11, our results
reﬂect the practice of the majority of Java developers. In this
study, we aimed at creating awareness regarding the effects of
technical leverage within software ecosystems, and therefore,
proper case control studies are needed to, for example, validate
the effect of odds ratio. In this respect, our study is easy to
replicate for other dependency management systems.
X. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
By extending the metaphore from ﬁnance started by the
notion of technical debt [1], we have introduced the new
notion of technical leverage and some associated code metrics
(leverage, change distance, and change direction) to capture
the relative importance and evolution of one’s own code
and third party code into a software library. This notion is
particularly important in today’s software ecosystem where
homegrown code is only a fraction of the total code base that
is shipped to customers (See e.g., [9], [42], [43] and Table IV).
We have applied the proposed metrics to 8464 FOSS
library instances from Java Maven stemming from an industry
relevant sample of the top 200 libraries used by a large
11https://zeroturnaround.com/ rebellabs/java-tools-and-technologies-
landscape-2016multi-national corporation for its customers. The results show
that small-medium libraries have high leverage on third-party
FOSS dependencies and their developers prefer to adopt new
dependencies to speed up the development process. Large
libraries have relatively small leverage and their developers
mostly increase own code of their libraries. The proposed
metrics correlate with time interval between library releases
and could be used to estimate the risk of a library to be affected
by a security vulnerability. Libraries whose developers perform
operations with (e.g., adopt or remove) dependencies tend to
be affected by vulnerabilities more often in comparison than
libraries whose developers mostly change libraries’ own code.
We brieﬂy recap the key ﬁndings of our paper as follows:
Small and medium libraries (with less than 100 KLoCs
of own code) by far ship other people’s code, and at
each round they typically add more. With a median direct
leverage of 14.65, most libraries in our sample include
less than 7% of homegrown code.
Direct leverage pays off. Shipping four times the size
of your own code base (as 75% of small and medium
libraries do) will only take two extra days on average.
Direct leverage increases the security risk. Shipping
four times the size of your own code base will increase
the odds of shipping a vulnerable version by 60%.
For sake of comparison, “if all presently unbelted drivers and
right front passengers were to use the provided three point
lap/shoulder belt, but not otherwise change their behavior,
fatalities to this group would decline by (43 3)%” [44].
1395These ﬁndings have also interesting implications for novel
research directions in empirical software engineering and
software security economics.
Within empirical software engineering, metrics of devel-
oper behavior (e.g., unfocussed contribution [45], different
development priorities [46], code complexity [47], large code
changes [48], etc.) are often studied to explain code quality.
Yet, as we have seen, for small and medium libraries, devel-
opers ship overwhelmingly other people’s code. So their skills
and behavior as coders which may be captured by the logs
of software repositories only contribute in minimal part to the
quality of the overall code they ship. In contrast, their decision
making behavior about the choice of libraries to be used
as dependencies in one’s own code has much larger impact.
Unfortunately, such behavior is not equally well documented
and captured by traditional software repositories. It might be
captured by NLP analysis of the mailing lists or discussion
blogs of the FOSS project (or company internal mechanisms).
From the perspective of security economics, our empirical
data shows that technical leverage creates a decision dilemma
(a moral hazard in the economics terminology). The beneﬁt
of a large leverage are reaped by the developers who can ship
more code, i.e. more functionalities, with a limited delay of
time interval between releases which is associated with greater
proﬁtability [13] and have been shown to have a log-linear
relation with costs [14]. Yet, the risk of using a vulnerable
software are borne by the users of the library which might be
hit by hackers if they kept an old, vulnerable version that was
however perfectly functional from their perspective (See the
Equifax data breach12). Since updating one’s software is often
not a technically feasible solution, as illustrated by a quanti-
tative study on Android libraries in [49] (almost every second
library update broke the dependent project) and qualitatively
explained in [10], the presence of such dilemma may require
to identify alternative solutions to software updates.
We also plan to investigate the broader impact of the pro-
posed metrics. For example, leverage may predict a boundary
for the amount of dependencies beyond which maintenance
and update become unwieldy: How many are too many? This
might require to correlate leverage with additional metrics
such as the number of open issues, the effort of developers
etc. Also, we may expect that library maintainers prefer dif-
ferent development strategies (captured by change direction),
depending on the stage of maturity of a library and it would
be interesting to determine whether there is such an effect.
Another important direction for future work is the study of the
impact of transitive dependencies on technical leverage albeit
this should be done with care to avoid double or triple counting
[12]. Above all, it will be interesting to further investigate the
impact of technical leverage on other programming languages
and software repositories.
12https://blogs.apache.org/foundation/entry/
media-alert-the-apache-softwareMORE INFORMATION
For the interested readers, we provide an online demo for
computing the proposed metrics for the software libraries
of this study and others at the following URL: https://
techleverage.eu/
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank A.Brucker, G. Kuper and P.Tonella
for their insightful comments on early drafts of this work. The
graphical abstract for this paper is an artwork by Anna Formi-
lanhttp://annaformilan.com. This work was partly funded by
the European Union under the H2020 Programme under grant
n. 952647 (AssureMOSS).
REFERENCES
[1] I. Ozkaya, R. L. Nord, and P. Kruchten, “Technical debt: From metaphor
to theory and practice,” IEEESoftware, vol. 29, no. 06, pp. 18–21, nov
2012.
[2] P. Avgeriou, P. Kruchten, I. Ozkaya, and C. Seaman, “Managing
technical debt in software engineering (dagstuhl seminar 16162),” in
Dagstuhl Reports, vol. 6, no. 4. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
fuer Informatik, 2016.
[3] A. Ampatzoglou, A. Ampatzoglou, A. Chatzigeorgiou, and P. Avgeriou,
“The ﬁnancial aspect of managing technical debt: A systematic literature
review,” Inf. and Softw. Tech. Journ., vol. 64, pp. 52–73, 2015.
[4] C. Bird, T. Menzies, and T. Zimmermann, The art and science of
analyzing software data. Elsevier, 2015.
[5] R. E. Grinter, “Understanding dependencies: A study of the coordination
challenges in software development,” Ph.D. dissertation, Citeseer, 1996.
[6] S. A. Dilawer, Practical Guide of Software Development Project Man-
agement in Practice. Lulu.com, 2011.
[7] P. Mohagheghi and R. Conradi, “Quality, productivity and economic
beneﬁts of software reuse: a review of industrial studies,” Emp. Soft.
Eng. Journ., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 471–516, 2007.
[8] H. Mack and T. Schroer, “Security midlife crisis: Building security in
a new world,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 18, no. 04, pp. 72–74, jul
2020.
[9] M. Pittenger, “Open source security analysis: The state of open source
security in commercial applications,” Black Duck Software, Tech. Rep.,
2016.
[10] I. Pashchenko, D. Vu, and F. Massacci, “A qualitative study of depen-
dency management and its security implications,” in Proc. of CCS’20.
ACM, 2020.
[11] J. Cox, E. Bouwers, M. van Eekelen, and J. Visser, “Measuring
dependency freshness in software systems,” in Proc. of ICSE’15, ser.
ICSE ’15. Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2015, pp. 109–118.
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2819009.2819027
[12] I. Pashchenko, H. Plate, S. E. Ponta, A. Sabetta, and F. Massacci,
“Vulnerable open source dependencies: counting those that matter,” in
Proc. of ESEM’18. ACM, 2018, p. 42.
[13] T. August and M. F. Niculescu, “The inﬂuence of software process
maturity and customer error reporting on software release and pricing,”
Management Science, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 2702–2726, 2013.
[14] H. Huijgens, A. van Deursen, L. Minku, and C. Lokan, “Effort and
cost in software engineering: A comparison of two industrial data sets,”
inProceedings of the 21st International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering. ACM, 2017, pp. 51–60.
[15] R. G. Kula, D. M. German, A. Ouni, T. Ishio, and K. Inoue,
“Do developers update their library dependencies?” Emp. Soft.
Eng. Journ., May 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10664-017-9521-5
[16] S. Dashevskyi, A. D. Brucker, and F. Massacci, “On the effort for
security maintenance of free and open source components,” Proc. of
WEIS’18, 2018.
[17] E. Allman, “Managing technical debt,” Commun. ACM, vol. 55, no. 5,
2012.
[18] A. Kraus and R. H. Litzenberger, “A state-preference model of optimal
ﬁnancial leverage,” J Finance, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 911–922, 1973.
1396[19] M. T. Baldassarre, A. Bianchi, D. Caivano, and G. Visaggio, “An indus-
trial case study on reuse oriented development,” in Proc. of ICSME’05.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 283–292.
[20] M. Morisio, D. Romano, and I. Stamelos, “Quality, productivity, and
learning in framework-based development: An exploratory case study,”
TSE, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 876–888, 2002.
[21] D. Greenlaw, J. Hatzius, A. K. Kashyap, and H. S. Shin, “Leveraged
losses: lessons from the mortgage market meltdown,” in Proceedings of
the US monetary policy forum, vol. 2008, 2008, pp. 8–59.
[22] E. Derr, S. Bugiel, S. Fahl, Y . Acar, and M. Backes, “Keep me updated:
An empirical study of third-party library updatability on android,” in
Proc. of CCS’17, 2017, pp. 2187–2200.
[23] I. Pashchenko, H. Plate, S. E. Ponta, A. Sabetta, and F. Massacci,
“Vuln4real: A methodology for counting actually vulnerable dependen-
cies,” IEEE TSE, 2020.
[24] J. Hejderup, “In dependencies we trust: How vulnerable are dependen-
cies in software modules?” Ph.D. dissertation, Computer Science, 2015.
[25] P. Glasserman and H. P. Young, “Contagion in ﬁnancial networks,” JEL,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 779–831, 2016.
[26] Anonymous, “For blind review,” To be unblinded in the ﬁnal version.
[27] W. S. Humphrey, A discipline for software engineering. Addison-
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1995.
[28] F. P. Brooks Jr et al., The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software
Engineering, Anniversary Edition, 2/E. Pearson Education India, 1995.
[29] J. Aguilar, M. S ´anchez, C. Fern ´andez, E. Rocha, D. Mart ´ınez, and
J. Figueroa, “The size of software projects developed by mexican
companies,” in Proc. of SERP’14. The Steering Committee of The
World Congress in Computer Science, Computer . . . , 2014, p. 1.
[30] J. Benesty, J. Chen, Y . Huang, and I. Cohen, “Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient,” in Noise reduction in speech processing. Springer, 2009,
pp. 1–4.
[31] R. L. Eubank and P. Speckman, “Curve ﬁtting by polynomial-
trigonometric regression,” Biometrika, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 1990.
[32] T. W. Anderson, “An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis,”
Wiley New York, Tech. Rep., 1962.
[33] M. Szumilas, “Explaining odds ratios,” The JCACAP , vol. 19, no. 3, p.
227, 2010.
[34] L. Allodi and F. Massacci, “Comparing vulnerability severity and
exploits using case-control studies,” TISSEC, vol. 17, no. 1, 2014.
[35] R. A. Fisher, “The logic of inductive inference,” J. Royal Stat. Soc.,
vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 39–82, 1935.[36] T. Lauinger, A. Chaabane, S. Arshad, W. Robertson, C. Wilson, and
E. Kirda, “Thou shalt not depend on me: Analysing the use of outdated
javascript libraries on the web,” in Proc. of NDSS’17, 2017.
[37] K. Manikas and K. M. Hansen, “Software ecosystems–a systematic
literature review,” Journ. of Sys. and Soft., vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 1294–
1306, 2013.
[38] K. Manikas, “Revisiting software ecosystems research: A longitudinal
literature study,” Journ. of Sys. and Soft., vol. 117, pp. 84–103, 2016.
[39] ——, “Supporting the evolution of research in software ecosystems:
reviewing the empirical literature,” in Proc. of ICSOB’16. Springer,
2016, pp. 63–78.
[40] V . Boucharas, S. Jansen, and S. Brinkkemper, “Formalizing software
ecosystem modeling,” in In Proc. of IWOCE’09. New York,
NY , USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 41–50. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/1595800.1595807
[41] A. Bonaccorsi and C. Rossi, “Why open source software can succeed,”
RP, vol. 32, no. 7, 2003.
[42] H. Mack and T. Schroer, “Security midlife crisis: Building security in a
new world,” IEEE Sec. and Privacy, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 72–74, 2020.
[43] M. J. Gallivan, “Striking a balance between trust and control in a virtual
organization: a content analysis of open source software case studies,”
ISJ, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 277–304, 2001.
[44] L. Evans, “The effectiveness of safety belts in preventing fatalities,”
Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 229 – 241,
1986. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0001457586900072
[45] A. Meneely and L. Williams, “Secure open source collaboration: an em-
pirical study of linus’ law,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM conference
on Computer and communications security, 2009, pp. 453–462.
[46] R. Peters and A. Zaidman, “Evaluating the lifespan of code smells using
software repository mining,” in Proc. of SANER’12. IEEE, 2012, pp.
411–416.
[47] T. Zimmermann, R. Premraj, and A. Zeller, “Predicting defects for
eclipse,” in Proc. of PROMISE’07. IEEE, 2007, pp. 9–9.
[48] Y . Jiang, B. Cuki, T. Menzies, and N. Bartlow, “Comparing design and
code metrics for software quality prediction,” in Proc. of PROMISE’08,
2008, pp. 11–18.
[49] J. Huang, N. Borges, S. Bugiel, and M. Backes, “Up-to-crash: Evaluating
third-party library updatability on android,” in 2019 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2019, pp. 15–
30.
1397