MoFuzz: A Fuzzer Suite for Testing Model-Driven Software
Engineering Tools
Hoang Lam Nguyen
nguyehoa@informatik.hu-berlin.de
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
GermanyNebras Nassar
nassarn@informatik.uni-marburg.de
Philipps-UniversitätMarburg
Germany
Timo Kehrer
kehrer@informatik.hu-berlin.de
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
GermanyLars Grunske
grunske@informatik.hu-berlin.de
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Germany
ABSTRACT
Fuzzing or fuzz testing is an established technique that aims to
discover unexpected program behavior (e.g., bugs, security vulner-
abilities,orcrashes)byfeedingautomaticallygenerateddatainto
aprogramundertest. However,the applicationoffuzzingtotest
Model-DrivenSoftwareEngineering(MDSE)toolsisstilllimited
becauseofthedifficultyofexistingfuzzerstoprovidestructured,
well-typed inputs, namely models that conform to typing and con-
sistencyconstraintsinducedbyagivenmeta-modelandunderlying
modeling framework. By drawing from recent advances on both
fuzz testing and automated model generation, we present threedifferent approaches for fuzzing MDSE tools: A graph grammar-
basedfuzzerandtwovariantsofacoverage-guidedmutation-based
fuzzer working with different sets of model mutation operators.
Ourevaluationonasetofreal-worldMDSEtoolsshowsthatour
approachescanoutperformbothstandardfuzzersandmodelgener-
ators w.r.t. their fuzzing capabilities. Moreover, we found that each
ofourapproachescomeswithitsownstrengthsandweaknessesin
terms of fault finding capabilities and the ability to cover different
aspects of the system under test. Thus the approaches complement
each other, forming a fuzzer suite for testing MDSE tools.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Softwareanditsengineering →Model-drivensoftwareen-
gineering; Software testing and debugging.
KEYWORDS
Model-Driven Software Engineering, Modeling Tools, Fuzzing, Au-
tomated Model Generation, Eclipse Modeling Framework
ACM Reference Format:
Hoang Lam Nguyen, Nebras Nassar, Timo Kehrer, and Lars Grunske. 2020.
MoFuzz: A Fuzzer Suite for Testing Model-Driven Software Engineering
Permission to make digital or hardcopies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6768-4/20/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416668Tools. In 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’20), September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416668
1 INTRODUCTION
Fuzz testing (aka. fuzzing) automatically generates a large number
of inputs and feeds them to the program under test to discover
unexpectedprogrambehaviorandevaluatetheprogram’sreliability.
SinceitsinitialintroductionbyMilleretal.[ 48],fuzzingviatools
like AFL [ 93,94] has been widely adopted due to its conceptual
simplicityanditsproveneffectiveness[ 29,44,95].Variousadvanced
approaches have been proposed to improve the performance of
fuzzersthroughguidingtheinputgenerationprocess[ 9,10,43,45].
Furtherimprovementshavebeenmadebyincludingtargetedinput
string mutations [63] or problem-specific generators [61].
However,theapplicationoffuzzingtotestModel-DrivenSoft-
ware Engineering (MDSE) tools is still limited. This is due to the
difficultyofexistingfuzzerstoprovidestructured,well-typedin-
puts,namelymodelsthatconformtotypingandconsistencycon-
straintsinducedbyagivenmeta-modelandunderlyingmodeling
framework.
In this paper,we investigatethe fuzzing of MDSE tools which
are based on the Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF) [ 74], a ref-
erence implementation of OMG’s Essential Meta-Object Facility
(EMOF) [59], which has emerged as a de-facto standard in the con-
text of open source MDSE environments and tool chains. Tools
workingwithEMFmodelsasinputhaveaprocessingpipelineas
illustratedinFigure1.Theparsingstagetranslatesamodelfrom
someexternalrepresentation(typicallyanXMIfile[ 58])intoanin-
ternalrepresentation(anobjectstructurewhichcanbeconceptually
considered as an abstract syntax graph (ASG)) which can be easily
processed in terms of the core functionality (e.g., code generation,
model editing, model comparison, etc.) of the tool. Models passing
theparsingstagearesyntacticallyvalidinthesensethattheyre-
spectbasicconsistencyconstraintsimposedbyEMF(aka.validEMF
models[7,50])andtheyareproperlytypedw.r.t.thegivenmeta-
model.Optionally,syntacticallyvalidmodelsmayneedtopassa
validation stage checking further semantic consistency constraints,
notably multiplicity constraints or arbitrary well-formedness rules
(e.g.,formulated in OCL [ 57]) defined by the meta-model. Parsing
andvalidationcorrespondtowhatisreferredtoassyntacticand
semantic stage in [ 61], respectively. Input models may be rejected
11032020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
byeachofthesestages,andthetool’scorefunctionalityremains
untested. Consequently,fuzzers for effectivelytesting EMF-based
toolsmustgenerateinputmodelswhichatleastadheretoEMFand
typingconstraints,arequirementwhichisnotmetbyanyofthe
existing fuzzing approaches.
WepresentMoFuzz,afuzzersuitefortestingMDSEtoolswhich
tackles this challenge by drawing from two research fields that
have developed independently of each other,namely (i) mutation-
andgenerator-basedfuzzing(seeSection2.1),and(ii)automated
modelgeneration(seeSection2.2).Basically,theformerprovides
inspirationtoguideafuzzertowardseffectivelycoveringthesystem
under test (i.e., in our case, the MDSE tool under test), while the
latter provides the technology to generate valid models. While this
idea appears to be obvious, it is yet unclear which combinations of
fuzzing approaches and technologies for model generation are the
most effective ones, which constitutes the main research question weaim to answer in this paper.
Weproposethreedifferentfuzzerstogeneratemodelsthatserve
asinputsforfuzzingMDSEtools:(i)agraphgrammar-basedfuzzer
that attempts to cover different aspects of the input domain as fast
aspossible,andtwomutation-basedapproachesthataimtoincre-
mentally evolve inputs to exercise deep paths using either (ii) a set
of customly defined mutations built on top of the EMF Edit API,or (iii) a set of edit operations specified as model transformationrules which are generated from the given meta-model [
40]. The
graph grammar-based fuzzer is inspired by the idea of using a con-
structive specification of the input format to generate syntactically
valid inputs by construction. While this idea has been explored for
textualinputformatsusingcontext-freegrammars,ourapproach
is integrated with an EMF Model Generator [ 50] which is based on
theconceptofinstance-generatinggraphgrammars.Ourmutation-
based fuzzers are guided in the sense that promising seed inputs
areselectedbyafeedbackloopthatleveragescoverageinformation
fromthesystemundertest.Theirvariationpointliesinthelevel
of consistency being preserved by the model mutations.
Wehaveevaluatedourfuzzingapproachesonasetofreal-world
MDSE tools based on EMF. Our experimental results show that allapproaches can outperform existing fuzzers and automated model
generatorsw.r.t.theeffectivenessoftheirfuzzingcapabilites.More-
over, we found that each of our approaches comes with its own
External model
representation
ParsingMDSE Tool
Core functionalityValidationModel loading
not EMF-compliant
not properly typed
Parsing
Error[optional]
Validation
Errornot well-formedInternal model
representation
Figure 1: Processing pipeline of EMF-based MDSE tools:Models need to be loaded into an ASG-based internal rep-resentationtobeprocessedbythetool;theymustbeatleastEMF-compliant and properly typed w.r.t. the given meta-model such that the tools’s core functionality is reached.strengths and weaknesses in terms of fault finding capabilities and
the ability to cover different aspects of the system under test. Thus
theapproachescomplementeachother,formingafuzzersuitefor
testingMDSEtoolswhichcancontributetoincreasethematurity
of modeling tools. This is still considered as one of the biggest
obstacles for adopting MDSE in practice [85].
2 STATE-OF-THE-ART AND RELATED WORK
OurworkonMoFuzzbuildsonexistingapproachesintwoareas,
namely work on fuzzing in general and work on automated model
generation.Inthefollowing,wereviewthestate-of-the-artonboth
areas and highlight the need for our research on MoFuzz.
2.1 Fuzzing
The main idea behind fuzzing [ 48] is to test the program by repeat-
edlyfeedingitwithrandominputdatathatmaybesyntacticallyor
semantically malformed. Usually, fuzzing approaches are classified
based on the level of program analysis that is employed: blackbox,
whitebox,o r greyboxfuzzing [29,44]. Besides, fuzzing tools can
alsobeclassifiedbasedonhowtheyproducenewtestinputsinto
mutation-based andgenerator-based fuzzers.
2.1.1 Mutation-based Fuzzing. Mutation-basedFuzzerslikezzuf[ 14]
orAFL[94]generatenewinputsbyrandomlymutatingwell-formed
seed inputs. The mutations usually operate on raw test inputs rep-
resented as a sequence of bytes, and ignore complex input (file)
structures.
Advances in fuzzing [ 9,10,43,45] mostly operate on providing
guidance for the mutations and the search process to improve the
coverageofthesystemundertest.Specifically,toolslikeAFLFast[ 10]
use a coverage-guided greybox fuzzing approach to systematically
exploretheinputstatespaceandprioritizemutationsoftestinputsinthefuzzingcorpusthatcovernovelprogramareas.Basedonthisidea,AFLGo[
9]extendedthecoverage-guidedfuzzingideatowards
directedgreyboxfuzzing,bysteeringthesearchthroughselecting
inputs that help to reachspecific code areas instead of novel ones.
In contrast, FairFuzz [ 43] and Steelix [ 45] do not determine which
input to mutate, but how to mutate the input. FairFuzz proposes
a targeted mutation strategy that tries to focus the location in the
input string that will likely generate mutants to hit rarely covered
branches. Similarly, Steelix uses light-weight static analysis to gain
information that pinpoints interesting bytes in the input.
The study by Pham et al. [ 63] shows that randomness of byte
mutationscanbeineffectiveandhencetheyusededicatedstring-
based mutation operators that correspond to the input structure
intheirtoolAFLSmart.TheyshowedthatAFLSmartcanimprove
coverage and identify more vulnerabilities than AFLFast and AFL.
2.1.2 Generator-based Fuzzing. Generator-basedfuzzingaddresses
the limitation of traditional fuzzers like AFL, which are likely tofail to generate valid inputs for programs which expect highly
structured inputs [34, 37, 83].
Totacklethisproblem,generator-basedfuzzerssuchasPeach[ 62]
or Csmith [ 88] leverage domain-specific knowledge of the input
format to generate input files that are syntactically valid by con-
struction.Thegeneratedinputfilesarethusmorelikelytopassthe
earlyinputprocessingstagesandtotestthecorefunctionalityof
1104theprogram.Sometoolsusefileformatspecifications[ 2,62]ora
context-free grammar [34, 37, 80] to describe the syntax of inputs.
Generator-based fuzzers do not require seed inputs. Instead, the
inputfilesareoftengenerated atrandom usingthefileformatspeci-
fication.Adrawbackoftheseapproachesisthatwhilethegenerated
inputsmay be syntacticallyvalid, theyarelikelystill semantically
invalid. For instance, a syntactically correct JavaScript file that
refers to variables that are not defined in the current execution
context will result in an error in the semantic analyzer.
2.1.3 Hybrid Fuzzing Approaches. There are several approaches
thattrytocombinemutation-basedfuzzingmethodswithgenerator-
based methods in order to mitigate their weaknesses.
For example, Skyfire [ 82] learns a probabilistic context-sensitive
grammar from an initial corpus and a context-free grammar in
ordertoproduceacorpusthatconsistsofvalidandwell-distributedinputs.Thegeneratedcorpuscanthenbefedtoanymutation-based
fuzzer (e.g., AFL) to improve the code coverage, thereby increasing
its likelihood of finding vulnerabilities.
In contrast, LangFuzz [ 37] and jsfunfuzz [ 67] use a tight integra-
tion of generator- and mutation-based fuzzing in order to generate
syntacticallycorrectJavaScriptcodefragments.Superion[ 83]e x-
tends Skyfire and applies a greybox fuzzing technique which uses
grammar-aware trimming and mutation strategies. The evaluation
showsthat this approachimprovesthe bug finding capabilities and
code coverage compared to AFL and jsfunfuzz [67].
Finally, Zest [ 61], integrates ideas of coverage-guided fuzzing
(i.e.mutation-basedfuzzing withcoverage-feedback)and random
generator-basedfuzzing.Inparticular,Zesttransformsa(pseudo)
random input generator into a deterministic parametric input gen-
eratorby mapping the random choices of the generator to fixed
bit-parametersequences.Theseparametersequencescanbemu-
tatedusingcommonbit-levelmutationoperatorsinordertodirectly
control the input generation process. By leveraging code coverage
and validity feedback, Zest can then automatically guide the para-
metricgeneratortoproduceinputsthateffectivelytestthesemantic
analysis stage.
2.2 Automated Model Generation
In the last decade, the automatic generation of instances of a given
meta-model has gained considerable attention by the MDSE re-search community. In the sequel, we review existing approaches
w.r.t.totheircapabilitytogeneratevalidEMFmodels,whichhas
emerged as a de-facto standard in MDSE. The internal structure of
anEMF modelcan beconceptually considered as typed attributed
graph (aka. ASG) whose node and edge types are drawn from ameta-model serving as type graph; a formal treatment of typing
conformancecanbefound,e.g.,in[ 7].Inthesequel,westicktothe
object-oriented terminology which is more common in the EMF
community,i.e.,nodes andedges ofa model’sASG arereferred to
asobjectsandreferences,respectively,wherecontainmentsarea
specific kind of reference. An EMF model is said to be valid if it
adherestoallEMFconstraintsasformalizedin[ 7].Mostnotably,
each object must not have more than one container and cycles
ofcontainmentsmustnotoccur.Semanticvalidityisspecifiedby
additionalwell-formednessconstraintsdefinedbyameta-model,
such as multiplicity constraints or arbitrary OCL expressions.Existingapproachestoautomatedmodelgenerationvarysub-
stantially w.r.t. the level of consistency of the generated modelsand the performance of the generation algorithm. Typically, the
higher the consistency guarantees, the slower and less scalable the
modelgeneration.Fromatechnicalpointofview,existingmodel
generation approaches can be classified as follows.
2.2.1 Solver-based Approaches. Solver-based approaches generate
modelsbytranslatingameta-modelintoalogicalformulaandusing
anoff-the-shelfsolvertofindpossiblesolutions.Theapproaches
presentedin[ 46,47,70,78]useAlloy[ 38]forthis purpose.Other
approaches are based on CSP modeling [ 30,35] or rely on SMT
solvers[87].Whilesolver-basedapproachesarecapableofgener-
ating models that respect arbitrary well-formedness constraints,theirscalabilityislimitedtogeneratingprettysmallmodels[
69].
More recently, a graph solver known as VIATRA Solver [ 68,69]
has been presented for the automated generation of valid EMFmodels respecting arbitrary well-formedness rules. While exper-imental results indicate that the approach performs better than
existingapproachesusingAlloy,itsscalabilityandefficiencyisstill
limited [68, 69].
2.2.2 Grammar-based Approaches. Grammar-based approaches
translateagivenmeta-modelservingasdeclarativelanguagespeci-
ficationintoaconstructiveonewhichisthenusedforthesakeof
modelgeneration.Mougenotetal.[ 49]convertagivenmeta-model
intoatreegrammarwhichisusedtouniformlycreatetreestruc-
tures. Uniformity means that for a tree of given size (in number of
nodes),themethodiscapableofuniformlygeneratingalltreestruc-turesofthatsize.However,modelsarereducedtotheircontainment
structure, which is a severe oversimplification in practice.
Ehrig et al. [ 27] present an approach for converting type graphs
with restricted multiplicity constraints into instance-generating
graph grammars that can be used to systematically enumerateall properly typed models of a modeling language. Taentzer [
79]
generalizesthatapproachtoarbitrarymultiplicies.Recently,Nassar
et al. [50] developed the EMF Model Generator, which extends and
advances the ones in [ 27,79] and respects EMF constraints as well.
2.2.3 Mutation-based Approaches. Mutation-basedgeneratorstake
a(potentiallyempty)modelasinputandmanipulateitbyapplying
modelmodifications.TheSiDiffmodel generator(SMG)proposed
by Pietsch et al. [ 64] performs model manipulation by applying
modeleditingoperations.However,theSMGneedstobeconfigured
by a stochastic controller which needs to be trained on a real-
world model history. It has mainly been developed as a testbed
for evaluating different learning strategies [ 89–92]. In contrast, the
AtlanMod EMF Random Instantiator [ 5], an EMF-based tool which
is still under active devlopment, can be used out of the box. It
generatesEMFmodelsbyusingprobabilitydistributionsforeach
meta-class and property defined by the meta-model, with uniform
distributions as the default configuration.
2.3 Need for Further Research
Mutation-based and generator-based fuzzers are applied to cre-
atetestinputsindifferentinput-fileformats,includingXSLTand
XML[9,43,61,82,83],jpegandpng[ 9,43],Javascript[ 61,83],just
tonameafew.However,whilesomeofthem,notablyXMLformats,
1105are similar to external representations of models serialized in XMI,
thereisafundamentaldifferencew.r.t.totheirinternalstructure.
First, structured representations of models form an abstract syntax
graph(ASG),insteadofa strictlyhierarchical documentobjectmodel
(aka.DOMtree).Second,thiscomplexityisfurtheraggravatedby
the fact that a model’s ASG must at least be properly typed and
adhere to validity constraints of the underlying modeling frame-
work (e.g., EMF) to pass the model loading process (cf. Figure 1).
Such consistency constraints in the input files are typically not
enforced by traditional XML-based tools (e.g., office environments
orwebbrowsers)whichhavebeenconsideredassystemundertest
in previous approaches on structure-aware fuzzing.
On the contrary, existing work on automated model generation
providesthetechnologytogeneratesyntacticallyorevenseman-
ticallyvalidmodels.However,therehasbeenlimitedresearchon
their capabilities for the sake of fuzz testing MDSE tools. Previous
applicationsofautomatedmodelgenerationincludebenchmarking
model queries and transformations [ 6,77], model-driven search
andoptimization[ 8,96],orvalidatingthesuitabilityofMDSEtools
to deal with large input models [ 1,19,33]. An application scenario
which is close to ours is model transformation testing. This has
been first addressed by Fleurey et al. [ 31], motivated by the con-
cept of equivalence classes in black-box testing, and later beenextended and implemented in [
13,42,84]. The basic idea is that
equivalence classes are formed by certain meta-model patterns,
andthegeneratedmodelsshouldrepresentsuitablerepresentatives
of these equivalence classes. The goal, however, is to find bugsin application-specific model transformations, while we aim for
testing generic or language-specific MDSE tools.
The closest related work focuses on the automated differen-
tial testing of cyber-physical system (CPS) tool chains (e.g., Mat-
lab/Simulink).CyFuzz[ 16]randomlygenerates(possiblyinvalid)
models and attempts to iteratively fix them based on the errormes-
sages of the system under test. However, since this approach is
unable to produce large, realistic models, it has been subsequently
improved by incorporating semi-formalspecifications[ 17]as well
as CPS language-specific mutation techniques [ 18]. While these
techniqueshavebeenshowntobeeffective,theyaretightlycou-
pled with Simulink, which limits the portability to other modeling
languages and MDSE tool suites. In contrast, our goal is to develop
afuzzersuitewhichisbasedonEMFandthusapplicabletoawider
rangeofgeneral-purposeaswellasdomain-specificMDSEtools.
Anothertechnique,DeepFuzzSL[ 72],learnsalanguagemodelfrom
existingvalidSimulink models and isable togenerate further valid
models with high probability, though it requires a large number of
seed models for deep learning. Since their accessibility is often lim-
ited (see, e.g., [ 11]), we aim to abstain from relying on seed models
but only require to have access to a meta-model that describes the
abstractsyntaxaswellasthestaticsemanticsofitsinstancemodels.
Thisisareasonableassumptionsincemeta-modelsarethestandard
way to define a modeling language, and they can be expected to be
publicly available in the context of the EMF ecosystem.
Insum,itisyetunclearwhichcombinationsoffuzzingapproaches
and technologies for model generation are the most effective
onesforfuzztestingMDSEtools,which constitutestheguiding
researchquestion weaim to answerin this paper.3 APPROACH
3.1 Overview
A general overview of our fuzzer suite called MoFuzz is given in
Figure 2. It takes as input the meta-model of the input domain
as well as the MDSE tool to be tested. Internally, we build upon
JQF[60](version1.4),afeedback-directedfuzztesting framework
forJava.JQFperformson-the-flybytecodeinstrumentationtomea-surecodecoverageandrepeatedlyexecutestheprogramundertest
using inputs provided by custom input generators. Furthermore,
JQFprovidesimplementationsforvariousfuzzingalgorithms,in-
cludingtheZestalgorithm(seeSection2.1.3),whichwillbeused
as a baseline technique in our evaluation.
Weprovidethreedifferentinputgenerationstrategies:(i)agraph
grammar-based method that attempts to cover different aspectsof the input domain as fast as possible by leveraging a recently
introduced efficient model generator [ 50], and two mutation-based
approaches that aim to incrementally evolve inputs to exercisedeep paths using either (ii) a set of customly defined mutations
builtontopofthegenericEMFEditAPI,or(iii)asetofconsistency-
preserving edit operations (CPEOs) specified as model transforma-
tionruleswhicharegeneratedfromthegivenmeta-modelusing
the approach [40] and supporting tool suite presented in [39, 66].
3.2 Generator-Based Fuzzing
The main aim of using a generator-based fuzzing approach is to
generate models covering different aspects of the input domainas fast as possible while adhering to a high level of consistency.
Although the strongest consistency guarantees are provided by
solver-based generators (see Section 2.2), existing tools are waytoo inefficient for our purpose of fuzzing; they fail to generatelarge numbers of models in a short amount of time. From the re-maining model generators, the EMF Model Generator which has
beenrecentlypresentedbyNassaretal.[ 50]representsthemost
promising trade-off between consistency and performance. The
generated models are valid EMF models which are properly typed
and which respect well-formedness rules up to arbitrary multiplic-
ity constraints defined by the meta-model. Additionally, the tool
cangeneratelargevalidmodels(withuptohalfamillionelements)
in a few minutes (in less than 2 minutes for simple meta-modelsand in about 30 minutes for more comprehensive ones). For the
sake of self-containedness, we briefly recall the general model gen-
erationprocess,beforewepresentthespecificconfigurationwhich
is integrated into our fuzzing suite MoFuzz.
3.2.1 Graph Grammar-based Model Generation. Followingthetyp-
icalschemaofgrammar-basedapproachestomodelgeneration,the
EMF Model Generator translates a meta-model into a constructive
languagespecification(i.e.,thegrammar)whichcanbethenused
for the sake of model generation. Here, the grammar is realized
as a model transformation system (MTS) which is implemented in
therule-based transformation language Henshin [ 4,76].Different
kinds of rules and transformation units are designed to increasethemodel size,handle andimprovethe degree of violations,andto support user parameterizations. The MTS can be then used togenerate EMF models according to various strategies. Typically,
the model generation is performed in twophases. First, the model
1106
 

 
!  ! 
" 
! 

!##$$
 

!##$$
!!
!##$$
%

 & $
!##

!  $
!##
Figure 2:High-leveloverviewof MoFuzz.
increasephasecreatesmodelelementswithoutviolatinguppermul-
tiplicitybounds.Then,the modelcompletion phasecompletesthe
intermediate model to a valid EMF model through interacting with
the model repair tool EMF Repair [51, 52].
3.2.2 MoFuzz-Specific Generation Strategy. Forthesakeoffuzzing,
weconfigurethemodelincreasephasewithtwokindsofproduc-
tion rules: additional-node-creation andadditional-edge-creation.
The former create an ASG object of a certain type together with its
incoming containment reference from a suitable container, and the
latterinsertsacross-treereferencebetweentwosuitableexisting
objects. The rules are derived for each meta-class and reference
typeofthemeta-modelandequippedwithapplicationconditions
to prevent introducing upper bound violations and to preserve the
EMF constraints. All rules are wrapped into one so-called indepen-
dentunit,whichiterativelyexecutesoneofitscomprisedrulesina
non-deterministic way.
Derivedfromouroverallaimsofusingagenerator-basedfuzzer,
the intuitions behind this strategy are as follows: The rules are
designed to be atomic, i.e., they perform basic changes, and thus
allpossiblestructuresofamodelcanbeproduced.Byconstruction,
the rules cover all the meta-model types. Thus, they can broadly
exploreand produce all possible valid EMF models for the given
meta-model.Moreover,findingarulematchishighly efficientsince
itrequiresoccurrencesofasmall-sizedgraphpatterntobefound.
The classification into two different kinds of rules increases the
possibility of finding an applicable rule. Additionally, their atomicdesign increases the flexibility of combining them in any order. Fi-
nally,thisstrategystartsthemodelgenerationprocess fromscratch,
and thus, it is independent of the quality of a given seed model
which, in principle, could be fed as an input into the EMF Model
Generator.Thisstrategycangeneratelargemodelsefficiently.In
MoFuzz, however, we choose a setting that limits the model size to
avoid scalability problems of executing the MDSE tools under test
(thelimithasbeensetto500elementsinourexperimentspresented
in Section 4).3.3 Mutation-Based Fuzzing
In this approach, we propose to adopt one of the most widely used
techniquesinautomatedfaultdetection,namelycoverage-guided
greyboxfuzzing(CGF)[ 9,10,43,45,61],tothedomainofMDSE.
Based on a set of initial inputs, CGF iteratively applies various
mutations to the inputs to produce new test inputs. The key idea is
thentoretainonlythosenewinputsthatincreasecoverage,thus
effectively exploring the program space in an iterative manner. In
particular,weproposetoimplementCGFintwophases,a generation
phaseand amutation phase :
In thegeneration phase, random seed models are generated until
a pre-configured target meta-model coverage has been achieved.
The goal is to have a diverse set of seed inputs that cover different
aspects oftheprogramundertest. However,weinitializeour inputqueuewithonlythemostrecent(e.g.,50asusedinourexperiments)
inputs that covered new parts of the MDSE tool under test. The
intuitionbehind thisapproachisthat thefirst inputsusually only
coverprogramlocationsthatcanbetriviallyreached.Incontrast,
laterinputsthatarestillabletoexecuteadditionalcoveragebeyond
those trivial paths may be more worthwhile to retain.
Inthemutationphase,aninputmodelisselectedfromthequeue
and a set of mutations is applied to it. As described earlier, if the
mutated input executes newcoverage,it is also added to the queue,otherwise it is discarded. This process is repeated until the timeout
isreachedortheusermanuallyabortstheprocess.However,tra-
ditional fuzzers that utilize CGF usually operate on binary/textual
inputs and therefore apply mutations on the bit-level, which is not
veryeffectivefortheinputdomainofinstancemodels.Thus,we
requiremutationoperatorsthatoperatedirectlyonthemodel-level
instead.
Weprovidetwoconcreteimplementationsoftheabovedescribed
two-phased approach, namely one that makes use of the genericEMF Edit API (Section 3.3.1) and one that is based on rule-based
mutations (Section 3.3.2).
3.3.1 Custom Mutations Based on the Generic EMF Edit API. Forthe
first technique, we use different kinds of model mutations in order
to address the different requirements of each of the two phases.
SincethemutationoperatorsareimplementedbasedontheEMF
Edit API, we refer to this technique as MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit.
(1) Generation phase: Forthethegenerationphase,webuild
upon the existing EMF Random Instantiator [5] developed by the
NaoMod team, formerly known as AtlanMod (see Section 2.2.3).
SimilartotheapproachbyMougenotetal.[ 49],theEMFrandom
instantiatorrandomlygeneratesEMFmodelsbyutilizingthecon-
tainment hierarchy defined by a given meta-model in two steps:
First,thecontainmenttreeispopulatedwithrandomlyinitialized
objects in a depth-first manner until a pre-configured target sizeis reached. The tree traversal may be pruned at random pointsor if a pre-configured maximum depth is reached. The result isa model that conforms to the containment hierarchy defined by
the meta-model. Second, cross-tree references are created based on
theavailabletypesinthepartialmodel.Thisisdonebyiterating
througheachobjectinthemodelandsettingcrossreferencesfor
which a suitable opposite object exists.
Togetahighdiversityofinstantiatedmodelstructuresinthegen-
eratedseedmodels,weadapttheoriginalrandomselectionstrategy
1107by prioritizing uncovered classes and reference types defined by
themeta-model.Thisiscommonforgrammar-basedfuzzerswhich
operateonderivationtrees,wherepreviouslyuncoveredexpansion
rules are prioritized to achieve higher grammar coverage.
(2)MutationPhase: ThemutationsbasedontheEMFEditAPI
operate on individual objects in the model and thus do not require
complexgraphpatternstobefoundbyacomputationallyintensive
matching algorithm. In particular, the following mutations have
been implemented:
•Addobject :Addsoneormoreobjectstothemodelaccord-
ingtothecontainmenthierarchyofthemeta-model.Meta-
classesthathavenotbeeninstantiatedbeforeareprioritized.
•Deleteobject :Deletesoneobjectandalltransitivelycontained
objects, including allcross-tree referencesto other objects.
•Change attributes : Randomly mutates all attributes of an
object.
•Unsetattributes :Unsetsallattributesofanobject.Thatis,all
attribute values are setto their default values.
•Change cross references : Changes the cross-tree references
for all objects in the model.
•Replace subtree : Deletes a subtree in the containment tree
of the model and replaces it with a randomly generated
containment tree of apre-configured size.
In principle, the mutation operations to be applied could be
selected uniformly . However, the application of the Delete object
mutationcouldleadtomoredrasticchangescomparedtothe Unset
attributes mutation. Further, the application of the Change cross
references mutation is computationally very expensive and thus
should be applied less frequently. Therefore, our default implemen-
tation prioritizes the mutation operators in the following order
whenselectingarandommutationtoapply:(1)Additionofobjects,
(2) Change/Unset attributes and Replace subtree, (3) Change cross
references, and (4) Delete object.
Comparedtosolver-basedorgraph-grammar-basedmethods,the
EMFAPIbasedoperationsaremoreefficientastheydonotrequire
toperform anyexpensiveconstraintsolving orgraph transforma-
tion operations. However, only basic consistency constraints are
considered,namelyconsistentcontainmenthierarchyandproper
typing; any further constraints (see Section 2.2) may be violated.
We tolerate this since, with this technique , we favor speed over
consistency. We rely on the evolutionary algorithm to filter out
inputmodelsthataretoomalformedandthusdonotexposenew
parts of the tested MDSE tool’s core functionality.
3.3.2 Rule-Based Mutations Derived from the Meta-Model. Our
second coverage-guided fuzzer, referred to as MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo
inFigure2,usesrule-basedmodeltransformationsbeingderived
fromagivenmeta-model[ 40]asmodelmutations.Thetransforma-
tion rule generator has been originally designed with the aim of
producingdeclarativespecificationsofeditoperations(usingtheHenshintransformationlanguage)whichareavailableasediting
commands in visual model editors. These edit operations must pre-
serve the level of consistency being enforced by standard visual
editors,whichcomprisesbasictypingandEMFconstraints.Inad-
dition,arestrictedsetofmultiplicitiesisenforced,notablylower
bounds, in order to keep a model in a graphically displayable state.
For example, associations in a UML class diagram must contain atleasttwoassociationends(aka.mandatorychildren),eachofwhichmustbeconnectedtoasuitableclassifier(aka.mandatoryneighbor).
Comparedto the custommutations presented inthe previoussec-
tion, our main intuition of using such consistency-preserving edit
operations (CPEOs) for fuzzing is to synthesize models on a higher
level of consistency, which are thus supposed to more reliably pass
the model loading pipeline depicted in Figure 1.
The general kinds of CPEOs are similar to our customly defined
mutations,comprisingoperationsforthecreation,deletion,moving
and changing of model elements:
•Nodecreation rulescreateanASGobjectofaspecifictype.In
contrasttoourAPI-basedobjectcreations,thecreatedobject
is immediately connected to its container, and mandatory
children and neighbors are created, too. All attribute values
of createdobjects areset along with their creation.
•Edgecreation rulesarelimitedtothecreationofcross-tree
referencesbetween existingsourceand target ASG objects.
•Nodeandedgedeletions areperformedbyrulesbeinginverse
to node andedge creationrules, respectively.
•Move and change rules re-structure the relations between
existing ASG objects. While a move rule moves an object
fromonecontainertoanotherone,achangerulejustchangesthetargetobjectofacross-treereference.Likewise,attribute
values can be changed from an old value to a new one.
Boththegenerationandthemutationphaseofourfuzzeruses
CPEOs from the above set. However, during the generation phase,
onlynodeandedgecreationrulesareselectedinordertoquickly
reachacertaindegreeofmeta-modelcoverage.Duringthemutation
phase,allkindsofCPEOsareusedtomutatethemostpromising
models in our feedback loop queue.
In contrast to the strategy of applying API-based mutations, we
chooseauniformprobabilitydistributionoverallkindsofCPEOs
for selecting the next mutation. The rationale behind this choice is
that node deletions and movements cannot lead to drastic changes
as it is the case for our API-based mutations. This is due to the
factthattheeditrulesspecifyingaCPEOareappliedbytheHen-
shin transformation engine by checking the so-called dangling
condition imposed by the double-pushout approach to graph trans-
formation [ 26]. The dangling condition prevents a rule from being
applicableifitwouldleadtodanglingreferencesintheASG,which
in turns means that we cannot delete larger sub-graphs in a single
transformation step specified by a CPEO. Larger sub-graphs can
only be deleted in a stepwise manner, starting from the leafs of the
containment tree.
4 EXPERIMENTALEVALUATION
Inthissection,wepresentanexperimentalevaluationofourfuzzersuite;thesourcecodeofMoFuzzaswellasthebenchmarksubjects
are publicly available at: https://github.com/hub-se/MoFuzz.
4.1 Study Design
4.1.1 Experimental Subjects. Theidealformofevaluationwould
be to assess the performance of our fuzzer suite on an established
benchmarklikeGoogle’sFuzzBench[ 36],asiscustomaryfortra-
ditional fuzzers and which is also required for sound experimen-
tal evaluation[ 41]. However, none of these benchmarks comprise
1108MDSE tools serving as program under test, and there is yet no
benchmarkforfuzztestingMDSEtools,whichwearepioneering
in this work. To that end, we selected a set of real-world MDSE
toolsasexperimental subjects.All toolsarepublicly available,im-
plemented in Java and on top of EMF and provide a suitable test
driver serving as entry point for the fuzzing:
EMF2GraphViz [12] generates graphical representations of
EMF models based on the GraphViz [ 28] utility. The test driver
performs the generation using the default graphical description.
UMLValidator is a utility class of the Eclipse UML2 project
[21]tovalidatealltypesofUMLmodelelements.Thetestdriver
performs the validation of a given UML model by simply iterating
through all model elements and validating them successively (this
includes checking multiplicity constraints as well as verifying the
presence of required containments and attributes).
UML2Java [53]generatesJavasourcecodefromUMLmodels.It
is one of the examples delivered with the template-based code gen-
eratorAcceleo[ 32],areferenceimplementationofOMG’sMOFM2T
standard[ 54]forperformingmodel-to-texttransformations.The
test driver performs the transformation with the default options.
UML2OWL [25]transformsUMLmodelstoWebOntologyLan-
guage (OWL) [ 86] models, as described in OMG’s ODM specifi-
cation [55]. The model-to-model transformation is implemented
basedontheAtlasTransformationLanguage(ATL)[ 23].Again,the
test driver performs the transformation with the default options.
EMFCompare [22]is astandardtoolfor comparingand merg-
ingEMFmodelsinthecontextofmodelversioning.Thetestdrivercomputesthedifferencebetweentwomodelsprovidedasinputand
attempts to merge them into one model.
EcoreUtil [24] is a library included in EMF that provides differ-
ent utility methods to modify and inspect EMF models. The testdriver performs multiple of these operations on the input model,
namely copy, deletion, and computation of arbitrary properties.
The selected subjects cover a wide range of different MDSE-
specifictasksandapplications,includingmodel-to-modelandmodel-
to-code transformations, model validation, model comparison and
merging, as well as a basic library for implementing modeling
tools.Inaddition,oursubjectselectionincludesbothgenericand
language-specifictools,wherethelatterarebasedonanEMF-based
implementation of the UML meta-model. All of our selected sub-jects are still under active development, heavily used within the
MDSEcommunity,andtheyhaveadevelopmenthistoryofmore
than a decade. Thus, we can assume a certain level of maturity
forall of our subjects; theyareunlikely tocomprise shallowbugs,rendering fault finding through fuzzing into a non-trivial task.
4.1.2 Configuration of the Fuzzer Suite. Although our fuzzer suite
couldworkwithanyEMF-basedmeta-modelforfuzztestingthe
generic tools, in our experiments, we stick to using the UML meta-
model for this purpose to enable a better comparison between the
different experimental subjects. Furthermore, the UML is a well-known and comprehensive modeling language which is defined
bya meta-model whose complexityis comparable toother propri-
etary modeling languages and tools such as Matlab/Simulink or
ETAS/Ascet.
As for algorithmic parameters, we set a maximum target size of
500forthegeneratedmodels asamiddlegroundbetweenmodelsthat are too simple to exercise interesting program functionality
andmodelsthat aretoo largetobegenerated withinareasonable
time for all approaches. However, Zest may dynamically adjust the
actualtargetcountaspartofitsparametersearchalgorithm.For
themutation-basedfuzzers,welimitthesizeoftheirinputqueue
to store at most 50 models that executed new program parts.
4.1.3 Baseline Selection. We have selected Zest [ 61] and the EMF
Random Instantiator [ 5] (for brevity, from now on referred to as
AtlanModgeneratorduetoitshistoricalorigin,seeSection2.2.3)as
baseline for our comparativebenchmark. Each of them represents
a state-of-the-art tool of the two fields of research, structure-aware
fuzzing and automated model generation, which we integrate in
this paper.
4.1.4 Number of Trials and Repetitions. Due to the fundamental
random nature of fuzzing (most notably when performing muta-
tions), the performance of the fuzzer can vary across multiple runs.
Toaccountforthis,30trialsareperformedforeachsubject.Results
arereportedintermsofmeanandstandarddeviation.Furthermore,
statisticaltestsareperformedinordertodeterminewhetherany
observed differences are statistically significant. For randomized
testing algorithms, Arcuri and Briand [ 3] suggest to use the Mann-
Whitney 𝑈test (also known as the Wilcoxon rank-sum test).
Anotherimportantquestionishowlongtorunthefuzzeroneach
subject, since the performance of the fuzzer may vary over time as
well. For instance, certain program regions may only be accessible
if the input meets highly specific criteria. As a consequence, as
long as the fuzzer is unable to generate such inputs, these regions
(possiblycontainingmanypaths)cannotbeexplored.Commonly
used timeouts in research range between a few hours [ 15,61]t o
1 day [9,43,65]. In this evaluation, a timeout of 1 hour is used,
as preliminary test runs revealed that map coverage (see below)
plateaued for almost all test subjects after this time.
4.1.5 Instrumentation. Inordertoaccuratelymeasurehoweffec-
tivelyeachapproachcancoverthecorefunctionalitiesofthediffer-entsubjects,weonlyincludetherelevantpackagesinthebytecode
instrumentation to determine the covered branches. That is, we
excludecoverageresultsfromcommonexternallibrariessuchas
theEclipseModelingFramework.Otherwise,dueto thelargesize
of the libraries compared to the benchmark subjects, the coverage
results would not accurately reflect the coverage of the subjects,
but rather those of the libraries.
4.1.6 Hardware. All experiments were conducted on a machine
with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) E7-4880 2.5GHz CPU and 1TB of RAM
running openSUSE Leap 15.
4.2 ResearchQuestions
Using the described experimental setup, we strive to answer the
following researchquestions to evaluatethe suitability of MoFuzz
to test model-driven software development tools:
•RQ1(Coverage): CanMoFuzzimprovethecodecoverage
when fuzzing MDSE tools compared to the two baseline
approaches?(Section 4.3.1)
1109•RQ2(FaultFinding): CanMoFuzzimprovethefaultfinding
capabilities when fuzzing MDSE tools compared to the two
baseline approaches? (Section 4.3.2)
4.3 Experimental Results
4.3.1 RQ1 Coverage Results. Toassesscoverage,weusethe map
coveragemetricthatisprovidedbytheJQFframework[ 60].Due
totheenormousnumberofprogramexecutionsduringafuzzing
trial,computingthecoverageforeachrunshouldbeaslightweight
aspossible.Therefore,JQF efficientlymaps eachbranch executed
duringafuzzingruntoaspecificentryinafixed-sizecoveragemap
andreportsthefractionofnon-zeroentriesasthemapcoverage.
Themapcoveragecanthusbeinterpretedasanapproximateproxy
for the actual branch coverage. Since the size of the map is usually
muchlargerthanthetotalbranchcount,themapcoveragetypically
corresponds to a small fraction of the actual branch coverage. In
particular,thecoveragemaphasbydefaultasizeof216−1,similar
tothesizeofthecoveragemapusedbyAFL1.Fullbranchcoverage
ofaprogramthatcontains10 ,000brancheswouldthustranslateto
about 15% map coverage.Asa result, in terms of our experiments,
relativedifferencesbetweentheresultsaremoreimportanttojudge
about the fuzzers’ performances than the absolute percentages
reached by the tools.
Figure3 plots themap coverageovertime for eachsubjectand
technique,whereeachplotshowstheaveragemapcoverageover
the 30 trials at each time point. The overallresultsarereported in
Table 1, which describes the average final coverage achieved after
the1htimeoutaswellasthestandarddeviation.Theresultsindicate
that for all benchmark subjects, except for UML2Java, one or more
of our proposed techniques was able to significantly outperform
the baseline approaches (highlighted cells). On the contrary, allapproaches could perform equally well on UML2Java, which is a
rather simple subject compared the other ones.
Overall,theAtlanModgeneratorperformedtheworstintermsof
coverage. This was also expected due to the complete random gen-
erationapproach.Further,whileZestisabletoeffectivelyguidethegeneratortoincrementallyincreasecoverage,itstillfallsshortcom-paredtoourtechniquesandalsoproduceslessstableresults.Onthe
otherhand,MoFuzz-emf-modelgenandMoFuzz-cgf-emfeditper-
formed the best out of all techniques, with MoFuzz-emf-modelgen
generally having the fastest and highest overall map coverage.
WhileMoFuzz-cgf-cpeowasabletooutperformAtlanModformost
subjects,theimprovementwastypicallynotenoughtosurpassZest
aswell.Onepossiblereasonforthismightbethatthemodelgen-
eration process is slightly slower for MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo. The graph
patternscomprisedbymostHenshinrulesimplementingCPEOs
areconsiderablylargerthantherulepatternsusedbyMoFuzz-emf-
modelgen, which leads to longer matching times when the rules
are applied.
BasedontheseresultswecanconcludethatMoFuzzcanimprove
codecoveragewhenfuzzingMDSEtoolscomparedtobaseline
methods.
1AFL uses a coverage map size of 216, which has empirically been found to be a good
trade-off between precision and performance [ 93]. In JQF, this value is adjusted to
further reduce collisions.4.3.2 RQ 2: Crashes Found. Table2presentsthecrashesthatwe
haveencounteredoverthecourse ofour experimentalevaluation.
If one of the approaches was able to trigger the crash, we reportthe mean time (
±standard deviation) to find the crash as well as
howreliablythecrashcouldbeexposed.Thereliabilityindicates
thefractionoftrialswheretheapproachwasabletoidentifythe
crash at least once.
Comparedtothebaselineapproaches,in11outof12crashesone
ofour techniques alwayseither: (1) triggeredthe crashas reliably
asthebaseline,(2)triggeredthecrashwithahigherreliability,or(3)exposedacrashthatcouldnotevenbefoundbyanyofthebaselinemethods. The only exception is EcoreUtil-1, which Zest can expose
more reliably, but on average takes significantly longer to do so. In
particular, for all crashes but EMFCompare-3, at least one of ourproposed techniques was able to find the crash in a significantly
faster time compared to the baseline methods.
Overall, the MoFuzz fuzzer suite found 12 crashes, while the
combinedbaselinewasonlyabletoexposeasubsetofit(8crashes),asillustratedinFigure4.Whilesomeofthediscoveredcrashesmay
have the same exception type (e.g., the ClassCastExceptions and
StackOverflowErrors), each of our individual fuzzers was also able
to trigger a unique crash that has not been covered by any other
method (UML2Java-1, EMFCompare-2, and EMF2Graphviz-3).
Therefore,theresultsindicatethatourproposedtechniquesare
indeedperformingbetterintermsofbugfindingcapabilitiescom-
pared to the baseline methods.
4.4 QualitativeAnalysis of Selected Crashes
To identify if MoFuzz has found real bugs, we have qualitatively
analyzed them and report some details below.
4.4.1 RuntimeException in UML2OWL. Thiscrashoccurswhenthe
modelcontainsanobjectofthemeta-class Slotthatdoesnothave
a value for the DefiningFeature reference. The model transfor-
mation attempts to access this field without validating its presence
beforehand. Thus, a straightforward fix would be to validate the
model with the UMLValidator before actually executing the trans-
formation.Whilethiserrorhasbeentriggeredbyeachapproach,itisnottrivialastherandomAtlanModgeneratorwasabletoexpose
the crash with a reliability of only 60%.
4.4.2 ClassCastException in UMLValidator. This exception can be
triggered by generating a model that has the following properties:
(a) The model contains a ProtocolStateMachine object𝑃, which
itselfcontainsa FunctionBehavior object𝐹,(b)𝐹hasacross-tree
referenceoftype RedefinedClassifier to𝑃,and(c)𝑃hasacross-
tree reference of type OwnedBehavior to𝐹.
The validation of the FunctionBehavior instance 𝐹includes
validating the RedefinedClassifier reference, which results in
theClassCastException . Triggering this crash thus requires (i)
creating specific meta-class instances in a particular hierarchy and
(ii) setting particular cross-tree references to the right targets. Ran-
domgenerationmethodsarelikelytomissthiscrashasthespecific
meta-classesarenottrivialtoreachduringmodelgeneration.On
the other hand, the Zest-guided generator takes significantly more
1110MoFuzz: A Fuzzer Suite for TestingModel-DrivenSoftwareEngineering Tools ASE’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event,Australia
(a)UML2Java (b) EcoreUtil
(c) EMFCompare (d) UMLValidator
(e) UML2OWL (f) EMF2GraphViz
Figure3:Averagemapcoverageovertime(30trials,1htimeout).Mapcoverageiscalculatedasthenumberofnon-zeroentries
in the coverage map with a fixed size of 216−1. A map coverage of 1% thus corresponds roughly to 655 covered branches.
Subject Baseline approaches MoFuzz Fuzzer Suite
Baseline-AtlanMod Baseline-Zest MoFuzz-emf-modelgen MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo
UML2Java 3.15(±0.02) 3.53(±0.02) 3.49(±0.03) 3.54(±0.01) 3.43(±0.01)
EcoreUtil 4.61(±0.10) 7.44(±0.51) 7.84(±0.03) 7.72(±0.36) 6.90(±0.16)
EMFCompare 2.27(±0.09) 2.23(±0.15) 2.38(±0.01) 2.35(±0.01) 0.71(±0.78)
UMLValidator 4.37(±0.14) 6.89(±0.73) 7.58(±0.09) 7.38(±0.29) 7.05(±0.05)
UML2OWL 1.955(±0.007) 1.969(±0.007) 1.979(±0.003) 1.974(±0.005) 1.977(±0.006)
EMF2GraphViz 4.56(±0.10) 5.88(±0.82) 7.76(±0.20) 7.29(±0.30) 7.30(±0.12)
Table 1: Average map coverage after 1h timeout over 30 trials ( ±standard deviation). Highlighted values indicate significant
improvements over both baseline approaches according to the Mann-Whitney 𝑈test (𝛼=.05).
1111

	




	
	

	




Figure 4: The number of crashes found by each approach.
Left:TheMoFuzzfuzzersuitetriggeredallcrashesfoundbythe baseline, plus additional four crashes. Right: Compari-sion of individual MoFuzz fuzzers, each of them exposes aunique crash.
time to reveal the crash as its mutations usually modify the model
more drastically compared to our targeted mutation operators.
4.5 Threats to Validity
Internal Validity. Threats to internal validity are related to po-
tential systematic errors during the performed experiments. Tocounteract these threats, we have carefully designed our experi-
mentsandfollowedtheexperimentalguidelinesbyKleesetal.[ 41].
Themainthreattotheinternalvalidityoftheresults(i.e.,thedegree
to which possible sources of systematic errors can be ruled out)
istheselectionofexperimentalparameters.Thisincludesparam-
eterswhichhavebeenchosenheuristicallybasedonpreliminary
test runs, including the duration of each fuzzing run as well asthe model generator configuration parameters. In particular, ourselected target model size of 500 elements may have affected theexperimental results, and much larger models might allow more
complexcrashestobeexposed.Further,thebaselinetoolshavebeenexecutedusingtheirdefaultconfigurationsonly,thoughalternative
configurationscouldhaveproduceddiffer entresults.However,a
detailed parameter sensitivity analysis is out of the scope of this
paper.Anothercommonthreattointernalvalidityforfuzzingex-
perimentsisthattheymightbeinfluencedbyrandomselections,
e.g.,whenchoosingmutationoperationsorgraphgrammarrules.
While this has been addressed by running 30 runs for each subject,
itcannotbeguaranteedthatallapproachesareequallyrobusttotheeffectofsuchselections.Theexperimentaldatacollectionandanal-
ysismethodscanalsoposeathreattointernalvalidity.However,
the whole process has been fully automated, and all results have
beencalculatedusingwell-knownlibrariesforscientificcomputing,
including NumPy [56] and SciPy [81].
ConstructValidity. Ourexperimentsrelyonevaluationmetrics
that may affect the construct validity of the results. For the first
researchquestion,weusedthemapcoverageprovidedbyJQFfor
measuring the coverageof the MDSE tools under test. This metric
can be less accurate than branch coverage due to the possibility of
collisionsinthecoveragemap.However,forallbenchmarksubjects,
less than 10% (about 6500 branches) of the total coverage map was
actually utilized, making a significant influence from collisions
unlikely.Additionally,theusageofcoveragemetricsingeneralis
questionable, since the goal of fuzzing tools is to find bugs. This isalso why we focussed our evaluation more on the second research
question that analyses the bug finding capability. However, for
completeness reasons, we report also the coverage results, similar
tootherstudies[ 9,10,43,45,61].Afinalproblemwithconstruct
validityis that the experiments justcomparethe performance of
thetoolsandnottheirunderlyingconcepts,whichisaninherent
problemofexperimentalevaluations. However,at leastsomeofthe
tools used in our experiments are built on top of each other, and
this is wherewe could reliably isolate the effects of the individual
conceptual contributions.
ExternalValidity. Toevaluatethreatstoexternalvaliditywe
have to answer the question whether our results are generalizable
to other MDSE tools. We choose EMF2GV [ 12], UMLValidator [ 21],
UML2Java [ 53], UML2OWL [ 25], EMFCompare [ 22], and Ecore-
Utils[24]assubjectsbecauseoftheirwidespreadadoptioninthe
MDSE community. The tools are long-living and mature, and they
coveravarietyofdifferentapplicationswithinMDSE.Basedonthisdiversityofthesetools,wearguethattheresultswillbetransferable
to tools sharing a similar level of maturity, where most of the bugs
have been already discovered during their long usage. However,
we cannot claim that the results arealso transferable to immature
prototypetools thatcontain plenty ofshallowbugs.Here,our hy-
pothesisisthattraditionalfuzzingandmodelgeneratorapproaches
detect these shallow bugs as fast as MoFuzz.
5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Inthispaper,wepresentedMoFuzz,afuzzersuitewhichistailoredtotheproblemoffuzztestingtoolsinmodel-drivensoftwaredevel-
opment (MDSE). The suite includes a graph grammar-based fuzzer
and two variants of a coverage-guided mutation-based fuzzer. The
intuitionbehindtheformeristheattempttocoverdifferentaspects
of the input domain as fast as possible, while the latter two aimtoincrementallyevolveinputmodelstoexercisedeeperpathsintheMDSEtoolundertest.Themainvariationpointbetweenthetwo mutation-based fuzzers is the set of change operations used
for model modification, with the main motivation of exploring the
trade-offbetweenefficiencyofmutationsandthelevelofconsis-
tency which is guaranteed to be preserved by the model mutations.
Our experimental results are twofold. First, we could show that
all fuzzers within the MoFuzz suite can significantly outperform
existingstandardfuzzersandmodelgeneratorsw.r.t.tocovering
the MDSE tool under test and their fault detection capabilities.
This demonstrates the benefits of integrating these two kinds of
technologiesforthesakeoffuzztestingMDSEtools,whichwasthemainresearchquestionguidingourwork.Second,ourexperimental
results demonstrate that the fuzzing approaches within MoFuzz
indeedcomewiththeirownstrengthsandweaknesses.Thusthe
fuzzerscomplementeachother,formingafuzzersuitefortesting
MDSEtoolswhichcancontributetomaturingofmodelingtools,
whichisstillconsideredasoneofthebiggestobstaclesforadopting
MDSE in practice.
Future work could focus on further enhancing the MoFuzz al-
gorithms.Forexample,hybridapproachessuchasDriller[ 75]or
SymFuzz [ 15] effectively combine fuzzing with symbolic execution
in order to find deeper bugs. Seed generation methods, such as
Skyfire [82] or Orthrus [ 71] might be able to provide MoFuzz with
1112Crash ID Exception Approach Average Time to Find Reliability
UML2Java-1 StackOverflowError MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 2155.82s (±0𝑠) 3%
EcoreUtil-1 StackOverflowError MoFuzz-emf-modelgen 1968.94s(±608.51𝑠) 23%
MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 125.22s(±91.51𝑠) 83%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 381.13s(±0𝑠) 3%
Baseline-Zest 538.41s(±383.26𝑠) 97%
EcoreUtil-2 ClassCastException MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 49.95s(±22.93𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 185.61s(±36.35𝑠) 40%
Baseline-Zest 181.03s(±202.65𝑠) 97%
EMFCompare-1 UnsupportedOperationException MoFuzz-emf-modelgen 238.25s(±23.73𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 2060.57s (±964.59𝑠) 30%
EMFCompare-2 IndexOutOfBoundsException MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 1533.42s (±758.23𝑠) 57%
EMFCompare-3 IllegalStateException MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 20.64s(±4.00𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 83.41s(±27.07𝑠) 100%
Baseline-Zest 6.40s(±2.73𝑠) 100%
Baseline-AtlanMod 25.18s(±7.01𝑠) 100%
UMLValidator-1 StackOverflowError MoFuzz-emf-modelgen 1337.24s(±907.88𝑠) 17%
MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 126.06s(±92.31𝑠) 100%
Baseline-Zest 528.82s(±327.61𝑠) 93%
UMLValidator-2 ClassCastException MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 53.28s(±26.39𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 824.57s(±587.26𝑠) 100%
Baseline-Zest 217.43s(±210.91𝑠) 100%
UML2OWL-1 RuntimeException MoFuzz-emf-modelgen 240.02s(±25.11𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 169.45s(±145.89𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 109.84s(±44.20𝑠) 100%
Baseline-Zest 1034.93s(±697.49𝑠) 93%
Baseline-AtlanMod 1218.62s(±1004.73𝑠) 60%
EMF2Graphviz-1 StackOverflowError MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 872.36s(±590.21𝑠) 90%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 2294.45s(±1251.17𝑠) 7%
Baseline-Zest 1767.62(±1091.29𝑠) 43%
EMF2Graphviz-2 ClassCastException MoFuzz-cgf-emfedit 191.68s(±147.91𝑠) 100%
MoFuzz-cgf-cpeo 1193.68s(±726.91𝑠) 73%
Baseline-Zest 1076.54s(±938.23𝑠) 87%
EMF2Graphviz-3 RuntimeException MoFuzz-emf-modelgen 544.19s(±966.30𝑠) 37%
Table2:Averagetimetofindeachcrashdiscoveredintheexperiments(calculatedoverthecrash-triggeringruns).Highlighted
valuesrepresentsignificantimprovementsoverthebaselineaccordingtotheMann-Whitney 𝑈test(𝛼=.05).Thereliabilityis
the percentage of runs (out of 30 trials) where the crash was triggered, rounded to the closest integer.
ahigh qualityseed corpus. Amorestraightforwardalternativeto
theseapproacheswouldbetofurthertweakourinstancegeneration
algorithmstofocusonthegenerationofunexpectedandslightly
malformedinputs,e.g.,bydeliberatelyviolatingmultiplicitycon-
straints, ignoring required references, setting invalid attribute val-
ues,etc.Forexample,themodelgenerationandmutationprocesses
of MoFuzz could be guided by attaching probabilities to the model
transformationrulesasappliedinthedomainofgrammar-based
fuzzing[20,73].Wewouldalsoliketostudypotentialbenefitsof
integratingourgenerator-andmutation-basedfuzzersmoretightly.
On the one hand, since the EMF Model Generator [ 50] which is
usedasabasisofourgenerator-basedfuzzercanworkwithseed
inputmodels,itcouldbeintegratedwiththefeedbackloopofthe
JQF framework to aim at a more coverage-guided behavior. On
the other hand, it could be used to generate seed inputs for the
two mutation-based fuzzers, which currently work as a two-phaseprocess creating their own seed inputs used for mutation. More-
over,weintendtoexplorethefuzzingcharacteristicsoftheother
generation strategies (with different configurations) provided by
the EMF Model Generator for generating diverse and huge models.
Finally, weintend to broadenour experiments to include furtherMDSE tools working with different kinds of models in order to
strengthen the external validity of our experimental results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThisworkwaspartiallyfundedbytheGermanResearchFoundation
(DFG), projects ”Meta-Modeling and Graph Grammars: Generating
Development Environments for Modeling Languages” (grant no.
HA2936/4-2andTA294/13-2)and”ProCI:ProcessConformance
under Incomplete Information” (grant no. GR 3634/7-1).
1113REFERENCES
[1]VladAcretoaieandHaraldStörrle.2014.Hypersonic:Modelanalysisandchecking
in the cloud. In 2nd Workshopon Scalability in Model DrivenEngineering.
[2]DaveAitel.2002. Theadvantagesofblock-basedprotocolanalysisforsecurity
testing.Immunity Inc., February (2002).
[3]Andrea Arcuri and Lionel C. Briand. 2011. A practical guide for using statistical
tests to assess randomized algorithms in software engineering. In Proceedings
of the 33rd International Conference on SoftwareEngineering, ICSE 2011, Waikiki,
Honolulu,HI,USA,May21-28,2011,RichardN.Taylor,HaraldC.Gall,andNenad
Medvidovic (Eds.). ACM, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985795
[4]ThorstenArendt,EnricoBiermann,StefanJurack,ChristianKrause,andGabriele
Taentzer. 2010. Henshin: Advanced Concepts and Tools for In-Place EMF Model
Transformations. In Proc. MODELS . Springer, 121–135.
[5]AtlanMod.2015. EMFRandomInstantiator. https://github.com/atlanmod/mondo-
atlzoo-benchmark/tree/master/fr.inria.atlanmod.instantiator/. Accessed: August
26, 2020.
[6]AmineBenelallam,MassimoTisi,IstvánRáth,BenedeckIzso,andDimitriosS
Kolovos. 2014. Towards an open set of real-world benchmarks for model queries
and transformations. In BigMDE@STAF.
[7]EnricoBiermann,ClaudiaErmel,andGabrieleTaentzer.2012. FormalFoundation
of Consistent EMF Model Transformations by Algebraic Graph Transformation.
SoSyM11, 2 (2012), 227–250.
[8]Robert Bill, Martin Fleck, Javier Troya, Tanja Mayerhofer, and Manuel Wimmer.
2017. A local and global tour on MOMoT. SoSyM(2017), 1–30.
[9]MarcelBöhme,Van-ThuanPham,Manh-DungNguyen,andAbhikRoychoudhury.
2017. Directed Greybox Fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Confer-
enceonComputerandCommunicationsSecurity (Dallas,Texas,USA) (CCS’17).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2329–2344. https://doi.org/10.1145/3133956.3134020
[10]Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Coverage-
basedGreyboxFuzzingAsMarkovChain.In Proceedingsofthe2016ACMSIGSAC
ConferenceonComputerandCommunicationsSecurity (Vienna,Austria) (CCS’16).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1032–1043. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978428
[11]Alexander Boll and Timo Kehrer. 2020. On the Replicability of Experimental
Tool Evaluations in Model-based Development. In Intl. Conference on Systems
Modelling and Management. to appear.
[12]Jean-François Brazeau. 2011. EMF To Graphviz (emf2gv). http://emftools.
tuxfamily.org/wiki/doku.php?id=emf2gv:start. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[13]Erwan Brottier, Franck Fleurey, Jim Steel, Benoit Baudry, and Yves Le Traon.
2006. Metamodel-based test generation for model transformations: an algorithm
and a tool. In Symp. on Software Reliability Engineering. 85–94.
[14]Caca Labs. 2015. zzuf - multiple purpose fuzzer. http://caca.zoy.org/wiki/zzuf.
Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[15]Sang Kil Cha, Maverick Woo, and David Brumley. 2015. Program-Adaptive
Mutational Fuzzing. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2015,
San Jose, CA, USA, May 17-21, 2015 . IEEE Computer Society, 725–741. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.50
[16] Shafiul Azam Chowdhury,TaylorT Johnson, and Christoph Csallner.2016. Cy-
Fuzz:Adifferentialtestingframeworkforcyber-physicalsystemsdevelopment
environments. In International Workshop on Design, Modeling, and Evaluation of
Cyber Physical Systems. Springer, 46–60.
[17]Shafiul Azam Chowdhury, Soumik Mohian, Sidharth Mehra, Siddhant Gawsane,
TaylorTJohnson,andChristophCsallner.2018. Automaticallyfindingbugsin
a commercial cyber-physical system development tool chain with SLforge. InProceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
2018).981–992.
[18] ShafiulAzam Chowdhury,Sohil LalShrestha,TaylorT Johnson,and Christoph
Csallner. 2020. SLEMI: Equivalence Modulo Input (EMI) Based Mutation of
CPSModelsforFindingCompilerBugsinSimulink.In Proceedingsofthe42nd
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2020).
[19]Gwendal Daniel, Gerson Sunyé, Amine Benelallam, and Massimo Tisi. 2014.
Improving memory efficiency for processing large-scale models. In BigMDE.
[20]Martin Eberlein, Yannic Noller, Thomas Vogel, and Lars Grunske. 2020. Evo-lutionary Grammar-Based Fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 12th Symposium on
Search-Based Software Engineering (SSBSE 2020).
[21]EclipseFoundation.2018. UML2. https://wiki.eclipse.org/MDT/UML2. Accessed:
August 26, 2020.
[22]Eclipse Foundation. 2019. EMFCompare. https://www.eclipse.org/emf/compare/.
Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[23]EclipseFoundation.2020. AtlasTransformationLanguage(ATL). https://www.
eclipse.org/atl/. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[24]Eclipse Foundation. 2020. Eclipse Modeling Framework. https://www.eclipse.
org/modeling/emf/. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[25]EclipseFoundation.2020. UMLtoOWLTransformation. https://www.eclipse.
org/atl/atlTransformations/#UML2OWL. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[26]H.Ehrig,K.Ehrig,U.Prange,andG.Taentzer.2006. FundamentalsofAlgebraic
Graph Transformation. Springer.[27]Karsten Ehrig, Jochen Malte Küster, and Gabriele Taentzer. 2009. Generating
instance models from meta models. SoSyM8, 4 (2009), 479–500.
[28]John Ellson, Emden Gansner, Lefteris Koutsofios, Stephen C. North, and Gordon
Woodhull. 2001. Graphviz - Open Source Graph Drawing Tools. In International
Symposium on Graph Drawing.
[29]Michael Felderer, Matthias Büchler, Martin Johns, Achim D. Brucker, Ruth Breu,
and Alexander Pretschner. 2016. Security Testing: A Survey. Vol. 101. 1–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.adcom.2015.11.003
[30]AdelFerdjoukh,Anne-ElisabethBaert,AnnieChateau,RémiColetta,andClé-
mentine Nebut. 2013. A CSP approach for metamodel instantiation. In 2013 IEEE
25thInternationalConferenceonToolswithArtificialIntelligence.IEEE,1044–1051.
[31]FranckFleurey,JimSteel,andBenoitBaudry.2004. Validationinmodel-driven
engineering: testing model transformations. In Proc. Intl. Workshop on Model,
Design and Validation.IEEE, 29–40.
[32]Eclipse Foundation. 2019. Acceleo. https://www.eclipse.org/acceleo/. Accessed:
August 26, 2020.
[33]AntonioGarmendia,AntonioJiménez-Pastor,andJuandeLara.2015. Scalable
modelexplorationthroughabstractionandfragmentationstrategies.In CEUR
Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.
[34]PatriceGodefroid,AdamKiezun,andMichaelY.Levin.2008. Grammar-Based
Whitebox Fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation (Tucson, AZ, USA) (PLDI
’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 206–215.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1375581.1375607
[35]Carlos A González, Fabian Büttner, Robert Clarisó, and Jordi Cabot. 2012.
EMFtoCSP:AtoolforthelightweightverificationofEMFmodels.In 2012First
International Workshop on Formal Methods in Software Engineering: Rigorous and
Agile Approaches (FormSERA). IEEE, 44–50.
[36]Google. 2020. FuzzBench: Fuzzer Benchmarking As a Service. https://github.
com/google/fuzzbench. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[37]Christian Holler, Kim Herzig, and Andreas Zeller. 2012. Fuzzing with Code
Fragments. In Presented as part of the 21st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 12). USENIX, Bellevue, WA, 445–458.
[38]Daniel Jackson. 2002. Alloy: A Lightweight Object Modelling Notation. ACM
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 11, 2 (2002), 256–290.
[39]Timo Kehrer, Michaela Rindt, Pit Pietsch, and Udo Kelter. 2013. Generating Edit
Operations for Profiled UML Models. In Proceedings of the Intl. Workshop on
Models and Evolution (CEURWorkshopProceedings), Vol. 1090. 30–39.
[40]Timo Kehrer, Gabriele Taentzer, Michaela Rindt, and Udo Kelter. 2016. Automati-
cally Deriving the Specification of Model Editing Operations from Meta-Models.
InProc. ICMT. 173–188.
[41]GeorgeKlees,AndrewRuef,BenjiCooper,ShiyiWei,andMichaelHicks.2018.EvaluatingFuzzTesting.In Proceedingsofthe2018ACMSIGSACConferenceon
Computer and Communications Security (Toronto, Canada) (CCS ’18). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2123–2138. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243804
[42]MaherLamari. 2007. Towardsan automated testgeneration for theverification
ofmodeltransformations.In Proc.ACMSymposiumonAppliedComputing.ACM,
998–1005.
[43]Caroline Lemieux and Koushik Sen. 2018. FairFuzz: A Targeted MutationStrategy for Increasing Greybox Fuzz Testing Coverage. In Proceedings of the
33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(Montpellier, France) (ASE 2018). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 475–485. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3238147.3238176
[44]Jun Li, Bodong Zhao, and Chao Zhang. 2018. Fuzzing: a survey. Cybersecurity 1,
1 (2018), 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42400-018-0002-y
[45]Yuekang Li, Bihuan Chen, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Shang-Wei Lin, YangLiu, and Alwen Tiu. 2017. Steelix: Program-state Based Binary Fuzzing. In
Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering
(Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE 2017). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 627–637.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106295
[46]MatthewJ McGill, REKurt Stirewalt,andLaura K Dillon. 2009. Automated test
input generation for software that consumes ORM models. In OTM Confederated
Intl. Conferences. Springer, 704–713.
[47]JacquelineMcQuillanandJamesPower.2008. Ametamodelforthemeasurement
of object-oriented systems: An analysis using Alloy. In Intl. Conf. on Software
Testing, Verification, and Validation. IEEE, 288–297.
[48]Barton P. Miller, Louis Fredriksen, and Bryan So. 1990. An Empirical Studyof the Reliability of UNIX Utilities. Commun. ACM 33, 12 (Dec. 1990), 32–44.
https://doi.org/10.1145/96267.96279
[49]Alix Mougenot, Alexis Darrasse, Xavier Blanc, and Michèle Soria. 2009. Uniform
random generation of huge metamodel instances. In European Conf. on Model
Driven Architecture-Foundations and Applications. Springer, 130–145.
[50]Nebras Nassar, Jens Kosiol, Timo Kehrer, and Gabriele Taentzer. 2020. Gener-
atingLarge EMF ModelsEfficiently - ARule-Based, Configurable Approach.In
FundamentalApproachestoSoftwareEngineering -23rdInternational Conference,
FASE2020, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferenceson Theory and Practice
ofSoftware,ETAPS2020,Dublin,Ireland,April25-30,2020,Proceedings (Lecture
Notesin ComputerScience),Heike WehrheimandJordiCabot(Eds.), Vol.12076.
1114Springer, 224–244. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45234-6_11
[51]Nebras Nassar, Jens Kosiol, and Hendrik Radke. 2017. Rule-based Repair of
EMF Models: Formalization and Correctness Proof. In Electronic Pre-Proc. Intl.
Workshop on Graph Computation Models.
[52]NebrasNassar,Hendrik Radke,and Thorsten Arendt.2017. Rule-Based Repair of
EMF Models: An Automated Interactive Approach. In Proc. ICMT. 171–181.
[53]Obeo.2020. UMLtoJavaGenerator. https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/uml-
java-generator. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[54]Object Management Group (OMG). 2008. MOF Model to Text Transformation
Language, v1.0. Standard. https://www.omg.org/spec/MOFM2T/1.0/PDF
[55]ObjectManagementGroup(OMG).2014. OntologyDefinitionMetamodel. Stan-
dard. https://www.omg.org/spec/ODM/1.1/PDF
[56] Travis E. Oliphant. 2006. A guide to NumPy. Vol. 1. Trelgol Publishing USA.
[57]OMG 2014. Object Constraint Language. OMG. http://www.omg.org/spec/OCL/
[58]OMG 2015. XML Metadata Interchange. OMG. https://www.omg.org/spec/XMI/
[59]OMG2016. OMGMetaObjectFacility(MOF).Version2.5.1. OMG. http://www.
omg.org/spec/MOF/
[60]RohanPadhye,CarolineLemieux,andKoushikSen.2019. JQF:Coverage-Guided
Property-Based Testing in Java. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT Interna-
tional Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis.398–401.
[61]Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, Koushik Sen, Mike Papadakis, and YvesLe Traon. 2019. Semantic Fuzzing with Zest. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Beijing,
China)(ISSTA 2019). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 329–340. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3293882.3330576
[62]Peach Tech. 2020. Peach Fuzzer Platform. https://www.peach.tech/products/
peach-fuzzer/peach-platform/. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[63]Van-ThuanPham,MarcelBöhme,AndrewE.Santosa,AlexandruR.Căciulescu,
andAbhikRoychoudhury.2019. SmartGreyboxFuzzing. IEEETransactionson
Software Engineering (2019), 1–17.
[64]Pit Pietsch, Hamed Shariat Yazdi, and Udo Kelter. 2011. Generating realistic test
models for model processing tools. In Proc. ASE.IEEE CS, 620–623.
[65]Sanjay Rawat, Vivek Jain, Ashish Kumar, Lucian Cojocar, Cristiano Giuffrida,and Herbert Bos. 2017. VUzzer: Application-aware Evolutionary Fuzzing. In24th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2017,San Diego, California, USA, February 26 - March 1, 2017. The Internet Soci-
ety. https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2017/ndss-2017-programme/vuzzer-
application-aware-evolutionary-fuzzing/
[66]Michaela Rindt, Timo Kehrer, and Udo Kelter. 2014. Automatic Generation ofConsistency-Preserving Edit Operations for MDE Tools. In Proceedings of the
Demonstrations Track of the ACM/IEEE 17th International Conference on Model
Driven Engineering Languages and Systems.
[67]JesseRuderman. 2007. Introducingjsfunfuzz. http://www.squarefree.com/2007/
08/02/introducing-jsfunfuzz/. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[68]OszkárSemeráth,ArenA.Babikian,SebastianPilarski,andDánielVarró.2019.
VIATRAsolver:aframeworkfortheautomatedgenerationofconsistentdomain-
specific models. In Proc. ICSE. IEEE/ACM, 43–46.
[69]OszkárSemeráth,AndrásSzabolcsNagy,andDánielVarró.2018. AGraphSolver
for the Automated Generation of Consistent Domain-specific Models. In Proc.
ICSE. ACM, 969–980.
[70]SagarSen,BenoitBaudry,andJean-MarieMottu.2009. Automaticmodelgenera-
tion strategies for model transformation testing. In Proc. ICMT. 148–164.
[71]Bhargava Shastry, Markus Leutner, Tobias Fiebig, Kashyap Thimmaraju, Fabian
Yamaguchi, Konrad Rieck, Stefan Schmid, Jean-Pierre Seifert, and Anja Feld-
mann. 2017. Static Program Analysis as a Fuzzing Aid. In Research in Attacks,
Intrusions, and Defenses - 20th International Symposium, RAID 2017, Atlanta, GA,
USA,September18-20,2017,Proceedings (LectureNotesinComputerScience),Marc
Dacier,MichaelBailey,MichalisPolychronakis,andManosAntonakakis(Eds.),
Vol. 10453. Springer, 26–47. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66332-6_2
[72]Sohil Lal Shrestha, Shafiul Azam Chowdhury, and Christoph Csallner. 2020.DeepFuzzSL: Generating Simulink Models with Deep Learning to Find Bugs
intheSimulinkToolchain.In WorkshoponTestingforDeepLearningandDeep
Learning for Testing (DeepTest 2020).
[73]EzekielSoremekun,EstebanPavese,NikolasHavrikov,LarsGrunske,andAn-
dreas Zeller. 2020. Inputs from Hell: Learning Input Distributions for Grammar-
Based Test Generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2020).
[74]Dave Steinberg, Frank Budinsky, Marcelo Paternostro, and Ed Merks. 2008. EMF:
Eclipse Modeling Framework (2 ed.). AddisonWesley,Upper Saddle River,NJ.
[75]NickStephens,JohnGrosen,ChristopherSalls,AndrewDutcher,RuoyuWang,
Jacopo Corbetta, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vi-
gna. 2016. Driller: Augmenting Fuzzing Through Selective Symbolic Exe-cution. In 23rd Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
NDSS2016,SanDiego,California,USA,February21-24,2016.TheInternetSoci-
ety. http://wp.internetsociety.org/ndss/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2017/09/
driller-augmenting-fuzzing-through-selective-symbolic-execution.pdf
[76]DanielStrüber,KristopherBorn,KanwalDaudGill,RaffaelaGroner,TimoKehrer,ManuelOhrndorf,andMatthiasTichy.2017. Henshin:Ausability-focusedframe-
work for emf model transformation development. In International Conference onGraph Transformation. Springer, 196–208.
[77]Daniel Strüber, Timo Kehrer, Thorsten Arendt, Christopher Pietsch, and Den-nis Reuling. 2016. Scalability of Model Transformations: Position Paper and
Benchmark Set. In BigMDE@ STAF. 21–30.
[78]Andreas Svendsen, Øystein Haugen, and Birger Møller-Pedersen. 2011. Synthe-
sizing software models: generating train station models automatically. In Intl.
SDL Forum. Springer,38–53.
[79]Gabriele Taentzer. 2012. Instance Generation from Type Graphs with Arbitrary
Multiplicities. ECEASST 47 (2012).
[80]Spandan Veggalam, Sanjay Rawat, István Haller, and Herbert Bos. 2016. IFuzzer:
AnEvolutionaryInterpreterFuzzerUsingGeneticProgramming.In Computer
Security - ESORICS 2016 - 21st European Symposium on Research in ComputerSecurity, Heraklion, Greece, September 26-30, 2016, Proceedings, Part I (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science), Ioannis G. Askoxylakis, Sotiris Ioannidis, Sokratis K.
Katsikas, and Catherine A. Meadows (Eds.), Vol. 9878. Springer, 581–601. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45744-4_29
[81]Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler
Reddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser,
Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jar-
rod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric Jones, Robert Kern,
EricLarson,C.J.Carey,İlhanPolat,YuFeng,EricW.Moore,JakeVanderPlas,
DenisLaxalde,JosefPerktold,RobertCimrman,IanHenriksen,E.A.Quintero,
Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa,Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1. 0 Contributors. 2020. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental
Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature Methods (2020).
[82]Junjie Wang,Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei,and YangLiu. 2017. Skyfire: Data-DrivenSeedGenerationforFuzzing. In 2017IEEESymposiumon SecurityandPrivacy,
SP 2017, San Jose, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2017. IEEE Computer Society, 579–594.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.23
[83]JunjieWang,BihuanChen,LeiWei,andYangLiu.2019.Superion:grammar-aware
greyboxfuzzing.In Proceedingsofthe41stInternationalConferenceonSoftware
Engineering, ICSE 2019, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 25-31, 2019, Joanne M. Atlee,
TevfikBultan,andJonWhittle(Eds.).IEEE/ACM,724–735. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICSE.2019.00081
[84]Junhua Wang, Soon-Kyeong Kim, and David Carrington. 2008. Automatic gener-
ationoftestmodelsformodeltransformations.In AustralianConf.onSoftware
Engineering. IEEE, 432–440.
[85]JonWhittle,JohnHutchinson,MarkRouncefield,HåkanBurden,andRogardt
Heldal. 2013. Industrial adoption of model-driven engineering: Are the toolsreally the problem?. In International Conference on Model Driven Engineering
Languages and Systems.Springer,1–17.
[86]World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). 2004. OWL Web Ontology Language Refer-
ence. Specification. https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/
[87]Hao Wu. 2016. An SMT-based approach for generating coverage oriented meta-
modelinstances. InternationalJournalofInformationSystemModelingandDesign
(IJISMD) 7, 3 (2016), 23–50.
[88]XuejunYang,YangChen,EricEide,andJohnRegehr.2011. Findingand under-
standingbugsinCcompilers.In Proceedingsofthe32ndACMSIGPLANConference
on ProgrammingLanguage Design and Implementation, PLDI 2011, San Jose, CA,
USA, June 4-8, 2011, Mary W. Hall and David A. Padua (Eds.). ACM, 283–294.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1993498.1993532
[89]Hamed Shariat Yazdi, Lefteris Angelis, Timo Kehrer, and Udo Kelter. 2016. A
frameworkforcapturing,statisticallymodelingandanalyzingtheevolutionof
software models. Journal of Systems and Software 118(2016), 176–207.
[90]Hamed Shariat Yazdi, Mahnaz Mirbolouki, Pit Pietsch, Timo Kehrer, and UdoKelter. 2014. Analysis and Prediction of Design Model Evolution Using TimeSeries. In Advanced Information Systems Engineering Workshops - CAiSE 2014
InternationalWorkshops(LectureNotesinBusinessInformationProcessing),Vol.178.
Springer, 1–15.
[91]Hamed Shariat Yazdi, Pit Pietsch, Timo Kehrer, and Udo Kelter. 2013. Statistical
analysisofchangesforsynthesizingrealistictestmodels. SoftwareEngineering
2013(2013).
[92]HamedShariatYazdi,PitPietsch,TimoKehrer,andUdoKelter.2015. Synthesizing
realistictest models. ComputerScience-ResearchandDevelopment 30,3-4 (2015),
231–253.
[93]Michal Zalewski. 2017. American Fuzzy Lop (AFL) - Technical Whitepaper.
http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/technical_details.txt. Accessed:August26,2020.
[94]MichalZalewski.2020. AmericanFuzzyLop(AFL)-asecurity-orientedfuzzer.
http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/. Accessed: August 26, 2020.
[95]AndreasZeller,RahulGopinath,MarcelBöhme,GordonFraser,andChristianHoller. 2019. The Fuzzing Book. In The Fuzzing Book . Saarland University.
https://www.fuzzingbook.org/
[96]SteffenZschalerandLawrenceMandow.2016. Towardsmodel-basedoptimisa-
tion: Using domain knowledge explicitly.In Software Technologies: Applications
and Foundations. Springer,317–329.
1115