An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android
Banking Apps
Sen Chen1, Lingling Fan1, Guozhu Meng2,3, Ting Su4, Minhui Xue5, Yinxing Xue6
Yang Liu1,8, Lihua Xu7
1Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2SKLOIS,Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China4ETH Zurich, Switzerland
5The University of Adelaide, Australia6University of Science and Technology of China, China
7New York University Shanghai, China8Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, China
chensen@ntu .edu.sg
ABSTRACT
Mobilebankingapps,belongingtothemostsecurity-criticalapp
category, render massive and dynamic transactions susceptible
to security risks. Given huge potential financial loss caused by
vulnerabilities, existing research lacks a comprehensive empirical
studyonthesecurityrisksofglobalbankingappstoprovideuseful
insightsandimprove the security of banking apps.
Sincedata-relatedweaknessesinbankingappsarecriticaland
maydirectlycauseseriousfinancialloss,thispaperfirstrevisitsthe
state-of-the-art available tools and finds that they have limited ca-
pability in identifying data-related security weaknesses of banking
apps.Tocomplementthecapabilityofexistingtoolsindata-related
weakness detection, we propose a three-phase automated security
riskassessmentsystem,namedAusera,whichleveragesstaticpro-
gram analysis techniques and sensitive keyword identification. By
leveraging Ausera, we collect 2,157 weaknesses in 693 real-world
bankingappsacross83countries,whichweuseasabasistoconduct
a comprehensive empirical study from different aspects, such as
global distribution and weakness evolution during version updates.
Wefindthatappsownedbysubsidiarybanksarealwayslesssecure
thanorequivalenttothoseownedbyparentbanks.Inaddition,we
alsotrackthepatchingofweaknessesandreceivemuchpositivefeedback from banking entities so as to improve the security of
banking apps in practice. We further find that weaknesses derived
from outdated versions of banking apps or third-party libraries
are highly prone to being exploited by attackers. To date, we high-
light that 21 banks have confirmed the weaknesses we reported
(including126weaknessesintotal).Wealsoexchangeinsightswith
7banks,suchasHSBCinUKandOCBCinSingapore,viain-person
or online meetings to help them improve their apps. We hope that
theinsightsdevelopedinthispaperwillinformthecommunities
about the gaps among multiple stakeholders, including banks, aca-
demicresearchers, and third-party security companies.
Permissionto make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE’20,May23–29,2020,Seoul, Republic of Korea
© 2020Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7121-6/20/05...$15.00
https://doi .org/10 .1145/3377811 .3380417CCS CONCEPTS
•Securityandprivacy →Softwareandapplicationsecurity ;
KEYWORDS
MobileBankingApps,Vulnerability, Weakness, Empirical Study
ACM Reference Format:
Sen Chen, Lingling Fan, Guozhu Meng, Ting Su, Minhui Xue, Yinxing Xue,
Yang Liu, Lihua Xu. 2020. An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of
Global Android Banking Apps. In 42nd International Conference on Software
Engineering(ICSE’20),May23–29,2020,Seoul,RepublicofKorea. ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3377811 .3380417
1 INTRODUCTION
Bankingappsbelongtothemostsecurity-criticalanddata-sensitive
appcategory.Cashlessmobilepaymenthassignificantlyfragmented
the traditional financial services, beginning with the first ATM and
culminating in e-banking. Users often misconceive that banking
appsprovidesecuretransactionsandaneasy-to-useinterface,by
assumingallcommunicationsaredonebetweenlocalbankingappsandremotebankserverssecurely(e.g.,overHTTPS).Unfortunately,
this assumption does not always hold. After examining many real-
worldbankingapps,wefindnewtypesofweaknessesthatarehard
to be detected by existing industrial and open-source tools, e.g.,QiHoo360 [
17], AndroBugs [ 2], MobSF [ 13], and QARK [ 16]. For
example, in a popular banking app from Google Play, the user will
be asked toregister with her personal information, includingfirst
name,lastname,password,andaddress.Aftertheuserclicksthe
“register” button, the app sends an SMS attached with the sensitive
data(inplaintext)to authenticatethat user,but the datais stored
in theSMS outbox unexpectedly.If an attackerregisters a content
observertotheSMSoutboxonthemobiledevicewith READ_SMS
permission,theuser’ssensitivedatacanbeeasilyinterceptedby
the attacker. Indeed, many other real-world banking-specific weak-
nessesandattackshavebeenwitnessedglobally[ 59,60].Nowadays,
bankingappsposenewchallenges,suchasflawsandvulnerabili-
ties [9,11] thatcause huge financial loss[3].
To understand the weaknesses exhibited in banking apps and
help to improve the security of these apps, several studies have
been done manually on a small-scale banking apps [ 30,61,63,64].
Theconclusionsdrawnfrommanualanalysismaybemorelikely
tobebiasedandcannotrepresentthesecuritystatusoftheentire
*&&&"$.OE*OUFSOBUJPOBM$POGFSFODFPO4PGUXBSF&OHJOFFSJOH	*$4&
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
693 banking appsRQ3: Global Distribution Analysis
RQ4: Multiple Version Analysis
RQ5: Weakness Fixing AnalysisFixing Recommendation
Useful Findings
Gap Unveiling
Lessons LearnedRQ2: Overall Security Status
Data-related
WeaknessesAndroBugs
MobSF
QARK
Qihoo360RQ1:Tool evaluation
AUSREA
Figure 1: Overview of our study
bankingecosystem.Apartfrommanualanalysisononlyasmall-
scaleapps,state-of-the-artassessmentapproachesalsoposeseveral
otherlimitations:(1)currentstudieslackabaselineofsensitivedata-
related security weaknesses specific to the core functionality of
banking apps to ensure an overall assessment of these apps; (2) thecurrentoff-the-shelfservices(
e.g.,Qihoo360[ 17])andopen-source
tools (e.g., AndroBugs [ 2]) use syntax-based scanning to perform
a security check during app development, which would incur alarge number of false positives (
e.g., non-sensitive data printed
inthelogfile).Besides,thesetoolsfocusongenericcategoriesof
apps, not specific to banking apps. Even when the weaknesses,such as cryptographic misuses [
42] and inappropriate SSL/TLS
implementations [ 40,45,51,65], have been reported for years, it
stillappearsunknownwhysomanysecurityweaknessesinbanking
apps are not yet patched [ 63]. Overall, the existing work cannot
represent the security status of the entire banking ecosystem, and
thestate-of-the-arttoolsareineffectiveincollectingalargenumber
of weaknesses to conduct further in-depth analysis.
To explore the entire mobile banking ecosystem and help to
ensuretheuser’sfinancialsecurity,thispapertakesalargenumber
of banking apps as subjects to conduct a comprehensive empirical
study on the data-related weaknesses in global Android banking
apps.AsshowninFigure1,ourstudycontainsthreemainsteps:(1)
we first collect693 banking apps across 83countries from various
markets, to our knowledge, this is the largest banking app dataset
taken into study to date; (2) to collect the weaknesses exhibited in
banking apps and complement the capability of existing tools indata-related weakness detection, we first summarize a weakness
baselineandproposean automatedsecurityriskassessmentsys-
tem(Ausera).Auseracombinesstaticprogramanalysistechniques
and sensitive keyword identification, to identify such weaknesses
(cf. Section 2). (3) By applying Ausera, we collected 2,157 security
weaknessesinthe693bankingapps,andfurtherconductacompre-
hensive empirical study (cf. Section 3) to investigate the ecosystem
of banking apps in terms of security weaknesses, aiming to answer
the followingresearch questions:
•RQ1:What is the current status of existing tools towards
collecting reliable data-related weaknesses in banking apps
compared with Ausera?
•RQ2:What is the overall security status of banking apps in
terms of data-related weaknesses?
•RQ3:What is the weakness status of banking apps globally
w.r.t. economies and regulations?
•RQ4:How are weaknesses introduced during app evolution
and fragmentation?
•RQ5:What is the gap between academic researchers and
banksin understanding and fixing weaknesses?Through an in-depth analysis of the weaknesses, we find that
(1)bankingappsacrossdifferentregionsexhibitvarioustypesof
security status, mainly due to different economy status ( e.g., small
village banks) and financialregulations ( e.g., GDPR [18]). Banking
apps in Europe and North America have few security weaknesses,
with only 0.27 weakness of data leakage per app. Asia is most
flooded with security weaknesses, averaging out to 6.4 weaknesses
perapp.BankingappsfromAfricahavecomparativelymoderate
securitystatuswith4.6weaknessesperapp,primarilybecauseofits
highdemandforcashlesspaymentservices.(2)Weaknessesofapps
varyacrossdifferentmarketsbycountriesandbringfragmentation
problemsamongdifferentversionsofthesamebankingapps.Apps
ownedbysubsidiarybanksarealwayslesssecurethanorequivalent
to those owned by parent banks. This observation is evidenced by
the South Korean version of the Citibank app and the Chinese
versionoftheHSBCapp.(3)Apartfromthelessonslearnedfrom
our study, we also track the weakness fixing process based on our
reportedweaknessesandsetup9in-personoronlinemeetingswith
7banks.Thesemeetingshelpthecommunitiesunderstandthegaps
betweendifferentparties,includingbanks,academicresearchers,
and third-partysecurity companies.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
•To collect weaknesses in banking apps and complement the
capabilityofexistingtoolsindata-relatedweaknessdetec-
tion,wedevelopedanautomatedsecurityriskassessment
system (Ausera), to efficiently identify security weaknesses
in banking apps, outperforming 4 state-of-the-art industrial
and open-source tools.
•To our knowledge, we conducted the first large-scale empir-
icalstudyon2,157securityweaknessescollectedfrom693
banking apps, the largest dataset taken into study to date.
Weattempttoinvestigatetheecosystemofglobalbanking
appsintermsofdata-relatedweaknessesfromfourdifferent
aspects, such as global distribution analysis and evolution
of multiple versions.
•Wereport theidentifiedweaknessesto banksand providesimple-but-concrete fixing recommendations. To date, 21
bankshaveacknowledgedourresults,and52reportedweak-nesseshavebeenpatchedbythecorrespondingbanks.Some
of them have actively collaborated with us to improve the
security of their apps.
2 TOOL EVALUATION
Inthissection,we proposeanautomatedweaknessdetectiontool
(namedAusera),guidedbyourconstructedsecurityweaknessbase-
lineinordertocollectsecurityweaknessesinbankingapps.Wealso
evaluateitseffectivenesscomparedwiththestate-of-the-practice
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Table 1: Taxonomy of security weaknesses in our study
Category Security Weakness Type
InputHarvest Sensitive data harvested by screenshots
Sensitive
DataStorageStored in shared preferences
Stored in webview.db
Logged locally
Stored on SD Card
Written in text files
Sensitive Data
TransmissionTransmitted via SMS
ICCleakedby dynamically registered Receiver
by implicit Intent
by component export
Communication
InfrastructureOnlyusesHTTP protocol
Usesinvalidcertificates(i.e., expiration, SHA-1 used)
Usesinvalid
certificateauthenticationallows all hostname request
usesinvalidhostnameverification
usesinvalidserver verification
Useshard-coded encryption key
UsesimproperAESencryption usesinsecure encryption
usesimproper function
UsesimproperRSAencryption no RSA
usesimproper function
Usesinsecure SecureRandom (i.e., setSeed)
Usesinsecure hash function (i.e., MD5 and SHA-1)
toolstoobservethecurrentstatusofdetectionabilitytowardsdata-
related weaknesses in banking apps. We then introduce the data
collectionprocessofbankingappsandsecurityweaknessesinthese
appsasthebasistoconductalarge-scaleanalysis.Beforeproposing
Ausera,wefirstrevisitthestate-of-the-artavailabletoolsoronline
servicesfor weakness detection.
AndroBugs[ 2],QARK[ 16],andMobSF[ 13]areallopen-source
tools for detecting vulnerabilities in general Android apps. Specifi-
cally, AndroBugs is a framework to find potential vulnerabilities
in Android apps by pattern-matching, and it also records some
metadatainthedatabasesuchaspermissionsusedinthecurrent
app. QARK is designed to look for vulnerabilities related to An-droid apps, either in source code or packaged APKs. MobSF is a
pen-testing framework, which is able to detect app vulnerabilities,
andtheresultscanbedisplayedonwebpages.Apartfromtheopen-
source detection tools, Qihoo360 is a popular security company in
China,whichmaintains anappscanengine, namedappscan[ 17].
It is a free online application for security risk scanning service.
However, the current off-the-shelf services and tools have the
following limitations in banking specific weakness collection ac-cording to our investigation: (1) They usually use syntax-based
scanning, thus cannot verify the actual data flow, which would in-
curalargenumberoffalsepositivesthatarenotrelatedtosensitive
data leakage. (2) They usually aim to detect weaknesses in general
apps, not specific to banking apps. Thus the patterns they use to
detectweaknessaredifficulttodetectdata-relatedweaknessesin
bankingapps.Thedetectionabilityofthestate-of-the-artweakness
detection tools are demonstrated in Section 2.2. Considering the
aforementionedsituations,tocomplementthecapabilityofexistingtoolsindata-relatedweaknessdetection,weproposeatool,Ausera,forautomatingthedetectionandcollectionofsensitive-daterelated
weaknesses specific to banking apps.Security Weakness
DetectionFunction
Identification
Newly-defined
Source & SinkSensitive
Data T agging
Banking
Keyword DBBanking App
Security Weakness 
BaselineAUSERA
SecurityWeaknesses
API Invocations for
Comm. Infra.
Figure 2: Overview of Ausera
2.1 Ausera
In order to collect a data-related weakness dataset specific to bank-
ing apps, we first propose a taxonomy of sensitive data-related se-
curityweaknessesinbankingapps.Guidedbythebaseline,Ausera
is proposed to identify weaknesses in banking apps.
2.1.1TaxonomyofSecurityWeaknesseswithinBanking
Apps .We propose and integrate security weaknesses of mobile
banking apps from prior research [ 30,61,63,64], best industrial
practice guidelines and reports ( e.g., OWASP [ 14], Google An-
droid Documentation [ 10], and AppKnox security reports [ 59,60]),
NowSecurereports[ 70],andsecurityweaknessandvulnerability
databases( e.g.,CWE[22],CVE[21]).Wetakeanin-depthlookat
the weaknesses w.r.t. sensitive data , since the biggest threat to
bankingappscomesfrommanipulationofdigitalassetsandrou-
tine financial activities. As shown in Table 1, sensitive data may be
exposed to attackers through various ways as follows:•
InputHarvest, confidentialinputsanduserrelevantsensitivedata
(e.g.,transactiondetails)canbeharvestedviaUIscreenshotby
maliciousappsonrooteddevices,orevenadb-enableddevices
withoutroot access [55].
•DataStorage, anadversaryisabletoobtaindatastoredinlocal
storage(e.g.,sharedpreference,webview.db)onrooteddevices
orexternalstorage( e.g.,SDCard),andalsofromtheoutputof
the Android loggingsystem withoutroot access.
•DataTransmission, sensitivedatatransmissionviaSMScanbe
easilyinterceptedbymalwareobservingtheoutboxofAndroid
SMSservice.Moreover,dataleakageviainter-componentcommu-
nication (ICC) is another potential threat, allowing third parties
to obtain data from banking apps by making implicit intent calls,
or dynamic registration of a broadcast Receiver.
•Communication Infrastructure, MITM attack can obtain sensitive
datathroughsniffingnetworktrafficbetweenclientandserver,
thereby sending fake data to either party. This kind of attack
is generally achieved due to improper authentication protocols,
insecure cryptography, lack of certificate verification, etc.
Ourbaselinecontainsdata-relatedweaknessesofmultiplecat-
egoriesandbuildsasolidfoundationforanalyzingweaknessesin
bankingapps.
2.1.2Methodology of Ausera .Tocollectalargedatasetof
security weaknesses, Ausera takes as input each banking app,
guidedbytheweaknessbaseline,andultimatelyoutputssecurity
weaknesses of the app. Figure 2 shows the overview of Ausera,
includingthree phases: (1) Sensitive data tagging, which identifies
sensitive data in banking apps, including user inputs and the data
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
693 banking apps*.xml String 
ExtractionKeyword
Construction
Sensitive 
Data T aggingKeyword DB
Variable
Extraction xml/class files
banking appSensitive 
dataFinancial services of banking apps
Figure 3: Identificationof sensitive data
fromserverdisplayedontheUIpages,andthenattachessemantics
tothesensitivedata-relatedvariablesin.xml/.javafilesaccording
toourconstructedsensitivekeyworddatabase.(2) Functioniden-
tification, which identifies the functions related to data leakage
such as preference storage, SMS transmission, and determines the
behavior ofa pieceof code basedon APIinvocations (or theircall
sequence patterns). (3) Weakness detection, which performs taint
analysis based on the tagged sensitive data and functions to check
the existence of weaknesses in the proposed baseline.
•Sensitivedatatagging. Sinceweareconcernedaboutthesensi-
tivedatainbankingappsthatmayincursecurityrisks,wemanually
extract typical data-related keywords in banking apps.
Figure3showstheprocessofsensitivekeyworddatabasecon-
struction and sensitive data tagging. (1) Sensitive keyword DB con-
struction. To construct the keyword database, we first extract all
strings(i.e.,componentIDnameofEditText,thehinttextofEdit-
Text,andthetextofTextView)fromthelayoutfilesof693banking
appsbyreverseengineering.Wethenfilterthestringsaccording
to the core financial services of banking apps such as login, pay-
ment, etc. Note that, to avoid missing variants of the keywords, we
further employ Word2vec [ 57] to supplement the corpus of the
keyworddatabase.Specifically,weloadthetrainedmodelbasedon
the.binwordvector,usingthesentencesextractedbySupor[ 52]
from54,371generalapps.Forexample,wefurtherfindthestring
“passwd”isavariantofthesensitivekeywordof“password.”These
sensitivekeywordsareabletoindicatethesemanticsofthecompo-nents (i.e., EditText and TextView). Eventually, we build a sensitive
keyword database containing 70 keywords, which can be classified
into 4 categories as shown in Table 2. Currently, we only consider
twolanguages(i.e.,EnglishandChinese).Inthefuturework,we
mayextendthelanguagetypes.Thefulllistofkeywordsispublicly
available online.1(2)Sensitive data tagging. Based on the keyword
database, we can identify the sensitive data-related variables in the
codeandattachsemanticstothem.Specifically,wefirstextractvari-
ablesrelatedtotwokindsofcomponents:EditTextforuserinput
andTextViewfordatadisplay.Foreachcomponent,asshownin
Figure 4, there may be several variables declaring different aspects
of the component such as the component ID, component hint, and
componenttext.Therefore,weextractallthevariablesrelatedto
eachcomponent,andthentagthevariableassensitiveifitmatches
withanykeywordinthekeyworddatabase.Notethat,thesemantic
tagging method in previous work [ 28,52] relies on the component
relationinlayouts,whichmaylosesomeuserinputs.Asaresult,
sensitivedataistaggedwithitssemanticsintheformat /angbracketleftvariable,
keyword/angbracketright.
1www .sites .google .com/view/ausera/Table 2: Keyword examples
Category Keyword Examples Number
Identity username, userid, byname, user-agent 13
Credential password, passcode, pwd, pin 11
PersonalInfo name, phone, email, birthday 24
FinancialInfo credit card, amount, payment, payee 22
<T extView android:text=“@string/ Passowrd ”/>
<EditT ext android:id=“@+id/ pwd ”
android:hint=“ Password ”/>

textPwd = (EditT ext) findViewById(R.id. pwd );
String password =textPwd .getT ext().toString();

UI layout
code
Java code
Figure 4: Code relation between Java and UI layout code
Fortheexampledescribedintheintroduction,thesensitivedata
istaggedas/angbracketleftedit_PIN,pin/angbracketright,/angbracketleftedit_firstName,firstname /angbracketright,/angbracketleftedit_lastName,
lastname/angbracketright,/angbracketleftedit_addr,addr/angbracketright,sotheappintheexampleisconfirmed
to send sensitive data out via SMS.•Functionidentification.
Thesensitivedataextractedaboveare
definedas sources,andbefarapartfromtheaccessofunauthorized
users.Weuseournewly-definedsinks(i.e.,specific-APIs)toiden-
tifyfunctioncodethatisassociatedwithweaknessesforbanking
services. Howev er, as discussed in Section 2.1.1, these sensitive
datamaybedivulgedduringthestorageortransmissionprocess.
To achieve confidentiality, the sensitive data should not flow into a
codepointwhereunauthorizeduserscanaccessvialocalstorage,
externalstorage,loggingoutput,SMS,andcomponenttransition
in Table 1 ( a.k.a.,sinksof sensitive data). It is worth mentioning
thatthesinksherearedifferentfromthesinksdefinedinSuSi[ 62].
SuSi’ssinksareallpotentialmethodcallswith12categoriesthat
leaksourcesoutofmobiledevices,whileournewly-definedsinks
areleakingsensitivedatathroughspecificleakagechannels(e.g.,
shared preferences, logging output, and SMS). According to the
leakage channels, we manually define 106 vulnerable sinks [ 20]i n
totalthat are likely to be exploited in banking apps.
Communicationinfrastructure,whichisindispensabletobank-
ing apps [ 42,64]. It establishes a channel to communicate with
remote bank servers. However, communication infrastructure islikely to be attacked, and hence it can undermine the securityof these apps. The core functionalities in communication infras-tructure include certificate verification, cryptographic operation,
and host authentication. To accurately identify the functional code
for communication infrastructure, we summarize all invocationpatterns of multiple Android APIs for each functionality. Takinghostnameverificationasanexample,ifthereisaninvocationse-quence {
new X509HostnameVerifier ,setHostnameVerifier of
class HttpURLConnection },weconsiderthattheappuseshostname
verificationduringcommunication.Wefurthercheckitsimplemen-
tationtodeterminewhetheritimplementscorrectly.Wehave12groupsofAPIinvocationpatternsintotalforfunctionidentifica-
tionincommunicationinfrastructure.Wereverse-engineerbanking
apps, locate the invocations of these relevant Android APIs, and
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
usecallgraphsandcomponenttransitionstodeterminetheircall
relationinbetween.Finally,wecanidentifythefunctionalcodefor
communicationinfrastructure of banking apps.
•Securityweaknessdetection. Givenabankingapp,weattempt
to find whether it contains any weaknesses listed in Table 1 and
reducefalsepositivesbyemployingthetwostrategies: (1)aforward
data-flow analysis to determine whether there exists sensitive data
flowinginto insecuresinks byleveragingsensitive datataggingand
taint analysis; (2) a backward control-flow analysis to check whether
thevulnerablefunctionalcodeidentifiedbyAPIinvocationpatterns
in communication infrastructure is feasible based on call graphs and
Activity transitions.
We carry on a forward taint analysis on top of Soot [ 71] to sup-
port intra- and inter-component communication analysis based on
the tagged sensitive data. These data are regarded as sources, and
thesinksaretheAndroidAPIlistwedefined.Duringtheprocessoffunctionalcodeidentification,wecanobtainallvulnerablecode(i.e.,
incorrect implementation )thatexistsincommunicationinfras-
tructure.However,noisemayarisebecausethedeadcodefortesting
purpose cannotbe executedduring runtime.Reaves et al.[63,64]
found that the dead code may bring false positives to the detection
results.Weperformabackwardcontrol-flowanalysis,andextract
allreachablecallsequencesaccordingtocallgraphsandActivity
transitions. If the vulnerable code is reachable, we determine it is a
validweakness, otherwise, it is a false alarm.
We highlight the following three strategies to reduce false posi-
tives. (1) Ausera reduces the size of our extracted keywords from
124 to 70, which effectively reduces ambiguity of the keywords
(e.g., “info” and “status”), and hence can identify sensitive data
more accurately. (2) Ausera utilizes newly-defined sources and
sinks,whicharerelevanttoweaknessesofsensitivedataleakage.
(3)Auseraidentifiesthevulnerablecodeandchecksitsreachability
toeliminateweaknessesindeadcodebycallgraphsandActivity
transitions.
2.1.3Implementationof Ausera .ToimplementAusera,we
combine staticprogram analysis and sensitive data tagging to iden-
tify sensitive data in banking apps, and associate them with thecorrespondingvariablesinXML/Javacode.AuserareliesonAp-ktool [
5] to extract resource files from apks. It then uses parts-
of-speech (POS) tagger of OpenNLP-1.8.3 [ 19] to parse the text
labels in TextView and EditText, thereby identifying keywords in-
cluded.Wemanuallycheckonthesekeywordstoretaintheones
thataresensitiveandrelevanttothecorefunctionalitiesofbankingapps.Afterthat,weemployWord2vectosupplementthekeyword
database.
Toaccomplishthedetection,wesummarize12groupsofpatterns
(e.g., AES/ECB/NoPanding) to depict the communication weak-
nesses.Thenweemploypattern-basedstaticanalysistofindthepos-siblevulnerablepatternsincode.Wecheckthreeaspectsforcertifi-
cate authentication: whether the client side 1) allows all hostname
requests;2)bypasseshostnameverification;3)failstoimplement
anythingintheserververificationmethod( checkServerTrusted ).
Theweakness“hard-codedencryptionkey”isdeterminedbyfirst
checking whether an encryption key is embedded in code, and ex-
aminingwhetheritisusedtoencrypt sensitivedatato reducefalsepositives.ThebankingsensitivedataareencryptedwiththeDESorTable 3: Distribution of the collected banking apps
Continent #Developed #Developing Total Percentage
Europe 102 0 102 21.7%
America 53 24 77 16.4%
Asia 16 210 226 48.1%
Oceania 16 0 16 3.4%
Africa 0 49 49 10.4%
Total 187 283 470 -
Blowfish algorithm. Using either of the encryption mechanisms is
viewed as a weakness [ 63,64]. The AES forbids ECB mode because
itdoesnotprovideageneralnotionofprivacy[ 42].Thepaddingof
AES and RSA is always improper, such as NoPadding andPKCS1,
though AES/ECB/NoPadding is very frequently used. The function
SecureRandom should not be seeded with a constant. The hash
functionsMD5and SHA-1 are insecure [72, 73].
2.1.4Evaluationof Ausera .We randomly selected 60 bank-
ingapps(12.8%)inourdatasetandmanuallycheckedthedetection
results to evaluate Ausera’s precision. Note that, we cannot evalu-
ate the false negatives when assessing banking apps due to lack of
weaknessbenchmarksofbankingapps.Falsepositive(FP)referstoweaknessthataredetectedduringstaticanalysisbutactuallyinfea-
sible at runtime or detected by mistake. As a result, we only found
6 false positives (corresponding to five weakness types, i.e., Shared
Preference Leakage, Logging Leakage, SD Card Leakage, Text File
Leakage, and Hard-coded Key) from the identified 341 weaknesses
of these 60 banking apps, achieving an average precision of 98.24%.
Consequently, 5 out of 6 falsepositives belong to sensitive data
leakage. The reason isthatAuseramatchesvariables( e.g., “pkg-
name.txt,”“login_fragement,”“loginpager,”and“spinnerGender”)
inaccuratelywiththekeywordsinourdatabase.Theremainingone
FP belongs to Hard-coded Key type, because the extracted variable
is relevant to the exception parameters ( i.e., “KeyPermanentlyIn-
validateException”).
2.2 RQ1: Tool Evaluation and Data Collection
Bankingappcollection. As shownin Figure1, we collected693
bankingapps2intotalfromvariousAndroidmarketssuchasGoogle
PlaystoreandAPKMonk[ 24].Notethatweonlycollectmultiple
versions of some apps from APKMonk to conduct the longitudinal
anlaysis(cf.Section3.3)sinceAPKMonkmaintainsthefullversions
ofapps,whileGooglePlaystoreonlymaintainthelatestversion.
The collected apps range across 470 unique banks, where some
appshavemultipleversions.Theyoriginatefrombothdeveloped
anddevelopingcountriesacrossfivecontinents(seebreakdownsin
Table 3). Table 3 indicates that 48.1% of the banking apps are from
Asia, considering the largest population proportion all over the
world.Only3.4%ofappsarefromOceania,consideringitssmallest
population proportion all over the world. The 24 banking apps
ofAmericandevelopingcountriesalloriginatefromSouthAmer-
ica, while 16 apps of Oceanian developed countries originate from
AustraliaandNewZealand.16appsofAsiandevelopedcountries
2Apart from the 693 apps, we have filtered out apps with packer techniques (49 apps
in total) and with decompilation failure since they are out of scope in this paper.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
Table 4: Detection result comparisons
Tools #Types Precision Time/App (mins)
Ausera 341 98.24% 1.6
Qihoo360 80 87.50% 8.5
AndroBugs 76 81.58% 1.8
QARK 93 87.10% 16.1
MobSF 213 48.36% 2.4
originatefromSingapore,Japan,andSouthKorea.Toourknowl-
edge, this is the largest banking app dataset taken into study to
date.
Comparison with the state of the practice . We compare the
detection results of Ausera with 4 industrial and open-sourcetools, including Qihoo360, AndroBugs, MobSF, and QARK. We
randomlyselect60bankingappsinourdatasetforcomparisonand
run each tool 3 times to stabilize the detection accuracy. Table 4
showstheresults.Auseraoutperformsothertoolsinbothprecision
and time cost, achieving 98.24% precision in 1.6 minutes per app.
The precisions for these tools are obtained by manual validation
through filtering out all false positives. We also conduct a cross-
validation of detection results across different authors. We can
seethatallcomparisonsofthedetectionresultscomplywiththe
weaknesses baseline.Auseraoutperforms other tools with higher
precision and less time. Ausera manages to scan each app within
1.6 minuteson average, much faster than the other tools.
Inparticular,weshowseveralspecificcasestoexplainhowfalse
positivesareincurred.Sensitivedatadisclosurethroughloggingcan
bedetectedby MobSF, howeve r,MobSFjustmatchesthefollowing
APIsifused( e.g.,Log.e(),Log.d(),and Log.v()),withoutfurther
determiningwhethertheoutputdataissensitiveornot.Thereis
no doubt that it would incur a large number of false positives. If
the data is not sensitive, such as “ menu_title ,” it is very normal
for developers to output it in the terminal or write messages to
understand the state of their application. The risk is that some cre-
dentials(e.g.,PINandpassword)arealsoleakedbyloggingoutputs.
Asyntax-basedscanningtoolmayprovideanincompleteandincor-
rect analysis result due to the influence of dead code. For example,
Qihoo360detectedthree codeblocks violatingserver verification,
e.g.,donothingin checkServerTrusted .Incontrast,Auseraaims
to to minimize the influence of dead code. Two key strategies to
eliminatesuchfalsepositivesare:(i)checking whetherinvalidau-
thenticationisinafeasiblepathincallgraphs;(ii)checkingwhether
theClasshas been instantiated in Activity transitions.
Apartfromthecomparisonwiththeabove4tools,wealsodis-
cuss the comparison between Ausera and two taint analysis tools
(i.e., FlowDroid [ 29] and IccTA [ 54]). Ausera aims to identify
weaknesses specifically in banking apps, while FlowDroid and
IccTA,whichlargelyrelyonsourcesandsinksdefinedinSuSi,aim
to identify the data leakage in general apps. (1) The sources and
sinksconsideredbyFlowDroidandIccTAarespecifiedbySuSi,
which contains 12 different source categories and 15 different sink
categories. However, among them, we only use taint analysis on 4
typesofweaknesses(i.e.,Sharedpreferenceleakage,loggingleak-
age,SDcardleakage,andSMSleakage).Inotherwords,FlowDroid
and IccTA cannot detect most of security weakness types in our
proposed data-related baseline specific to banking apps. (2) In fact,Table 5: Weaknesses in 470 banking apps
Weakness Category Weakness Type #Affected Apps
Input Harvest Screenshot 415 (88.3%)
Data StorageShared preference 44
WebView DB 64
Logging 66
SD Card 14
Text File 10
Data
TransmissionSMS Leakage 18
ICC Leakage 324 (68.9%)
Communication
InfrastructureHTTP Protocol 84Invalid Certificate 31
Invalid Authentication 222
Hard-coded Key 30Improper AES 131
Improper RSA 231
Insecure SecureRandom 133Insecure Hash Function 340 (72.3%)
wehavedeployedFlowDroidandIccTAonourdefinedsources
andsinks,andfindthattheycannotidentifytheconcretedatatypes
(i.e., sensitive or non-sensitive) when tracking the 4 types of weak-
nesses. For example, developers usually output debug information
suchasstring lengthvialoggingchannel, however,trackingsuch
non-sensitive data causes many false positives. While Ausera only
tracksthelabeledsensitivedatathataremostrelevanttothecore
financialservicesofbankingapps.(3)Mostofthesourcesdefinedin
SuSi are not sensitive in banking apps, such as the API invocations
of Bluetooth, Calendar, and Settings. More comparison results can
be found on our website [20].
Answer to RQ1. In summary, existing state-of-the-practice
toolsarelesseffective(i.e.,lowerprecision,morefalsepositives,
andcostmoretime)inidentifyingdata-relatedweaknessesin
banking apps, compared with Ausera. Therefore, Ausera can
be used to collect a large number of security weaknesses for
further in-depthanalysis.
Weakness collection. Ausera is demonstrated as the most effec-
tivetooltocollectbankingspecificsecurityweaknesses,wethus
applyitonthecollected693bankingappsacross83countries.Fi-
nally,wecollect2,157securityweaknessesforfurtherlarge-scale
empiricalstudy.
3 A LARGE-SCALE COMPREHENSIVE
EMPIRICALSTUDY
Inthissection,weconductalarge-scaleempiricalstudyfromdif-
ferent aspects based on the collected weaknesses by Ausera.
3.1 RQ2: Security Status of Banking Apps
Since the multiple versions of a banking app may have overlapped
weaknesses,weselectthelatestversionofthe693appsiftheyhave
multipleversions,and applyAuserato these470uniquebanking
apps to conduct the following study. Table 5 shows the resultsof weaknesses corresponding to the security baseline defined in
Section 2.1.1.
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
	












 !

" #

!$
%
Figure 5: Top 10 sensitive data types leaked in 470 banking apps
Inputharvest. Screenshot(88.3%),asaneasy-to-usewaytohar-
vest users’ credentials, is most likely to be neglected by developers.
Only55apps( e.g.,BankofCommunicationsofChina)areprotected
from screenshots in our investigation.
Datastorage. Only a small portion of apps store sensitive data on
SDCard(2.98%)andTextFile(2.13%),whicharegloballyaccessible
andtherebysusceptibletoprivacyleakage.WeshowthatShared
preference, Logging, and WebView DB are the main channels that
leak sensitive data. As shown in Figure 5, Ausera identifies 592
cases of private data leakage across 470 unique banking apps. Cre-
dentials(e.g., PIN), as the most dangerous leakage in banking apps,
appearin82casesandaffect64bankingapps.Notethat banking-
specificdata (e.g.,transactionpasswordandcardnumber)accounts
for22.47%,andtheotherdataleakageincludes personalinfo (e.g.,
Name, Phone, and Email).Data transmission.
We show that ICC Leakage (68.9%) is also
among the mostpopular weaknesses. Despitethe small portion of
SMSLeakage, SMS coulddirectly forward credentials, thwarting
confidentiality.Forexample,therealbankingappmentionedinthe
introduction leaks sensitive data such as pin, first name, last name,
and address via SMS.Communication infrastructure.
The protection of communica-
tion infrastructure in banking apps is far away from satisfactory.More specifically, many apps are still using HTTP to exchange
sensitivedatawiththeremotebankserver,ordonotvalidatethe
certificatesoftheconnectedservers.Wefind222bankingappswith
invalidauthentication,including13bankingappsthathaveboth
invalid and correct SSL/TLS implementations in source code. They
establish communications with servers using different strategies
(i.e.,invalidandcorrectSSL/TLSimplementation).InsecureHash
Function(72.3%)is also frequently misused.
AnswertoRQ2. Overall,thesecuritystatusofbankingappsis
severe according to the results. In summary, Screenshot (88.3%),
InsecureHashFunction(72.3%),andICCLeakage(68.9%)arethe
most popular weaknesses of banking apps. Meanwhile, Invalid
Authentication (222 apps) also has severe damage.
3.2 RQ3: GlobalDistributionof Weaknesses
Figure6showsthenumberofweaknessesdiscoveredamongthe
bankingappsbycontinents.Theintensityscaleencodesthenumber
of weaknesses the apps have, scaled from light blue (least) to dark
Figure 6: Number of weaknesses in global banking apps
blue (most). We observe the following findings: (1) Weaknessesin bankingapps of Asia outnumber those of Europe (resp. North
America) by 1.56 (resp. 1.31) to 1, where each banking app of Asia
has 6.4 weaknesses on average, indicating that the banking apps of
developedcountries( i.e.,EuropeandNorthAmerica)havefewer
weaknessesthanthoseofdevelopingcountries.Ironically,toour
surprise,we find thatweaknesses inapps ofAsian developedcoun-
tries slightly outnumber (with 6.7 weaknesses per app) those of
Asiandevelopingcountries.(2)BankingappsfromAfricaexhibit
satisfactory security status, having only 4.6 weaknesses on aver-
age, some are even more secure than those of developed countries.
Possible reasons why the security of banking apps varies across
regions can be interpreted as follows:•
The financial regulations and development guidelines are dif-ferent across regions, which may affect the implementation of
bankingapps.Forexample,bothEurope(GDPR[ 18])andUSA
(PCI DSS [ 15]) adopt very strict security and privacy regulations.
The GDPR poses a regulatory framework that is unique to the
financialserviceindustry.Failuretomeetitsrequirementswill
come with potentially hefty penalties [ 44]. This is also reflected
by the 143 banking apps from Europe and USA, where data leak-
age rarely exists, with only 0.27 data leakage weakness reported
per app.
•The development budget and developers’ expertise may affect
thesecurityofproducts.Duringourinvestigation,wefindthata
numberoflocalbankingappsofChinahavemanymoreweak-
nesses than international or nationwide ones. We speculate that
due to inadequate budget for app development, those released
appsare prone to being less secure.
•Cashlesspaymentsystemshavebeenbootstrappedinareaswhere
traditional banking is uneconomical and expensive, removinglarge investments on the massively deployed financial infras-
tructure.ThisisevidencedbythefactthatKenya,acountryin
Africa, is a world leader of money transfers by mobile [ 1], and
68%ofpeopleinKenyareporttheuseofphonesforafinancial
service[12].
AnswertoRQ3. Weconcludethatappsacrossdifferentcountries
exhibitvarioustypesofsecuritystatus,mainlybecauseofdifferenteconomiesandregulationsthattakeshape.Wefindthatappsfrom
Africa have comparatively moderate security status, primarily
because of its high demand for cashless services.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
   	

 


		

        !!
Figure 7: Number of weaknesses in each update version.
3.3 RQ4: LongitudinalAnalysisof Version
Updates and Fragmentation
We attempt to perform a longitudinal study on security risks by
revisitingthe7apps(GCash,mPay,MOM,Zuum,OxigenWallet,
Airtel Money, and mCoin) which have been systematically studied
by Reaves et al.[64], with confirmed weaknesses. We downloaded
all available versions of 6 apps (mCoin is excluded since history
versions are not publicly available.), and obtained 88 different ver-
sions in total, i.e., GCash (6 versions), mPay (20 versions), MOM
(22 versions), Zuum (12 versions), Oxigen Wallet (12 versions), and
AirtelMoney (8 versions). All versions span more than two years.
Figure 7 shows the number of detected weaknesses across all
versions of each app. We can see most of the version updates (90%)
fail to bring at least two successful patches for weaknesses in their
history versions, which echoes the findings of paper [ 63] that apps
havenotrepairedcriticalvulnerabilitiesintheirnewversions.After
anin-depthmanualanalysis,wefindinputharvestviascreenshots,
MITM attacks, AES/RSA misuses, and insecure hash functions are
themostcommonweaknessesthatremainunfixed.Furthermore,
developersusuallyneglecthostnameverificationorserverauthenti-
cation,whichmayenabletheMITMattack.Theseappsarealsonot
aware of AES/RSA misuses and insecure hash functions, indicating
that developers are still not aware of these weaknesses perpetually.
GCashhasasharpdeclinefromv2.4.3tov3.0.0intermsofthe
number of weaknesses. Three weaknesses are patched, the hard-
codedencryptionkey,insecureSecureRandom,andprivacyleakage
to SD Card. Reaves et al.[63,64] found that the vulnerabilities still
remain inthe updatedversion in2016. However,according toour
security reports, GCash fixed most of the vulnerabilities in theirlatest version. In contrast, the weaknesses of Oxigen Wallet sig-
nificantlyincreasefromv5.01tov7.3.3duetothechangesofapp
features. More specifically, many new weaknesses ( i.e.,WebView
DBLeakage, ICC Leakage, MITM Attacks, and Insecure SecureRan-
dom)wereintroduced,whichhadnotbeendiscoveredbyReaves
et al.[64].Theycomparedthecodesimilaritybetweenthe2015and
2016versions ofeachapp, andfoundsomeappshavesignificantamounts of new code [
63]. This aligns with our study that many
banking apps do not perform systematic security checks before
delivery.Furthermore,wefindbanksencountertheversionfragmentation
problem especially when they release versions to different markets
by countries. We selected the top 5 banking apps based on the S&P
Global Market Intelligencereport [ 7] across their 30different ver-
sions,i.e.,Citibank(10versions),HSBC(3versions),DeutscheBank
(3versions),BancoSantander(8versions),andICBC(6versions).
By comparing the differences of weaknesses between these ver-
sions,weobservethefollowing:(1)Asubsidiarybank,incorporated
in the host country but owned by a foreign parent bank, usuallylaunches its original financial services with most of its products,
suchasbankingapps,intothehostmarket.Asaresult,asubsidiarybankinheritstheweaknessesfromtheoriginalversionofitsparent
bank.ThisobservationisevidencedbytheSouthKoreanversion
of Citibank app and the Macau version of ICBC app (see Figure 8).
(2) Due to the business difference, culture difference, and exper-
tise of security teams, weaknesses of apps vary across differentmarkets by countries. This is also evidenced by the fact that the
official app of HSBC (China) v2.7.1 has more weaknesses than that
of HSBC (UK) and HSBC (Hong Kong). A possible reason might be
thatHSBC(China)isindependentoftheparentbankintermsofits app development outsourcing procedures and security teams,
while in Hong Kong, as the former UK colony, HSBC (Hong Kong)
largely follows the convention of HSBC (UK). Nevertheless, we
find that not all subsidiary banks operate under the host country’s
regulationsintermsofthenumberofbankingappsecurityrisks
(Figure8 showsthe sourceand hostcountriesof flowscontaining
security weaknesses.).
Answer to RQ4. By revisiting apps studied by previous re-
search and further examining them across all their publicly
availableversionsthathavenotbeenscrutinizedbefore,wecon-cludethatappdevelopersarestillnotawareoftheseweaknesses
perpetually.Furthermore,appsownedbysubsidiarybanksare
always less secure than or equivalent to those owned by parent
banks, for which the assumption that subsidiary banks operate
under the host country’s regulations does not always hold true.
3.4 RQ5: Weakness Fixing and Feedback
Our study has uncovered 2,157 weaknesses in total from 693 bank-
ingapps,mostofwhichhavebeenreportedtothecorresponding
banks.AsshowninTable7,21bankshaverepliedandconfirmed
theseweaknesses,and 16appshavebeenpatched.3Furthermore,
we approached the major stakeholders across the global, such as
HSBC (UK/Hong Kong/Shanghai), OCBC (Singapore), DBS (Singa-
pore), and BHIM(India), to understand theirsecurity practice and
policies. Through in-depth discussions with 7 banks, we find they
hold different mindsets toward assessing severity of weaknesses
andsettingsecuritygoals.Notethat,onaverage,the7bankstake
41 days to fix their security weaknesses we reported. We elaborate
this gap and provide our insights on how to close it.Lack of effective criteria for rating security weaknesses
.A n
effective severity criterion of weaknesses is crucial for banks to
prioritize security patching. However, such a criterion is still miss-
ing for banking apps. As a result, some banks use CVSS [ 23]t o
determine the severity of the identified weaknesses. However, this
3Wedonotdiscloseanyconcreteweaknesstypesordetailsinthesebankingappsto
avoid security threats.
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
	
	











 	!"  	!"
!"!"
 " "# 	
# 	




##  	 	


$$
 % %
 	 	




Figure8:Flowofsecurityweaknessesfromparentbanksto
subsidiarybanksacrosstheworld.Theflowwidthindicatesthe number of weaknesses originating and terminating be-tween two corresponding banks. Different types of banksare encoded by different colors.
standard is not perfect in practice [ 25–27,58], and provides few
principled ways to characterize security risks and potential im-pact. Moreover, we find these banks hold subjective attitudes to-
wardfixingdifferenttypesofweaknesses.Forexample,mostbanks
are concerned about obvious privacy leakage ( e.g., leakage from
SharedPreference , Logging, SMS, SD Card, Text File, and Web-
View DB), while they are only aware of and somehow reluctant to
fix theweaknesses, suchas ICC Leakage,Invalid Certificate, and
InsecureHashFunction.Table6summarizesourobservationson
variousbanks’attitudestowardsdifferentweaknesses,whichare
classifiedby“Concerned"(highpriority)and“Aware"(lowpriority).
Lackofsystematicsecuritychecksandvalidationtools. Many
bankingappsdonotundergoasystematicsecuritycheckandval-
idation before delivery — Ausera discovers a large number of
high-severityweaknesses, e.g.,sensitivedataleakage,hard-coded
key and invalid authentication. With the assistance of Ausera,
many banks, e.g., OCBC and Zijin Bank, expeditiously patched the
weaknesses in their new versions. However, ironically, some banks
patched the weaknesses but introduced new ones at the same time.
For example, C∗patched two weaknesses ( i.e., Logging Leakage
and HTTP Protocol) by employing SSL over HTTPS communi-cation. However, new weaknesses are introduced in the updated
version,i.e.,theappfailstoverifytheidentityofthebankserver
(checkServerTrusted ),whichechoesthefindingof[ 63,64]that
4 apps have new vulnerabilities. Due to lack of systematic security
checks and validation tools, many security weaknesses still reside
in these apps.Table 6: Different concerns from banks
Security Weaknesses
ConcernedScreenshot, SharedPreference Leakage, Logging
Leakage,SMSLeakage,SDCardLeakage,TextFile
Leakage, WebView DB Leakage, Invalid Authentica-
tion,Hard-coded Key, Insecure SecureRandom
AwareICCLeakage,HTTP Protocol,Invalid Certificate, Im-
proper AES/RSA, Insecure Hash Function
Outdatedversionsremainineffectinthewild. Banksusually
holdtheassumptionthatcustomersalwayskeeptheirappsupdated,
and thus concentrate more on the weaknesses of latest versions
thanthoseofoutdatedversions.However,thisassumptionis not
true,consideringthedevicefragmentationproblem—Androidappshavetobecompatiblewithmorethan10majorversionsofAndroid
OS running on over 24,000 distinct device models; and it is alsodangerous, considering attackers can leverage the weaknesses ofoutdated versions to mount specific attacks. We find that most
bankingappsacrossmultipleversionsstillremainineffectinthe
wild(e.g.,Apkmonk[ 24]).Onaverage,theseappshave7.7different
versions,andthemostfragmentedapphas25versions.Thus,we
strongly recommend banks push compulsory app updates to the
customers or block access to outdated apps, especially when high-
severity weaknesses were patched.Risksfromthird-partylibraries.
Ourstudyfindsthethird-party
libraries, e.g.,com.google.android.gms.∗ andcom.facebook.∗ ,
arewidelyusedinbankingapps.AuseradetectsBHIM(v2.3.6)and
MyAadhar (v1.9.3) use insecure third-party hash functions, such as
MD5andSHA-1,toproducemessagedigests,whichhavealready
been accepted as insecure [ 66,73]. Banks still use these insecure
functions despite being aware of the insecure, as they assume that
ordinaryattackersarenotcapableof breakingthem.H owever,it
is still possible for experienced attackers to mount a large-scaleattacks by exploiting these weaknesses. Banks are liable if theyuse security-weakened or poisoned third-party libraries without
careful inspection. To avoid an “amplification effect” caused by the
weaknessesinthird-partylibraries[ 41],westronglyrecommend
banksto carefully inspect third-party libraries in use.
Answer to RQ5. Incomplete security criterion provides banks
wide leeway to use one-sided judgment about specific security
practices.Wealsoobservethatoutdatedversionsandweaknesses
fromthird-partylibrariesarealllikelytobeexploited.Theyre-
main unfixed for weeks to months post-disclosure. This gap pro-
videsopportunitiesforattackerstostrike.Understandingthegap
betweenindustrialpractitionersandacademicresearchershelp
illuminatethe nature of patching process.
3.5 CaseStudies of Weaknesses
To showcase the exploitability of these weaknesses, we introduce 4
vulnerableappsreported by Ausera.
Screenshot weakness. A∗Bank (v3.3.1.0038) employs two-factor
authentication, i.e.,theuserfirstinputstheusernameandpassword,
and then enters verification code sent by the bank server. It can be
attacked if the login page is not protected (without setting the flag
WindowManager.LayoutParams.FLAG_SECURE to prohibit taking
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
11(%$! !%%)"$&"$$!
#$(&("($!&%234
2&%.$  $.%2334
&"$&"$A! $%.&23-&"$&"$8A%%)"$$%.&23-11(%$! 
&"$.#'&&$!26! 6,&%$! 
.&*&233-11(%%)"$&"$8.#'&&$!26%%)"$6,&%%)"$
.&*&233-
&"$."  &23-&"$8."  &23-
$&'$!-
58
9:
;
<=
>
?
@
878889
8:
Figure 9: Simplified code of Prefer-
enceweakness in G∗00"% (  ""'#$! 
"&$%%'!&"%1! %)%! %)%25
1(#$! 12 25
%"1. #!  ""-"/+#2,
6
00  ""'#$! 
#'%!! (#$! 125
!  %! ! A  ( !  %! 12,
! -#'##&$%12, #%&# %#&,
6
00 $#'#
"& '!#'##&$%1<7@#%34
)<7@#%%##+%# $%#25
00! !% 
68
9:
;
<
=
>
?
@
87
88
89
8:
8;
8<
Figure 10: Simplified code of update
weakness in I∗ SMS8
9:
;
<
=
>
?
@
87
88
898:8;
8<
8="#'%%# 	A .@?>=<;:987/ ,
"#'%%# 
A .% 9<%?@=8/ ,
00 #*"%%
"&$%%%#   #*"%%# 1%# %)%25
"#"#A"#-%	 $1 .00! / 2,
"#- %18+
+	2," )% A*%$!)1"#-! 122,
#%&# %)%,
6
00#*"%%
"&$%%%#  #*"%%# 1%#  %#25
"#"#A"#-%	 $1 .00! / 2,
"#- %19+
+	2,
 %# A"#-! 1)!*%$1 %#22,
#%&#  #*"%%#,
6
Figure 11: Simplified code of en/decryption
weakness in N∗
Table 7: Weaknesses tracking of 21 banking apps. 16 banks have
alreadypatchedtheirbankingapps,andtheresthaveconfirmedthe
weaknessesintheirrepliesandwillfixthemsooninnewversions.
No.BankingApps #W #Patched #New Country Downloads
1 HSBC∗5 2 0 UK 5M - 10M
2 PSD Bank 3 2 0 Germany 50K - 100K
3 BBBank 3 2 0 Germany 50K - 100K
4IntesaSanpaolo
Mobile5 2 0 Italy 1M - 5M
5 AIB Mobile 8 1 0 Ireland 5M - 10M
6 Alma Bank 6 3 0 Russia 5K - 10K
7 Discover Mobile 8 4 0 USA 10M - 50M
8CitizensBankof Lafayette2 1 2 USA 5K - 10K
9 CDB 6 2 2 China 5K - 10K
10 Zijin Bank 8 7 0 China 10K - 50K
11 DBS 10 0 0 Singapore 5M - 10M
12 OCBC 9 8 0 Singapore 5M - 10M
13 MyAadhar 4 0 0 India 50M - 100M
14 BHIM 3 2 0 India 10M - 50M
15 ICICI Netbanking 7 0 0 India 100M - 500M
16 ICICI Pockets 7 0 0 India 50M - 100M
17 GCash 11 8 0 Philippines 10M - 50M
18 Bank Australia 7 2 0 Australia 10K - 50K
19 CaixaBank 5 2 0 Brazil 1M - 5M
20 BMCE Bank 5 2 0 Morocco 100K - 500K
21 NMB Mobile Bank 4 0 1 Zimbabwe 10K - 50K
“#W”:Thenumber of detected weaknesses. “#Patched”: the number of patched weaknesses in
update versions. “#New”: The number of newly-introduced weaknesses in update versions.
“∗”: The HSBC Cybersecurity team has reviewed and responded that the remaining three reported
“weaknesses” in v2.7.1 are not vulnerabilities. These features have been purposely retained to
supportmarket-specific customer requirements.
screenshot ), and the verification code can be accessed with granted
permissions. As such, we generate a malicious app [ 33,68] that
runs a service which can take screenshot of the screen and read
the verification code from SMS during the process of login. As a
result, the remote attacker can steal the credentials and bypass the
loginauthentication.Notethatthecraftedmalware[ 38,49,50]has
bypassedthesecurityvettingofGooglePlayandissuccessfullyput
on the shelf, which makesthis attackmore practical [36, 37, 39].Preference weakness.
Figure 9 shows the vulnerable code of a
Preference weakness in G∗Bank (v1.1) from Algeria. This appstoresthecredentials( i.e.,usernameandpassword)into Preference
named UnamePrefs andPasswordPrefs (lines6-9). Tosteal these
credentials, we can either (1) create a malicious app signed with
the samekey,so that it can runin the same sandbox asthe victim
app on a non-rooted device; or (2) create a malicious app that mod-
ifies the original file permission from “660” to “777” by running
Runtime.getRuntime().exec onrooteddevices[ 63,64].Ineither
way,themalwarecanaccessthevictim’ssensitivedatastoredin
thePreference . Even worse, we find that several apps use inse-
cure permissions MODE_WORLD_READABLE/WRITEABLE rather than
MODE_PRIVATE, which eases such attacks.
Versionupdateweakness. I∗SMS Bank (v5.0) is detected as hav-
ing a MITM risk during version updates, the vulnerable code isshown in Figure 10. The app checks new versions with the bankserver once started (line 3), but does not verify the
X.509certifi-
cates from SSL servers (lines 11-15). It allows MITM attackers to
spoof the server by crafting an arbitrary certificate. As a result, the
new versioncan bedownloaded toSD Card froman attackserver
(line 4). To exploit this, we use Burp Suite [6] andFiddler[8]t o
foolthebankingapp,bysendingamaliciousapptoimpersonate
the most recent version [ 4]. After this malicious app is installed, it
serves as a phishing app to steal user credentials and other data.Encryption/Decryption attack.
Ausera detects an encryption
weakness in N∗Bank (v1.8) as shown in Figure 11. It leaves the
hard-coded AES keys ( IVandKEY) as plain text (lines 1-2), and
uses them to encrypt and decrypt the communication between the
app and the bank server. By leveraging these keys, we successfully
decryptallsensitivedataduringcommunication.Moreover,AES
uses blockcipher modes. If we set with NoPadding (lines 5 and12),
it is easier for attackers to subvert encryption because they only
need to decrypt one of the blocks.
4 LESSONS LEARNED AND LIMITATIONS
Lessons learned. (1) According to the security assessment of
global banking apps in Table 5, banking apps are not as secureas we expected in the real world. Meanwhile, the results of the
global status and longitudinal studies unveil many security threats
andunreasonablephenomena.Stockholderssuchassecurityteamsinbanksshouldpaymoreattentiononthesesecurityissues.(2)The
processes of weakness reporting and patches tracking reveal the
gapsbetweenacademicresearchers,banks,andthird-partysecurity
companies.(3)The processes ofmeeting and discussionsbetween
correspondingbanks bringusefulrecommendations,and someof
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
themhavebeenusedtoimprovethebankingappsecurity.(4)From
theperspectiveofbanks,theyshouldpaymoreattentiontosecu-
rityissuescomparedwithfunctionalbugs.Meanwhile,theyshould
providevariouschannelstorespondtothereportedvulnerabilities,
to make thepatching process more efficient.(5) Fortunately, some
of banks have accepted our reported vulnerabilities and actively
collaboratedwithustoimprovetheirappsecuritybyusingAusera
before releasing new app versions.Limitations.
(1)Theproposeddata-relatedbaselineisintegrated
bymanychannelsbasedonourdepthunderstandingandknowl-
edge,thusmightbeincomplete.However,wecaninvestigatethe
globalecosystemofbankingappsbasedonthebaseline.Meanwhile,
accordingtothecommunicationswithrealbanks,theyarehighly
concernedaboutthesecurityweaknessesweproposedinTable1.
(2)Thekeyworddatabaseisconstructedfirstwithmanualselection
ofkeywords,andthenextendedwiththehelpofNLPtechniques.
However,someofkeywordsmaybeignoredinthemanualanalysis
process. Actually, the database can be further extended with the
increasingbankingapps.(3)Auseraisbuiltonthetopofthestaticanalysisframework(i.e.Soot),thusinheritsthelimitationof Soot
thatit may fail and lose some data flows, creating false negatives.
5 RELATED WORK
Securityassessmentofbankingapps. In2015,Reavesetal.[ 64]
realizedthesevereweaknessesofbranchlessbankingapps.They
reverse engineered and then manually analyzed 7 apps from devel-
oping countries, and last found 28 significant weaknesses. Most of
these weaknesses remained unresolved after one year [ 63]. Chana-
jitt et al. [ 31] also manually analyzed 7 banking apps, and inves-
tigatedthreetypesofweaknesses,includinghowmuchsensitive
data is stored on device, whether the original apps can be substi-tuted, and whether communication with the remote server can
beintercepted.Ourstudydiffersfrom[ 31,63,64]withregardsto
thescopeofthestudy.Whereas[ 31,63,64]mainlyleveragecase
studiestostudybankingapps,thefocusofourpaperistoconductalarge-scaleempiricalstudyonsecurityweaknessesofbankingapps.
Furthermore, we also incorporate multidisciplinary expertise ( e.g.,
codecomprehension,regulations,economics)tointerpretthepo-
tential causes of occurrence of security weaknesses. Our work also
differs from alternative topics, such as functional bugs [ 47,48,67],
performance[ 56]andfragmentation[ 74].Fortheconcretesecurity
weaknesses, for example, SSL issues have been widely discussed
in [46], which suggests revisiting the SSL handling in applied plat-
forms(e.g.,iOSandAndroid).Followedbyrecentreports[ 53,61]
andourobservation,wefindthatmanybankingappshavefairly
weakorevennoauthenticationandencryptionmechanisms.Soun-
thirarajetal.[ 65]proposedtocombinestaticanddynamicanalysis
toidentifysecurityproblemsinSSL/TLSforAndroidapps.Georgievetal.[
51]focusedonSSLconnectionauthenticationofnon-browser
software, indicating that SSL certificate validation is defective and
vulnerabilities are logical errors, due to the poor design of APIs to
SSL libraries and misuse of such APIs. Egele et al. [ 42] checked for
violationsof6cryptographicrules(usingcryptographicAPIs)in
real-world Android apps. They applied static analysis to extract
necessaryinformationtoevaluatethepropertiesandshowedthat
about88%oftheappsviolatethesecurityrules.Forourresearch,wealsointegratetheseaforementionedweaknessesasvulnerable
security points, and examine whether banking apps contain these
vulnerabilities.
Globalanalysis of banking apps. Castleetal.[ 30]conducteda
manual analysis of 197 Android apps and interviewed 7 app devel-
opersacrossdevelopingcountries(AfricaandSouthAmerica).Theydivided13hypotheticalattacksinto5categoriesandconcludedthat
realistic concernsare onSMS interceptions,server attacks,MITM
attacks, unauthorized access, etc. Lebeck et al. [ 53] summarized
weaknessesofmobilemoneyappsindevelopingeconomies,and
combined existing techniques ( e.g., cryptocurrencies) to achieve
security and functionality goals. Parasa et al. [ 61] studied 9 mostly-
used mobile money apps across 9 Australasian countries, and re-ported the security weaknesses in authentication, data integrity,
poor protocol implementation, malfunction, and overlooked attack
vectors.Theyreportedthattheappsfromcomparativelydeveloped
countries( e.g.,AliPay,Osaifu-Keitai)alsohaveweaknesses.Be-
sides,Tayloretal.[ 69]adoptedtwooff-the-shelftoolstoroughly
scantheappsthatarelabeledasfinancefromGooglePlayStore.All
these prior work adopts small-scale analysis or is taken by survey,
while our results are obtained in an automated and largest-scale
fashion, which have not been systematically scrutinized before.Besides, Chen et al. [
35] focused on studying the details of issue-
reportingandissue-patchinglifecyclebasedontheresultsofweak-
nessdetectiontoolslikeAusera[ 34].It unveilsgaps betweenthe
industryandacademiaregardingtheinconsistentunderstanding
ofreportedissuesandresponsibilities.However,inthispaper,we
propose a comprehensive taxonomy of data-related security weak-
nessesforbankingapps,andproposeadetectionapproachbased
on the taxonomy. Using Ausera, we conducted experiments to
identify security weaknesses and investigate the overall ecosystem
of global banking apps from multiple aspects.
SecurityanalysisofAndroidapps. Taintanalysisisacommonly-
usedmethodtorevealpotentialprivacyleakageinAndroidapps.
Forexample,TaintDroid[ 43]isadynamictaint-tracingtoolwhich
tracks flows of private data by modifying Dalvik virtual machine;
FlowDroid and IccTA [ 29,54] are both static taint analysis tools
that accept the sourceandsinkconfigurations for privacy leaks.
However,thesetoolstargetongeneralapps[ 32],andthusmaynot
beabletounveilspecificsecurityweaknesses(summarizedinTa-
ble1)whenappliedforbankingapps.Wealsodetailthedifferences
in Section 2.2.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we conduct a large-scale comprehensive empirical
study on the collected 2,157 security weaknesses of 693 banking
appsacrossmorethan80countriesfromvariousaspects.Tocollect
the dataset, we also propose a three-phase system, Ausera, toautomatically identify data-related weaknesses in banking apps.Our detected security weaknesses (i.e., 52 security weaknesses)
havebeenconfirmedandpatchedbythe21correspondingbanks
andsomeofthemhaveactivelycollaboratedwithustoimprovethe
securityoftheirbankingapps.Thestudyalsonarrowsdownthe
gaps between academic research and industrial banks, and helps
both banks and third-party companies to better tackle security
weaknesses.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea S. Chen, L. Fan, G. Meng, T. Su, M. Xue, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, and L. Xu
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Weappreciateallthereviewersfortheirvaluablecomments.We
would like to acknowledge HSBC Cybersecurity team for their
conscientious response to our responsible disclosure. This work is
partially supported by the National Satellite of Excellence in Trust-
worthySoftwareSystem(AwardNo.NRF2018NCR-NSOE003-0001),
theNationalResearchFoundation,PrimeMinistersOffice,Singa-
pore under its National Cybersecurity R&D Program (Award No.
NRF2018NCR-NCR005-0001) and the Singapore National Research
Foundation under NCR Award Number NRF2018NCR-NSOE004-
0001.
REFERENCES
[1]2007. Kenya sets world first with money transfers by mobile. https://
www .theguardian .com/money/2007/mar/20/kenya .mobilephones.(2007).
[2] 2015. AndroBugs. https://github .com/AndroBugs/.(2015).
[3]2015. Over $7,000 lost in malware attack at fake banking por-
tal. http://www .straitstimes .com/singapore/over-7000-lost-in-malware-attack-
at-fake-banking-portal/. (2015).
[4]2017. Androidvulnerabilityallowsattackerstomodifyappswithoutaffecting
their signatures. https://www .helpnetsecurity .com/2017/12/11/android-modify-
apps-without-affecting-signatures/. (2017).
[5]2017. Apktool: A tool for reverse engineering Android apk files. https:
//ibotpeaches .github .io/Apktool/.(2017).
[6] 2017. BurpSuite. https://portswigger .net/burp.(2017).
[7]2017. Data Dispatch: The world’s 100 largest banks. http://www .snl .com/
web/client?auth =inherit#news/article?id =40223698&cdid =A-40223698-11568.
(2017).
[8]2017. Fiddler:FreeWebDebuggingProxy-Telerik. http://www .telerik .com/
fiddler.(2017).
[9]2017. Flaw discovered in banking apps leaving millions vulnerable
to hack. http://www .telegraph .co.uk/science/2017/12/06/flaw-discovered-
banking-apps-leaving-millions-vulnerable-hack/.(2017).
[10]2017. Google Best Practices for Security & Privacy. https:
//developer .android .com/training/best-security .html.(2 2017).
[11]2017. Hackers’ Delight: Mobile bank app security flaw couldhave smacked millions. https://www
.theregister .co.uk/2017/12/11/
mobile_banking_security_research/.(2017).
[12]2017. Kenya tops Africa in use of mobile financial services. http:
//kenyanwallstreet .com/kenya-tops-africa-use-mobile-financial-services-
report. (2017).
[13]2017. Mobile-Security-Framework-MobSF. https://github .com/MobSF/Mobile-
Security-Framework-MobSF. (2017).
[14]2017. OWASP: OWASP Mobile Security Project. https://www .owasp .org/
index .php/Mobile_Top_10_2016-Top_10. (2 2017).
[15]2017. PCI:Security StandardsCouncil. https://www .pcisecuritystandards .org/.
(2017).
[16]2017. QARK:TooltolookforseveralsecurityrelatedAndroidapplicationvul-
nerabilities. https://github .com/linkedin/qark.(2017).
[17] 2017. Qihoo360(Appscan). http://appscan .360 .cn/.(2017).
[18]2017. The EU General Data Protection Regulation. https://www .eugdpr .org/.
(2017).
[19]2018. Apache OpenNLP 1.8.3. https://opennlp .apache .org/news/release-
183 .html/.(2018).
[20] 2018. AUSERA. https://sites .google .com/view/ausera/.(2018).
[21]2018. CVE: Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures. https://cve .mitre .org/.
(2018).
[22] 2018. CWE:CommonWeaknessEnumeration. https://cwe .mitre .org/.(2018).
[23] 2018. The CommonVulnerability Scoring System. https://www .first .org/cvss/.
(2018).
[24] 2019. Apkmonk. (2019). https://www .apkmonk .com
[25]2019. Scoring security vulnerabilities 101: Introducing CVSS for CVEs.
(2019). https://snyk .io/blog/scoring-security-vulnerabilities-101-introducing-
cvss-for-cve/
[26]2019. Towards Improving CVSS. (2019). https://resources .sei .cmu .edu/library/
asset-view .cfm?assetID =538368
[27]Luca Allodi, Sebastian Banescu, Henning Femmer, and Kristian Beckers. 2018.
Identifyingrelevant information cues for vulnerability assessment using CVSS.
InProceedings of the Eighth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security
andPrivacy. 119–126.
[28]Benjamin Andow, Akhil Acharya, Dengfeng Li, William Enck, Kapil Singh, and
TaoXie.2017. UiRef:analysisofsensitiveuserinputsinAndroidapplications.In
Proceedingsofthe10thACMConferenceonSecurityandPrivacyinWirelessandMobileNetworks. ACM, 23–34.
[29]Steven Arzt, Siegfried Rasthofer, Christian Fritz, Eric Bodden, Alexandre Bar-
tel,JacquesKlein,YvesLeTraon,DamienOcteau,andPatrickMcDaniel.2014.
Flowdroid: Precise context, flow, field, object-sensitive and lifecycle-aware taint
analysisfor Androidapps. Acm Sigplan Notices 49,6 (2014), 259–269.
[30]SamCastle,FahadPervaiz,GalenWeld,FranziskaRoesner,andRichardAnderson.
2016. Let’stalkmoney:Evaluatingthesecuritychallengesofmobilemoneyin
the developing world. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual Symposium on Computing
forDevelopment. ACM, 4.
[31]Rajchada Chanajitt, Wantanee Viriyasitavat, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo.2018. Forensic analysis and security assessment of Android m-banking apps.
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences 50,1 (2018), 3–19.
[32]SenChen,LinglingFan,ChunyangChen,TingSu,WenheLi,YangLiu,andLihua
Xu. 2019. Storydroid: Automated generation of storyboard for Android apps. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE
Press, 596–607.
[33]Sen Chen,Lingling Fan,Chunyang Chen, MinhuiXue, Yang Liu,and Lihua Xu.
2019. GUI-Squatting Attack: Automated Generation of Android Phishing Apps.
IEEETransactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2019).
[34]Sen Chen, Guozhu Meng, Ting Su, Lingling Fan, Minhui Xue, Yinxing Xue, Yang
Liu,andLihuaXu.2018. Ausera:Large-scaleautomatedsecurityriskassessment
of global mobile banking apps. arXivpreprint arXiv:1805.05236 (2018).
[35]Sen Chen, Ting Su, Lingling Fan, Guozhu Meng, Minhui Xue, Yang Liu, and
Lihua Xu. 2018. Are mobile banking apps secure? what can be improved?. In
Proceedingsofthe201826thACMJointMeetingonEuropeanSoftwareEngineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . ACM,
797–802.
[36]SenChen,MinhuiXue,LinglingFan,ShuangHao,LihuaXu,HaojinZhu,and
Bo Li. 2018. Automated poisoning attacks and defenses in malware detectionsystems:An adversarial machinelearning approach. Computers& Security 73
(2018),326–344.
[37]Sen Chen, Minhui Xue, Lingling Fan, Lei Ma, Yang Liu, and Lihua Xu. 2019.
How can we craft large-scale Android malware? An automated poisoning at-
tack.In2019IEEE1stInternationalWorkshoponArtificialIntelligenceforMobile
(AI4Mobile). IEEE, 21–24.
[38]Sen Chen, Minhui Xue, Zhushou Tang, Lihua Xu, and Haojin Zhu. 2016. Storm-
droid: A streaminglized machine learning-based system for detecting android
malware. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and
CommunicationsSecurity . ACM, 377–388.
[39]Sen Chen, Minhui Xue, and Lihua Xu. 2016. Towards adversarial detection of
mobilemalware:poster.In Proceedingsofthe22ndAnnualInternationalConference
on Mobile Computing and Networking. ACM, 415–416.
[40]TomChothia,FlavioDGarcia,ChrisHeppel,andChrisMcMahonStone.2017.
WhybankerBob(still)can’tgetTLSright:ASecurityAnalysisofTLSinLeading
UK Banking Apps. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
DataSecurity. Springer, 579–597.
[41]Erik Derr, Sven Bugiel, Sascha Fahl, Yasemin Acar, and Michael Backes. 2017.
KeepmeUpdated:AnEmpiricalStudyofThird-PartyLibraryUpdatabilityon
Android. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
CommunicationsSecurity . 2187–2200.
[42]Manuel Egele, David Brumley, Yanick Fratantonio, and Christopher Kruegel.
2013. An empirical study of cryptographic misuse in Android applications. In
Proceedingsofthe2013ACMSIGSACconferenceonComputer&communications
security. ACM, 73–84.
[43]William Enck, Peter Gilbert, Seungyeop Han, Vasant Tendulkar, Byung-Gon
Chun, Landon P Cox, Jaeyeon Jung, Patrick McDaniel, and Anmol N Sheth. 2014.
TaintDroid:Aninformation-flowtrackingsystemforrealtimeprivacymonitoring
on smartphones. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (2014).
[44]European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 1995. Directive95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995
ontheprotectionofindividualswithregardtotheprocessingofpersonaldata
andonthefreemovementofsuchdata. OfficialJournalL 281(1995),0031–0050.
[45]Sascha Fahl, Marian Harbach, Thomas Muders, Lars Baumgärtner, Bernd
Freisleben,andMatthewSmith.2012. WhyEveandMalloryloveAndroid:An
analysisof Android SSL (in) security. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference
on Computer and communications security. ACM, 50–61.
[46]SaschaFahl,MarianHarbach,HenningPerl,MarkusKoetter,andMatthewSmith.
2013. RethinkingSSLdevelopmentinanappifiedworld.In Proceedingsofthe2013
ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer & communications security. ACM, 49–60.
[47]LinglingFan,TingSu,SenChen,GuozhuMeng,YangLiu,LihuaXu,andGeguang
Pu.2018. Efficientlymanifestingasynchronousprogrammingerrorsinandroid
apps. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering. 486–497.
[48]LinglingFan,TingSu,SenChen,GuozhuMeng,YangLiu,LihuaXu,GeguangPu,
and Zhendong Su. 2018. Large-scale Analysis of Framework-specific Exceptions
in Android Apps. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE’18). 408–419.
An Empirical Assessment of Security Risks of Global Android Banking Apps ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
[49]LinglingFan,MinhuiXue,SenChen,LihuaXu,andHaojinZhu.2016. Poster:
Accuracy vs. time cost: Detecting Android malware through pareto ensemble
pruning. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
communicationssecurity. ACM, 1748–1750.
[50]Ruitao Feng, Sen Chen, Xiaofei Xie, Lei Ma, Guozhu Meng, Yang Liu, and Shang-
WeiLin.2019.MobiDroid:APerformance-SensitiveMalwareDetectionSystemon
MobilePlatform.In 201924thInternational Conference onEngineeringofComplex
ComputerSystems(ICECCS) . IEEE, 61–70.
[51]MartinGeorgiev,SubodhIyengar,SumanJana,RishitaAnubhai,DanBoneh,and
VitalyShmatikov.2012. Themostdangerouscodeintheworld:validatingSSL
certificatesinnon-browsersoftware.In Proceedingsofthe2012ACMconference
on Computer and communications security. ACM, 38–49.
[52]Jianjun Huang, Zhichun Li, Xusheng Xiao, Zhenyu Wu, Kangjie Lu, Xiangyu
Zhang,andGuofeiJiang.2015. SUPOR:PreciseandScalableSensitiveUserInput
Detectionfor AndroidApps.In USENIXSecurity Symposium. 977–992.
[53]KironLebeck,TemitopeOluwafemi,TadayoshiKohno,andFranziskaRoesner.
2015.RethinkingMobileMoneySecurityforDevelopingRegions . TechnicalReport.
Universityof Washington.
[54]LiLi,AlexandreBartel,TegawendéFBissyandé,JacquesKlein,YvesLeTraon,
StevenArzt,SiegfriedRasthofer,EricBodden,DamienOcteau,andPatrickMc-
Daniel. 2015. Iccta: Detecting inter-component privacy leaks in Android apps. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software Engineering-Volume
1. IEEE Press, 280–291.
[55]Chia-Chi Lin, Hongyang Li, Xiao-yong Zhou, and XiaoFeng Wang. 2014. Screen-
milker:How to Milk Your Android Screen for Secrets.. In NDSS.
[56]Yepang Liu, Chang Xu, and Shing-Chi Cheung. 2014. Characterizing and De-
tecting Performance Bugs for Smartphone Applications. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2014). 1013–1024.
http://doi .acm .org/10 .1145/2568225 .2568229
[57]Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient
estimationofwordrepresentationsinvectorspace. arXivpreprintarXiv:1301.3781
(2013).
[58]Nuthan Munaiah and Andrew Meneely. 2016. Vulnerability severity scoring and
bounties: Why the disconnect?. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Software Analytics. ACM, 8–14.
[59]Prateek Panda. 2015. Security Report of Top 100 Mobile Banking Apps-APAC .
Technical Report. Appknox.
[60]PrateekPanda.2016. ASecurityAnalysisofTheTop500GlobalE-commerceMobile
Apps in USA, UK, Australia, Singapore and India. Technical Report. Appknox.
[61]Swathi Parasa and Lynn Margaret Batten. 2016. Mobile Money in the Aus-
tralasianRegion-ATechnicalSecurityPerspective.In InternationalConferenceon
Applications and Techniques in Information Security. Springer, 154–162.[62]Siegfried Rasthofer, Steven Arzt, and Eric Bodden. 2014. A Machine-learning
ApproachforClassifyingandCategorizingAndroidSourcesandSinks..In NDSS.
[63]Bradley Reaves, Jasmine Bowers, Nolen Scaife, Adam Bates, Arnav Bhartiya,
PatrickTraynor,andKevinRBButler.2017. Mo(bile)money,Mo(bile)Problems:
Analysisofbranchlessbankingapplications. ACMTransactionsonPrivacyand
Security (TOPS) 20,3 (2017), 11.
[64]Bradley Reaves, Nolen Scaife, Adam M Bates, Patrick Traynor, and Kevin RB
Butler.2015.Mo(bile)Money,Mo(bile)Problems:AnalysisofBranchlessBanking
Applicationsin the Developing World. In USENIXSecurity. 17–32.
[65]DavidSounthiraraj,JustinSahs,GarretGreenwood,ZhiqiangLin,andLatifur
Khan.2014. Smv-hunter:Largescale,automateddetectionofSSL/TLSman-in-
the-middlevulnerabilitiesinAndroidapps.In InProceedingsofthe21stAnnual
Network andDistributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 14) . Citeseer.
[66]Marc Stevens, Elie Bursztein, Pierre Karpman, Ange Albertini, and Yarik Markov.
2017. The First Collision for Full SHA-1. In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO
2017 - 37th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
August 20-24, 2017, Proceedings. 570–596.
[67]Ting Su, Guozhu Meng, Yuting Chen, Ke Wu, Weiming Yang, Yao Yao, Geguang
Pu,YangLiu,andZhendongSu.2017. Guided,stochasticmodel-basedGUItesting
ofAndroidapps.In Proceedingsofthe201711thJointMeetingonFoundationsof
Software Engineering. 245–256.
[68]Chongbin Tang, Sen Chen, Lingling Fan, Lihua Xu, Yang Liu, Zhushou Tang,
andLiangDou.2019. Alarge-scaleempiricalstudyonindustrialfakeapps.In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineeringin Practice. IEEE Press, 183–192.
[69]VF Taylor and I Martinovic. 2017. A Longitudinal Study of Financial Apps in the
Google Play Store. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Lecture Notes in
ComputerScience(LNCS).SpringerBerlinHeidelberg .
[70]Chris Thompson, Ryan Leininger, and Roshani Bhatt. 2017. Mobile Banking
Applications: Security Challenges for Banks. Technical Report. Accenture &
NowSecure Inc.
[71]RajaVallée-Rai,PhongCo, EtienneGagnon,Laurie Hendren,PatrickLam, and
Vijay Sundaresan. 1999. Soot - a Java bytecode optimization framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1999 conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative
research. IBM Press, 13.
[72]XiaoyunWang,YiqunLisa Yin,andHongboYu.2005. Findingcollisions inthe
full SHA-1.In Crypto, Vol. 3621. Springer, 17–36.
[73]XiaoyunWangandHongboYu.2005.HowtobreakMD5andotherhashfunctions.
InEurocrypt, Vol. 3494. Springer, 19–35.
[74]Lili Wei, Yepang Liu, and Shing-Chi Cheung. 2016. Taming Android Fragmenta-
tion: Characterizing and Detecting Compatibility Issues for Android Apps. In
Proceedingsofthe31stIEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonAutomatedSoftware
Engineering (ASE2016). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 226–237.
