Prober: Practically Defending Overflows with Page Protection
Hongyu Liu∗†
liu2978@purdue.edu
Purdue University
USARuiqin Tian∗
rtian@email.wm.edu
William & Mary
USA
Bin Ren
bren@cs.wm.edu
William & Mary
USATongping Liu†
tongping@umass.edu
University of Massachusetts Amherst
USA
ABSTRACT
Heap-based overflows are still not completely solved even after
decades of research. This paper proposes Prober, a novel systemaiming to detect and prevent heap overflows in the productionenvironment. Prober leverages a key observation based on theanalysis of dozens of real bugs: all heap overflows are related toarrays. Based on this observation, Prober only focuses on array-
relatedheapobjects,insteadofallheapobjects.Proberutilizesstatic
analysis to label all susceptible call-stacks during the compilation,
andthenemploysthepageprotectiontodetectanyinvalidaccesses
during the runtime. In addition to this, Prober integrates multiple
existing methodstogether toensure theefficiency of itsdetection.
Overall,Proberintroducesalmostnegligibleperformanceoverhead,
with 1.5% on average. Prober not only stops possible attacks on
time,but alsoreports thefaultyinstructions thatcould guidebug
fixes.Proberisreadyfordeploymentduetoitseffectivenessand
low overhead.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Softwareanditsengineering →Automatedstaticanalysis ;
Software testing and debugging.
KEYWORDS
Buffer overflow, Program analysis, Page protection
ACM Reference Format:
Hongyu Liu,Ruiqin Tian,Bin Ren,and TongpingLiu. 2020.Prober: Practi-
callyDefendingOverflowswithPageProtection.In 35thIEEE/ACMInterna-
tionalConferenceonAutomatedSoftwareEngineering(ASE’20),September
21–25,2020,VirtualEvent,Australia. ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,13pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416533
∗Both authors contributed equally to this work.
†This work was initiated and partially conducted while Hongyu Liu and Tongping
Liu were at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthe firstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6768-4/20/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.34165331 INTRODUCTION
C/C++ applications are prone to memory errors, such as buffer
overflows (including over-reads/over-writes). Buffer overflows will
notonlycauseaprogramtocrash,butalsocanbeexploitedtoissue
securityattacksorcauseinformationleakage[ 44].Sinceitisnot
able to expunge all buffer overflows during development phases,
highly depending on program inputs, significant research has been
focused on detecting and preventing buffer overflows dynamically.
Among them, stack-based overflows can be detected with very low
overhead (less than 6.5%) via the shadow stack technique [ 44]. But
heap-basedoverflowsarestillnotsolvedyet,sincetheywerestill
ranked as Top 2 vulnerabilities (as shown in Table 1).
Table 1: Top five vulnerabilities reported in 2018 [10].
Vulnerabilities DoSCode Execution Overflow XSS Gain Information
16555 1852 3035 2492 2004 1426
Dynamic detection tools can be further divided into multiple
types. The most common approach is to check the overflow before
everymemoryaccess,whichcouldstoptheoverflowimmediatelyif
amemoryaccessisfoundtoaccessredzonesthatarenotsupposed
to be read or written. Existing work, such as Valgrind [ 30], Dr.
Memory [ 5], and AddressSanitizer [ 40], employs this approach,
but withstatic or dynamicinstrumentation method, anddifferent
organization of red zones. However, even the state-of-the-art of
this type, e.g. AddressSanitizer, still imposes over 40% performanceoverhead,inadditiontoitssignificantmemoryoverhead.Therefore,
this type of approach is only applicable for development phases,
but not for the production environment.
Efficientapproachesexist,suchasCruiser[ 48],DoubleTake[ 26],
HeapTherapy [ 49], or iReplayer [ 24]. They detect buffer overflows
after the effect, typically by checking the evidence of corrupted
canaries. Althoughtheyimpose very low overhead,generally less
than 5%, they cannot detect read-based overflows because reads
do not leave any evidence behind. Also, they cannot stop security
attackstimely,sincethedetectionmayoccurafterexploits.Sampler
also imposes littleoverhead by only checking sampled references
via hardware performance counters [ 43]. However, Sampler can-
notdetectalloverflowswithinoneexecutionduetoitssampling
property,andsharesthesameissuethatmayonlydetectoverflows
after exploits.
We propose a novel system, called Prober, to overcome these
issues. Prober has the following goals. First, Prober aims for in-production systems, which should impose low performance and
11162020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
memoryoverhead.Second,Probershoulddetectbothread-based
and write-based overflows. Third, Prober will stop overflows im-
mediately, eliminating any possibility of memory exploits. Last but
not least, Prober is able to report detailed information to assist bug
fixes, e.g., allocation sites and faulty instructions.
To achieve these goals, Prober is based on a key observation
thatseparatesitfromallexistingwork: overflowingobjectsaretypi-
cally related to arrays. This observation is based on our analysis on
dozensofbugscollectedbyexistingwork[ 47](asfurtherdiscussed
in Section 2.1). We further confirmed that this observation holds
foralloverflowsreportedinarandomly-selectedperiodintheCVE
database. This observation is also aligned with the intuition: foran object not related to an array, there is no need of operating it
with error-prone operations, such as pointer arithmetic instruc-
tions,stringAPIs,orloopoperations,thuswithalowpossibilityof
overflows.
Thiskeyobservationidentifiesthetypeofobjectsthatmayhave
bufferoverflows,calledas array-relatedobjects orsusceptibleobjects.
Both terms will be utilized interchangeably in the remainder of
thispaper.Totakeadvantageofthisobservation, Proberproposes
to separate array-related objects from normal objects, by placing
themintoaseparatespace.ThenProberemploysthepageprotec-
tion to detect overflows, an idea that was initially proposed by
ElectricFence[ 37]butcanbeseamlesslyintegratedwiththiskey
observation that reduces the scope of detection. Prober allocatesarray-related objects from a heap that every object is separated
fromeachotherbyprotectedpages.Morespecifically,Proberplaceseveryarray-relatedobjectattheendofcorrespondingpages,while
thenextpagewillbesettobenon-readableandnon-writable(or
protected). Therefore, any overflowing reference (either read or
write)ontheprotectedpagewilltriggeraviolation.Byintercepting
suchviolations,Proberwillimmediatelystoptheexecutionandany
subsequent exploits, and report the faulty instructions precisely.Comparing to the mechanisms of using explicit checks [
30,40],
page protection checks buffer overflows without actually checking
every access, thus imposing no additional checking overhead other
thantheinitialprotectionoverhead.Proberisabletotrackallin-
validaccessesintheprotectedpage,causedbyeithercontinuous
or non-continuous overflows, which could potentially detect more
issues than existing work using one word [ 24,26,43,48,49]o r
multiple words [40] as the canary.
However, the key challenge is to correctly identify all array-
related heap objects. On the one hand, missing array-related ob-jects will lead to no detection/protection of overflows caused bythem, reducing the safety guarantee. On the other hand, if some
unnecessary objects were included, it may impose some overhead
unnecessarily. To this end, Prober proposes a hybrid approach
to identifyarray-related objects. Someobjects can beidentified as
array-related (or not) statically by analyzing the source code as
describedinSection3.1,whiletheremainingoneswillbeidentifiedinahybridway:Prober’sstaticcomponent(Prober-Static)identifies
the basic type of such allocations (easier to do), instruments the
size ofsuch allocationswith thecompiler,and itsruntime system
(Prober-Dynamic)isresponsiblefordeterminingwhetheritisan
array-relatedobjectbytherealallocationsize.Thatis,ifthesize
ofanallocationismultipletimesofthebasictype,thenthisallo-
cation site is identified as susceptible allocation site. Consequently,all future allocations from such sites will be allocated from the
protectedheapsothatalloverflowingreferencescanbedetected
and prevented immediately.
Initsimplementation,Prober-StaticreliesontheLLVMcompiler
to perform the analysis and instrumentation at the Intermediate
Representation (IR) level. Prober proposes to identify array-related
allocationsbasedontheallocationfunction,thedefinitionofthe
sizeparameter, and the operations of the corresponding object.
Afterthat,Prober-Staticfurtherlabelsarray-relatedallocationsites
with simple instrumentation, so that Prober-Dynamic will place
thecorrespondingobjectsintheprotectedheap.Forobjectsthat
cannotbeidentifiedasarray-relatedonesstatically,Prober-Static
simply labels the unit size so that Prober-Dynamic can determine
its type dynamically. Overall, Prober is over-estimated so that it
will not miss any array-related allocations.
Prober-Dynamic intercepts all memory allocations and dealloca-
tionssothatitcandeterminearray-relatedallocationsandmanagearray-relatedallocationscorrespondingly.Prober’skeyobservationrestrictsitsprotectionscopetoasmallportionofobjects,insteadofmonitoringallheapobjects,whichisonemajorreasonwhyProberrunsmuchmoreefficientlythanElectricFence[
37].Further,Prober
also implements carefully to reduce the overhead as follows: (1) It
employsper-threadheapstocacheavailable/freedobjectslocallyinordertoreducethecontentionamongdifferentthreads,anideabor-rowedfromHoard[
3];(2)Itemploysaninformation-computablede-
sign to reduce the checking overhead upon deallocations; (3) Freed
objects are organized by the size of power-of-two pages in order
to encourage the re-utilization of objects, without coalescence and
splitting, which is different from Electric Fence [37].
Wehaveperformedextensiveexperimentstoevaluatetheper-
formanceoverhead,memoryoverhead,andeffectiveness.Basedon
the evaluation of 18 applications, Prober imposes only 1.5% perfor-
manceoverheadonaverageandaround25.9%memoryoverhead,
making it applicable for in-production systems. To ensure that
Prober does not miss any necessary instrumentation, we have con-
firmedthatProberinstrumentscorrectlyforallknownoverflows
collected by existing work [ 47]. Also, we further confirmed that
Probercorrectlydetectsandprevents10knownoverflowswithin
real applications. Prober is ready for in-production systems due to
its low overhead, timely prevention, and effectiveness.
Overall, this paper makes the following contributions.
•It makes a novel key observation that only array-related objects
are prone to overflows based on our analysis of massive bugs.
We further empirically confirm that this observation holds for
randomly-chosen real bugs in the CWE database.
•Itproposesahybridmechanismthatensurestoidentifyallarray-
related allocations. Such a mechanism is based on the allocation
function,thedefinitionof sizeparameterandtheoperationson
thecorrespondingobject,orthecombinationoftheunitsizeand
the requested size.
•It designs and implements a new allocator to manage the pro-
tected heap efficiently, by borrowing multiple mechanisms origi-
nated from different memory allocators.
•Thepaperperformsextensiveevaluationontheperformanceand
effectiveness of Prober, showing that Prober has the potential to
be actually employed in the deployment environment.
1117Table 2: Analysis on 48 heap overflows collected by [47].
Type Overflow Reason Num(#)
Sub-structure
overflowsPointer arithmetic 0
Loop operation 4
System call 0
String APImemcpy 2
strncpy 3
strcpy 1
Whole-structureOverflowsPointer arithmetic 3
Loop operation 20
System call 2
String APImemcpy 6
strncpy 1
strncmp 1
memset 3
sprintf 1
memmove 1
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
firstdescribesthekeyobservation,thebasicideaofProber,andthen
describes the attack model of Prober. The detailed implementation
is further described in Section 3, and the evaluation is presented in
Section4.Afterthat,wediscussProber’sweaknessesinSection5.In
the end, Section 6 discusses related work, and Section 7 concludes.
2 OVERVIEW
Thissectionfirstanalyzesoverflowbugscollectedbyanexisting
study [47], and derives our key observation : overflowing objects
areallrelatedtoarrays.Basedonthiskeyobservation,itfurther
discusses the basic design and key challenges of Prober.
2.1 Observations on Heap Overflows
Onerecentworkstudies100“randomlyselectedbugswithinthe
buffer overflow category from the CVE website” [ 47]. Based on
their description, the study is objective due to random selection,
representingtherealsituationofbufferoverflows.Therefore,our
analysiswasbasedonthesebugstoavoidanybias.Basedonour
analysis,these100overflowbugsinclude48heapoverflows,and
52stackorglobalbufferoverflows.Thissectionfocuseson48heap
overflows,asshowninTable2.Wehavethefollowingobservations.
Thefirstobservationisthatalloftheheapoverflowsareinvolved
witharrays,eithersub-structureorwhole-structureoverflows.Here,
awhole-structure overflow is an overflow that its allocation is an
arrayofstructuresorbasicunits(e.g.,characters,integers,orwords).
Asub-structureoverflow isthattheobject(orallocation)itselfisnot
an array, but the corresponding structure includes one or multiple
arrays internally. It is intuitive that array-related objects are prone
to overflows. If an allocation is just a structure, every field can
bemanipulatedwithamemberaccessoperator(e.g.,“ ->”or“ .”),
whichshouldnotcausetheoverflow.Ontheotherhand,ifanobject
isrelatedtoanarray,thenitisverylikelytoemployerror-prone
operations, such as pointer arithmetic instructions, string APIs, or
loop operations.
The second observation is that whole-structure overflows are
much more common than sub-structure overflows, consisting of
around 79.2% of these bugs (with 38 bugs in total).The third observation is that overflow bugs can be caused by
multiple operations, such as pointer arithmetic instructions, string
APIs, loop operations, or system calls, as further shown in Table 2.
Morespecifically,24outof48overflowsarerelatedtoloopsdur-
ingtheiterations,and19overflowsarerelatedtostringAPIs.For
instance, the memcpyfunction copies more memory than it should.
Thesetwocategoriesactuallyconsistofmorethan89.5%ofthese
bugs.Inadditiontothesetwocategories,threeoverflowsarerelated
to pointer arithmetic, and two overflows occur when the readsys-
tem call does not check the boundary of the buffer. Thus, overflow
occurs if programs utilize the pointers to access the entry of an
array, but without correctly checking its size.
Table3:Heapoverflowsbetween11/01/2018and02/15/2019.
Type Overflow Reason Num(#)
Sub-structure
overflowsLoop operation 4
String API sprintf 1
Whole-structureOverflowsPointer arithmetic 5
Loop operation 15
System call 1
String APImemcpy 4
strncat 1
strncpy 1
memset 2
snprintf 1
memmove 2
ConfirmingKeyObservation: Inordertofurtherconfirmour
key observation, we further examined 65 heap overflow bugs re-
ported in the National Vulnerability Database, with the published
datebetween11/01/2018to02/15/2019.Sinceonly37bugsoutof
65bugshaveadetaileddescriptionorhavethesourcecodeinfor-
mation, we focused on these 37 bugs. Based on our analysis, all of
these37bugsarearray-related,wherewhole-structureoverflows
are still the most common types of overflows, with the percentage
of 86.4% and a total of 32 bugs.
2.2 Basic Idea of Prober
 



	
"

" 


	!
	
Figure 1: Overview of Prober.
Based on the key observation, Prober focuses only on array-
relatedwhole-structureoverflows,wherearound80%reportedheap
1118overflows to belong to. Since array-related objects are only a small
percentageofallheapobjects,thedetectionoverheadcanbedra-
matically reduced as further evaluated in Section 4 when using the
page-protection mechanism. Prober does not handle sub-structure
overflows in this paper, which will be the future work.
ThedesignofProberisillustratedasFigure1.Basically,Proberin-
cludestwocomponents,Prober-StaticandProber-Dynamic.Prober-
Staticisastaticcompile-timebasedtoolthatidentifiesandlabels
susceptible memory allocation sites, while Prober-Dynamic per-
formsoverflowdetection/preventionanddeterminessomearray-
related allocations on top of the static instrumentation.
2.2.1 Prober-Static. Prober-Static performs analysis and instru-
mentation at the Intermediate Representation (IR) level because of
multiple benefits. First, LLVM IR offers multiple built-in functions
thatcanfacilitatetheanalysisandinstrumentation.Forexample,
define-use anduse-define chains that track the definition and us-
age of memory allocation, can help determine an array-related
allocation.Second, theanalysisandinstrumentation algorithmon
LLVM IR is more robust, because many complicated cases (e.g.,
various macros) at the source code are simplified or merged at the
IR level. Third, instrumenting at IR level provides the flexibility
of registering the new code transformation pass in an appropriate
positionofthecompilationchain,thusavoidingthepossibleside-
effectstothesubsequentanalysisandcodeoptimizations(e.g.,loop
optimizations) that are crucial to the code performance. Prober-
StaticanalyzestheIRtodeterminearray-relatedallocations,and
marks susceptible allocation sites via the explicit instrumentation.
Currently, Prober-Static is registered as a Link Time Optimization
(LTO)passsothatitcanhandledefinitionsandusageslocatedin
multiple C/C++ files.
ResearchChallenges: TheaimofProber-Staticistodesignaro-
bust compile-time analysis, which further includes two challenges.
First,howtoidentifymemoryallocations,giventhatmemoryal-
locationshavevariousforms,e.g.,wrapperfunctions,orfunction
pointers? Second, how to identify array-related memory alloca-
tions? Basically, Prober designs a hybrid mechanism to ensure
correctnessandcompleteness.Ifanallocationsitecanbeidentified
statically, as described in Section 3.1, then it will be labeled explic-
itly. Otherwise, Prober-Static labels the size of its basic unit, and
thenreliesonitsdynamiccomponenttodeterminearray-related
allocations.
2.2.2 Prober-Dynamic. Prober-Dynamic is a dynamic library that
applicationsshouldbelinkedwith.Itinterceptsallheapallocations
and deallocations via its “Alloc/Free Monitor” module, and handles
theallocationanddetectionforarray-relatedobjects.Forobjects
allocatedfromarray-relatedallocationsites,ifProber-staticcould
identify them statically, Prober-Dynamic allocates these objects
fromaseparateheapviaits“ProtectedHeapManagement”module.
Basically,thesesusceptibleobjectswillbeseparatedbyprotected
pages.Inparticular,theywillbeplacedtotheendofcorrespond-
ing pages, with the next page as protected pages. Therefore, any
overflowwillbeforcedtolandonprotectedpages,triggeringthe
protection violation consequently. Prober-Dynamic has anothercomponent—“Exception Handler”–to deal with protection viola-
tions.Insidetheexceptionhandler,Proberpreciselypinpointsthefaulty instruction that causes the overflow by simply analyzingits calling context of exception. Then Prober stops the execution
immediately, preventing any further exploits of overflows. Prober
can be configured to detect out-of-one-page overflows easily. Note
that Prober cannot detect overflows that do not access protected
pages. This indicates that Prober cannot detect less-than-one-word
overflows. However, this is not a real issue, since most heap alloca-
tors will return a word-aligned address. Less-than-one-word heap
overflowspracticallywillnotcauseanyissue.Probercannotdetect
underflows landing on the same page as the starting address of
special objects, but will tolerate them instead.
Another task of Prober-Dynamic is to identify array-related
objects,whentheycannotbeidentifiedstatically.Itutilizesasimple
mechanismto determinethisdynamically: whethertherequested
allocation is multiple times of its basic structure. If that is the
case, Prober-Dynamic will treat the allocation site as array-related
objects, and follows the above description.
Research Challenges: Page-based protection guarantees that it
generatesnofalsepositives,sincememoryreferencesonthepro-
tected pages are guaranteed to be real overflows. However, thechallenge is to design a system that could manage protected ob-jects efficiently, since a naive method as Electric Fence imposestoo much overhead to be employed in the deployment environ-ment. Section 3.2.2 presents multiple mechanisms to reduce the
contention and possible cache misses.
2.3 Attack Model
Probertargetstodetectbothread-basedandwrite-basedheapbuffer
overflows, and then stop any possible exploits immediately, based
on explicit instrumentation. It utilizes the page-based protection
to detect invalid accesses, which is available on any hardware that
supports the virtual memory mechanism. Prober does not relyonaspecificOperatingSystem,whichwillbeageneralsolution,although the current prototype is only implemented on top of
Linux.Proberdoesnotrelyonanyrandomizationmechanismin
user space or kernel space. Prober could still work effectively, even
if the hacker knows the source code of the application and Prober.
3 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Thissectiondescribesthedetaileddesignandimplementationof
Prober that consists of two components, static instrumentation
(Section 3.1) and runtime system (Section 3.2).
3.1 Compiler Analysis and Instrumentation
Prober-Staticperformsitsstaticanalysisandinstrumentationon
LLVM IR to identify all susceptible allocations, and relies on dy-namic confirmation to confirm those ones that cannot be deter-
minedstatically.Overall,ourhybridapproachguaranteesa100%
coverageforarray-relatedallocations,whichisover-estimatedin
reality.Prober-StaticisimplementedasoneLinkTimeOptimization
(LTO)passbecauseoftwomajorconsiderations.First,thealloca-
tion function may be located inside a wrapper function, but this
wrapperfunctionisinvokedinanotherCfile,soaninter-module
analysis (provided by LTO) is required. Second, placing instrumen-
tationatlink-timecaneffectivelyavoidcomplicatingorinterfering
performance-critical compile-time analysis and optimizations (e.g.,
1119varied loop optimizations). Prober-Static determines array-related
allocations in three steps, as further described in Section 3.1.1.
3.1.1 Identify Susceptible Allocations. Prober-Staticanalyzessus-
ceptible (or array-related) allocations in the following steps.
Step-I: Identify memory allocation functions: Based on our
knowledge,memoryallocationsareinvokedbyseveralAPIsandop-
eratorsinC/C++,suchas new,malloc(),calloc(),realloc(),valloc,
posix_memaliдn (), andmemaliдn (). But there are multiple situa-
tions as described in the following.
Basic Case: Some memory allocation invocations can be directly
recognized according to the name in LLVM IR. For example, the
new[]keywordistranslatedto _ZnaminLLVMIR.Similarly,various
macrodefinitionscanalsoberecognizeddirectlyinIRlevel,because
they have already been replaced by the preprocessor before being
converted to IR.
Special Cases: Prober-Static also handles two more sophisticated
but common cases. First, memory allocation is invoked inside a
wrapper.For thiscase,Prober-Static recursivelytreatsall functions
in its calling stack as wrappers of memory allocation functions.
Second,memoryallocationisdefinedasafunctionpointer.Fortu-
nately, LLVM translates function pointer calls to indirect calls in
itsIR,andthefunctioninvocationisspecifiedbyaloadinstruction.Listing1showsasimpleexample.Thedefinitionof
malloc_ptr re-
quiresanadditionalchecktodeterminewhetherline2isamemory
allocation.
Listing 1: Memory alloc is defined and called as a fun ptr.
1 %4 = load i8∗ (i64)∗, i8∗ (i64)∗∗@malloc_ptr, align 8
2 %5 = tail call i8∗ %4(i64 %0)
Step-II: Identify array-related allocations: Prober-Static fur-
theridentifiesarray-relatedallocationsbythenameoffunctions,
the definition of allocation size, and the operations of the corre-
sponding object. Table 4 lists multiple examples that cover 36 bugs
analyzedinSection2.1.Thedetailsoftheseexamplesarediscussed
as follows.
Type Ican be identified by the name of memory allocation
functions. For example, new[]is known as an operator to allocate
an array, and callocallocates an array with multiple objects with
the same size. 5 out of 36 cases belong to this simple type.
Type II, III,and IV can be identified by the definition of size
parameter. If its sizeparameter is defined (or manipulated) by
multiplication ,addition , and strlenoperations, then the cor-
responding allocation is array-related. We can easily understand
thisbycheckingitscontradiction.Ifanallocationisjustforasinglestructure, a
sizeofoperation will be used to compute the sizepa-
rameter, without these operations. Prober-Static employs LLVM’s
built-in def-useanduse-defchainstoassisttheanalysisonthe
definition of sizeparameter. 24 out of 36 cases can be analyzed
using this method.
Type Vcan be identified by the operation on corresponding
objects.Asweknow,someAPIs,suchas read,fread,pread,readv,
read multiple bytes from the network or a file to the local buffer.
Therefore,wheneveroneobjectappearsasthedestinationbufferof
thesesystemcalls,itshouldbetracked.Basedonouranalysis,2outTable 4: Examples of susceptible allocations.
TypeExample Explanation Count
I. . .=(int*) new[5];
. . .=(int*) calloc(5,sizeof(int));Memory allocation
calls new[]orcalloc.5
IIsize = num * sizeof(struct S);
. . .=(struct S*) malloc(size);sizeis defined by a
multiply operation.13
IIIsize = size1 + size2;
. . .=(struct S*) malloc(size);sizeis defined by a
addoperation.10
IVsize = strlen(buffer);. . .=(int*) malloc(size); sizeisareturnvalue
ofstrlen().1
Vbuffer = malloc(size);read(buffer, 0, size); Object is operated by
array-related syscalls.2
VI. . .=(int*) malloc(const_value); sizeis a constant. 3
VIIsize = (i>0?sizeof(int):1 0*
sizeof(int));. . .=(int*) malloc(size);sizeisfromabranch
that is potentially
array-related.2
SUM 36
of 36 cases belong to this type. Similarly, the analysis also requires
the support of LLVM’s built-in def-use anduse-def analysis.
Type VI requires further analysis, when the sizeparameter of
anallocationisaconstantinteger.Formostcases,ifthe sizepa-
rameter is a constant, the corresponding allocation is an array. But
there are some exceptions when analyzing in IR level. For instance,
if a statement is like this, (structS∗)malloc(sizeof(structS)), the
sizeparameter is also interpreted as a constant integer in IR level.
Butthisisnotanarray.Toavoidthemisidentification,Prober-Static
further confirms whether the sizeis equal to the size of the corre-
spondingdatatype.AlthoughLLVMhassomebuilt-infunctionsto
get the size of the object type, it requires some additional analysis
to determine the object type. The challenge is to determine this
whenanallocationreturnsavoidtypepointer.Prober-Staticadopts
adef-useoruse-defanalysistofindthedefinitionortheusage
of the return value to figure out the object type.
Type VII is more complicated, since the object can be an ar-
ray in some branches. More specifically, LLVM-IR represents these
branches with a PHINode instruction. Prober-Static tracks all in-
coming values of this PHINode instruction. If at least one valuebelongs to
Type II, III, or IV , this allocation is treated as array-
related conservatively.
After the above analysis, Prober-Static will determine most allo-
cationsarray-relatedornot andselectivelyprotectthearraysand
ignore the ones that are not array-related.
Step-III: Identify the object type (and unit size) for mem-
ory allocations non-determined: If a statement cannot be de-
termined array-related or not in Step-II, Prober-Static labels the al-
locatedobjecttype(andthustheunitsize)sothatthisallocationcan
bedetermineddynamicallybyProber-Dynamic.Prober-Dynamic
collectsthesizeofanallocationsizeanddividesitbytheunitsize1.
If thisresult isgreater thanone, Prober-Dynamicwill protectthismemory allocation.
Prober-StaticmainlyemploysLLVM’sbuilt-in def-usechainsto
findanobject’stypeinitsusagesite.Prober-Staticalsoreliesonthe
metadata in LLVM IR to find the type information. Listing 2 and 3
showtwoexamplesoffindingtheobjecttypewith def-use chains
1A memory allocation might be used in more than one data types
1120





'!!$($#$%&($#'
!!$($#+&%%&'
)#($#%$#(&'	!!#+$&!!$

#,")!

#,



#,'(&!#
'#&&,','!!,)'
	$#'(#(*!)
((,%
	$"&$"&#$ #'(&)($#


 



	

		



)'#
((

,#"
 #
Figure 2: Identify susceptible allocations.
and metadata, respectively. Listing 2 illustrates that an explicit
casting operation reveals the object type.
Listing 2: Identify the object type with a casting
1 %1 = call noalias i8∗ @malloc(i64 70) #4
2 %2 = bitcast i8∗ %1 to %struct.s∗
Sometimes,itisdifficulttofindanyobvioususageforamemory
allocation, then the metadata information showed in Listing 3 also
helps to find its object type.
Listing 3: Identify the object type with metadata
1 %21 = tail call i32 @mbuffer_create(%struct.mbuffer_t∗ nonnull %20,
/arrowhookleft→i64 %19) #7, !dbg !1409
2 !22 = !DIBasicType(name: "int", size: 32, encoding: DW_ATE_signed)
3 !1393 = !DILocalVariable(name: "r", scope: !1387, file: !137, line: 312,
/arrowhookleft→type: !22)
ItisworthnoticingthatProber-Staticsetsthetypesizeas“1”by
default,soevenitcannotdeterminetheobjecttypestaticallyvia
theaboveanalysis,theallocationsitewillbeprotectedeffectively
duringtheruntime.Thatis,Proberalwaysensuresover-protection.
Put them together: Figure 2 summarizes Prober-Static’s imple-
mentation. In Step-I, it checks each LLVM IR instruction according
toonebasiccaseandtwospecialcasestoidentifyallinvocationsof
allocationfunctions,allocationfunctionwrappers,andallocation
functionpointers.InStep-II,onlytheseallocationinvocationsare
further identifiedbased on the following order. First,it checks the
functionnameandoperator.Second,itcheckstheallocationsize
withuse-def,datatype,andPHINodeinstructioninformation.Fi-
nally,itcheckswhethertheoperationsofthecorrespondingobjects
isrelatedtosomespecialsystemcalls.Ifanallocationmeetsanyof
these cases, then it is array-related. For them, Prober-Static label it
explicitly as shown in Section 3.1.2. Otherwise, Prober-Static finds
the object type (and type size) with either def-use chains or meta-
data in LLVM IR, and instruments the size of the allocation before
the allocation so that Prober-Dynamic will confirm it dynamically.Inreal-worldapplications,pointersandaliasvariablesmaycom-
plicate this analysis in two aspects. First, an alias pointer pointsto the protected allocation. However, this will not cause any is-sue, since Prober detects any access on the protected pages, nomatter whether they are accessed via an alias or not. Second, anallocation function contains pointers or alias variables as its size
parameter.Prober-StaticreliesonLLVM’spointerandaliasanalysis
functions to associate these pointers or alias variables to the actual
size variable and then performs further analysis. The evaluation in
Section 4 demonstrates that Prober-Static can successfully identify
and instrument array-related allocations for 46 bugs.
Listing 4: A LLVM-IR instrumentation example with new.
1 @specialMalloc = external thread_local global i8, align 1
2 define dso_local i32 @main() #0 {
3 store volatilei8−1, i8∗ @specialMalloc, align 1
4 %6 = call i8∗ @_Znam(i64 20) #2
5 ret i32 0
6}
Listing5:EquivalentCinstrumentationofthe newexample.
1extern__thread volatile bool specialMalloc;
2intmain(){
3 specialMalloc = −1;
4int∗b=new int[5];
5return0;
6}
3.1.2 LLVM-IR Instrumentation. After a susceptible allocation site
has been identified, a thread-local variable, e.g., specialMalloc, will
beinsertedtomarkthissiteasasusceptibleallocation.Here,thespecialMalloc variableisanintegervariable,withthevalueof“0”
bydefault.Thisvariableissetto“-1”beforetheallocationsiteiftheallocationisarray-relatedallocation.Forinstance,the
newexample
ofType IinTable4isinstrumentedasListing4,whereListing5
showsitsequivalentCcodeforclarification.Ifamemoryallocation
1121isnon-determinablestatically, specialMalloc willbesetasthesize
oftheobjecttype.Prober’sruntimewilldetermineifitshouldbe
protected.
3.2 Runtime System
AsdescribedinSection2,theruntimesysteminterceptsallmemory
allocationsanddeallocationssothatallsusceptibleobjectscanbe
protected correspondingly. Therefore, the runtime system includes
multiplecomponents,suchasmalloc/freemonitor(Section3.2.1),
protected heap management (Section 3.2.2), and exception handler
(Section 3.2.3), as further shown in Figure 1.
3.2.1 Malloc/Free Monitor. Prober intercepts all memory alloca-
tions and deallocations with the preloading mechanism. Prober
determines whether an object should be allocated from the pro-tected heap upon memory allocations, and whether to return an
object to the protected heap upon deallocations.
Proberreliesonthestaticinstrumentationtodetermineanarray-
related object. As described in Section 3.1.1, a thread-local variable
(specialMalloc ) will be labeled by the Prober-Static: If an object
is identified as not-array related statically, with the value 0, theobject will be allocated from the default allocator; If the valueis
−1, indicating an array-related object, then the object will be
allocatedfromtheprotectedheap;Otherwise,thisvariableisthebasicunitsizeofanobject.Proberfurthercollectstheactualsize
for the allocation. When the allocation size is multiple times of
the basic structure, then Prober decided that the current allocation
is an array-related object. After that, the object will be allocatedfrom the protected heap. Note that when there is an extensive
number of array-related allocations, Prober allows users to disable
the protection on some allocation sites explicitly via a blacklist file.
Inparticular,Prober-StaticgeneratesauniqueIDforeachallocation
site,thenuserscanspecifytheIDsofallocationsitesthatshould
be excluded for the protection.
For each deallocation, Prober should determine whether this
objectiscomingfromtheprotectedheap.Proberutilizestheaddress
of the deallocation to determine it, where the address must be
located in a special range. For such objects, Prober returns them to
the protected heap as described in Section 3.2.2. Otherwise, objects
will be passed to the default allocator.
3.2.2 Management of Protected Heap. Proberdesignsitsownheap
tomanagearray-relatedobjectsinordertoreducetheperformance
overhead. Similar to existing allocators [ 3,16,31], Prober manages
small and large objects separately. The idea behind this is that
largeobjectsaretypicallymuchless,andthentheydonothavea
big chance of being re-utilized. Objects larger than 31 pages aretreated as large objects, which are allocated from or returned to
the OS directly by invoking mmapandmunmpsystem calls. In order
to determine whether an object is a protected big object, Prober
maintainsahashtabletotrackaddressesofsusceptiblelargeobjects,andconfirmsitbycheckingthehashtable.Theprotectedbigobject
will be returned to the OS with the munmapsystem call.
Objectslessthan31pageswillbetreatedassmallobjects,which
are managed differently from big objects. Prober overcomes multi-
ple design issues of Electric Fence. First, Electric Fence introduces
high contention for multi-threaded applications with one global ar-ray to hold all freed objects. For instance, every freed object can bestoredintoaglobalarrayonlyafterholdingthegloballock,prevent-
ing concurrent allocations and deallocations from multiple threads.
Second, it uses the best-fit allocation policy. For each allocation, it
searches the whole array to find the best-matched buffer, which is
unnecessarilyslow.Ifitfailstofindone,iteitherdividesabigger
objectintotwoparts,ormapsanewonefromtheOSdirectly.Third,
it supports the coalescence and splitting of objects, which invokes
unnecessary mprotect systemcallstochangetheattributesofpro-
tection.Instead,ProbertakestheoppositeapproachesofElectric
Fence to improve the performance.
Fixed Size Class: The size of each object is kept the same dur-
ing the whole execution. Therefore, there is no need to invoke
mprotect to change the protection attribute. It is intuitive to main-
tain 31 classes, starting from 1-page to 31-page, but this method
does not encourage memory utilization. Instead, Prober maintains
only five size classes, including 1-page, 3-pages, 7-pages, 15-pages,
and31-pages.Allofthesesizeclassesareonepagelessthanpower-
of-two pages, since one page is reserved for the protected page.Given this design, Prober could quickly compute the bag index
usingsimplebit-shifts operations,whichisintegrated withitsnext
information-computable design.
Information-ComputableDesign: Uponeverydeallocation,Prober
checks the size of each object in order to return it to the freelist be-longingtothecorrespondingsizeclass.Onenaivedesignistomain-
tain the size of each object into a hash table, which may invoke ex-
tensivesearchingandcomparingoperations.Instead,Proberadopts
the “information-computable design” of existing work [ 41,42], as
shown in Figure 3. It takes advantage of the vast virtual addressspace of 64-bits machines. Prober maps a large chunk of virtual
memoryfromtheunderlyingoperatingsystemsatfirst,andthen
dividesitintomultipleregions(calledas“bags”)withthesamesize.
Eachbagonlyholdsobjectswiththesamesizeclass.Thisdesign
enablesthequickcomputationofthebagindex(thusthesizeofa
givenobject)bytheaddress,whichcanbecomputedbydividing
the offset with the size of each bag.
Per-Thread Heap: In order to reduce lock contention of multi-
threaded applications, Prober adopts the per-thread heap idea ofHoard [
3]: allocations and deallocations of different threads will
occuronlyintheirownper-threadheaps,withouttheacquisition
of a global lock. Only when freed objects of a per-thread heap are
larger than a predefined threshold, then these freed objects willbe returned to the global buffer and then be shared by all otherthreads. In order to quickly locate the index of a thread, Prober
intercepts the creation of threads in order to assign a thread index
foreverythread,whichwillbestoredinitsThreadLocalStorage
(TLS). Therefore, upon each allocation and deallocation, Prober
could quickly locate its per-thread heap using its thread index, and
then direct it to its per-thread heap.
Pre-allocatedFreeArray: Proberutilizesapre-allocatedcircular
arraytotrackavailable/freedobjects.Twocontinuousdeallocations
willbestorednexttoeachother(exceptthelastoneinthearray).For
allocationsfromtheFreeArray,ProberutilizestheLast-In-First-Out
(LIFO)algorithm,sincethemost-recently-freedobjecthavealarger
chance of being in the cache, which improves the cache efficiency.
Comparing to the normal freelist that each entry will be getting
1122from anew allocation, thearray-based designimproves thecache
efficiency, since multiple continuous allocations and deallocations
can be satisfied from objects stored in the same cache line. Its pre-
allocated array further avoids the overhead of allocations of free
lists.
Overall,Probermanagesmemoryasfollows.Uponeachmem-
ory allocation, Prober determines the size class by rounding the
allocation size up to its next size class. After that, the FreeArrayof its specific size class will be checked first. If a freed object isavailable, the request will be satisfied with the FreeArray. When
thereisnofreedobjects,Proberfetchesmultipleobjectstogether
from the never-allocated ones to the FreeArray, and then allocates
one from it. During each deallocation, Prober first checks whether
thedeallocationisallocatedfromtheprotectedheapornot.Ifan
objectisnotfromtheprotectedheap,Proberinvokesthedefault
allocator to deal with that. Otherwise, the current freed object will
beaddedintotheper-threadFreeArraywiththecorrespondingsize
class. Note that the allocator only saves the starting address of the
freed block to the FreeArray. If the FreeArray is full, half of thefreed objects will be donated to the global buffer. That is, Prober
only involves with lock operations when there are no freed objects
intheper-threadFreeArray,orwhentheper-threadFreeArrayis
full. Therefore, Prober’s design minimizes the lock contention.

##
 
 

   
##

	"
!
	"##
!
	"##
##
Figure 3: Basic idea of heap design.
3.2.3 Exception Handler. Sincebothoverflowsandprogramfail-
ures could trigger segmentation faults, Prober should determine
whetherafaultiscausedbyanoverflowornot,andonlyreportthe
faultyinstructiontousersforheapoverflows.Toachievethistarget,
Prober registers its segmentation fault handler in order to capture
everySIGSEGV signal.Insidethesignalhandler,Proberfirstchecks
whether the current object is one of the protected objects, either
the small or the big one. If the access does not belong to the pro-tected object, the exception will be passed to the default handler
of applications. Otherwise, the current fault is an overflow. Prober
reportsthefaultyinstructiondifferently,dependingonwhetherthe
binary includes the symbol information. If the symbol information
is included, Prober reports the detailed line number information
withthe addr2line command.Otherwise,Proberonlyreportsbi-
nary addresses of the corresponding call stacks. For each overflow,
Proberalsoreportsthecallstackofitscorrespondingmemoryal-
locationsite,wheretheinformationwillbestoredintheshadow
memory for small objects and in the hash table for big objects.4 EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We performed the experiments on a two-socket quiescent machine,
where each socket is an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6138 processor with
20 cores. It has 200GB main memory, and 32KB L1, 1024 KB L2 and
28160KBL3cache.TheexperimentswereperformedonUbuntu
18.04,installedwithLinux-4.15.0kernel.Allapplicationswerecom-
piledwithLLVM-8.0,byaddingananalysis/instrumentationpass
of Prober-Static.
4.1 Effectiveness
Theeffectivenessevaluationincludestwoparts,38bugsincluded
intheexistingstudy[ 47]andotheroverflowbugsincludedinother
existing work, such as Bugbench [ 28], CVE database, or HeapTher-
apy [49].
4.1.1 38 Bugs from the Existing Study. For 38 bugs listed in the
existingstudy,weconfirmthatProbercorrectlyinstrumented36
bugs outof them.The remainingtwo bugscannot be instrumented
due to the invocation of external standard library calls (e.g., lib-
stdc++), which are not analyzed (shared by instrumentation-based
approaches). Therefore, Prober’s evaluation presents high confi-dence on the actual overhead, since it could instrument all bugs
correctly.
Notethatwedidnotrunthesebuggyapplicationsdirectly,dueto
the following reasons. First, these bugs may not include erroneous
inputsthatarerequiredtoexercisethem.Second,manyofthemare
not compatible with modern libraries, which requires a significant
amountofmanualeffortsfor thecompilation.Therefore,weonly
verify whether the corresponding bugs have been instrumented
correctly.
4.1.2 Other Real-world Bugs. Weperformedtheeffectivenesseval-
uation on the other real-world 10 bugs that are not listed in the
existingstudy[ 47].Theseapplicationsandtheirspecificbugtrig-
ger inputs are obtained from Bugbench [ 28] , CVE database, or
HeapTherapy [ 49]. Among these 10 vulnerable applications, the
heartbleedandlibtiff-4.0.7vulnerabilitiesarecausedbybufferover-
reads, while others are caused by buffer over-writes. The details
of these applications are shown in Table 5, where all of these bugs
can be detected by AddressSanitizer. Table 5 also listed the number
of allocation sites that can be identified statically (“Static” column)
and dynamically (“Dynamic”). Overall, Prober detects all known
overflows without false positives. Upon detection, Prober stops the
executionimmediately(beforethecrashes),andreportsthetypeofanoverflow(over-readorover-write),thecallpathoftriggeringthe
overflow,andtheallocationsiteofthecorrespondingbuffer.The
evaluationconfirmsthatProberisabletodetectrealheapoverflows
with its proposed instrumentation and runtime system.
4.1.3 Case Study. Figure4showsthebugreportfortheheartbleed
vulnerability. Prober identifies that this bug is a buffer over-read
problem.Thebugreportalsoincludesthecallstackofthefaulty
instruction(wheretheoverflowoccurs),andthecallstackofthis
object’s allocation site.
Accordingtothebugreport,theoverflowoccursinthe memcpy()
function, which is invoked by the tls1_process_heartbeat function
atline2586of ./ssl/t1_lib.c file.Bycheckingthesourcecode,
thecorrespondingstatementis memcpy(bp,pl,payload).According
1123Table 5: Statically and dynamically identified callsites in
buggy applications
Application ReferenceStatic
(#)Dynamic
(#)
bc-1.06 BugBench [28] 43 5
gzip-1.2.4 BugBench [28] 3 1
Heartbleed CVE-2014-0160 [13] 9314 3941
LibHX-3.4 CVE-2010-2947 [6] 23 15
Libtiff-4.0.1 CVE-2013-4243 [7] 406 75
Libtiff-4.0.7 CVE-2016-10269 [9] 421 104
Memcached-1.4.25 CVE-2016-8706 [45] 80 19
openjpeg-1.3 CVE-2012-3535 [39] 756 201
polymorph-0.4.0 BugBench [28] 1 0
squid-2.3 BugBench [28] 83 175
A buffer over−read problem is detected at:
../glibc/../multiarch/memcpy−avx−unaligned.S:237
../x86_64−linux−gnu/bits/string3.h:53
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/t1_lib.c:2586
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/s3_pkt.c:1092
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/s3_both.c:457
...
../nginx−1.3.9/src/event/ngx_event.c:247
../nginx−1.3.9/src/os/unix/ngx_process_cycle.c:807
...
This object is allocated at:
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/s3_both.c:770
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/s3_pkt.c:949
../openssl−OpenSSL_1_0_1f/ssl/s3_both.c:457
Figure 4: Bug report for the Heartbleed Problem.
totheattributeofthisproblem–abufferover-readproblem,itiseasy
to know that the over-read issue is related to the source of memcpy,
that is, either plorpayload. Sinceplis the starting address of a
normalheapobjectthatisallocatedatline770of ./ssl/s3_both.c
file, then the failure must be caused by payload. By examining the
sourcecode,wecouldeasilyfindoutthat payloadiscomputedfrom
the length of the data that the server receives from the network.
Therefore,viathebugreport,programmerscaneasilyreasonthe
root cause of overflow, and fix the problem correspondingly.
4.2 Performance Overhead
To evaluate the performance overhead, Prober is evaluated on a
popularbenchmarksuite–PARSEC[ 4],andmultiplewidely-utilized
real applications, suchas sqlite, memcached, aget, pbzip2,and pfs-
can,with18multithreadedapplicationsintotal.ForPARSECbench-
marks,weusedthenativeinputsand40threads.Forapplications
thatcanonlyusepower-of-2threads,e.g.,facesim,thentheywill
use 32 threads [4].
We compare Prober with Prober-All, Electric Fence [ 37] ,and
AddressSanitizer [ 40]. Prober-All protects all heap objects through
thepageprotectiondespitetheyarearray-relatedornot.Electric
Fencealsoutilizesthepageprotectiontoprotectallheapobjects,
which is very similar to Prober-All, but with different implementa-
tion.AddressSanitizerisaninstrumentation-basedapproachthatchecks every memory access, representing one important tech-nique that is widely employed in development phases. For both
AddressSanitizerandProber,wedidnotinstrumentanyexternal
andstandardlibrariesthatarerequiredbytheseapplications,which
could impose more overhead if they are included. For the fair com-
parison, we disable the checks of global and stack overflows for
AddressSanitizer.
Figure 5 shows the normalized runtime of these four systems,
which are normalized to the runtime of the default Linux libraries.
Overall, the average overhead of Prober, Prober-All, Electric Fence,
and AddressSanitizer are 1.5%, 2 .4×,>7×, 42.9%, respectively. The
largest overhead of Prober is only 9.3% for ferret.
ForbothAddressSanitizerandElectricFence, freqmine iscrashed
due to an unknown problem in our evaluation environment. aget
iscrashedwithElectricFenceaswell.ForElectricfence,fiveapplica-tions,including
canneal,dedup,facesim,raytrace andswaptions ,
cannot finish the execution within 1 hour (marked as “T”). ForProber, dedup runs over 2
×slower initially, if all identified call-
sites are protected. Based on our analysis, one callsite has over50% of allocations, which is excluded manually (as described in
Section 3.2.1).
Multiple reasons contribute to the big performance difference
of these systems. AddressSanitizer’s performance overhead mainly
comesfromitscheckingoverheadforeverymemoryaccess,which
also explains its little overhead for IO-bound applications, such as
agetorpfscan.ComparingtoAddressSanitizer,Proberdoesnot
checkonaccesses,withitspageprotectionmechanism.Compar-
ing to Prober-All and Electric Fence, Prober only protects array-
related objects, instead of all heap objects. Therefore, the overhead
ofProber-AllandElectricFenceismuchhigherthanthatofProber.ElectricFenceimposesthehighestoverheadduetoitsimplementa-
tion issues as discussed in Section 3.2.2.
Comparing to Electric Fence, Prober-All (and Prober) is more
efficient due to multiple reasons. First, Electric Fence utilizes the
globallocktoprotectallallocationsanddeallocations,whichunfor-
tunatelyserializesallallocationsanddeallocations.Second,Elec-
tric Fence may coalesce continuous objects upon deallocations,and split a larger object to smaller ones upon allocations. Third,
ElectricFencecannotquicklylocatethemetadatainformation.In-
stead,ProberandProber-Alldesignsper-threadheap,pre-allocatedfreeArray, and information-computable design as further discussed
in Section 3.2.2.
We further collected the characteristics of these applications
dynamically,asshowninTable6.Inthistable,the“ Total Objects ”
column shows the total number of allocations for each application,
including allocations from the application and all libraries. The
“Protected Objects ” column shows the number of allocations
thatareprotectedintotal.Here,“ Static”and“ Dynamic”represent
whether such objects can be identified statically or dynamically
(requiringthedeterminationofitsruntime).Amongtheseprotected
objects, “Live” column shows the maximum number of objects
thatareprotectedatthesametime.The“ Unprotected Objects ”
columnindicatesthenumberofheapobjectsthatarenotprotected
by Prober. We have the following observations.
First, most applications have a larger portion of objects that
arenotarray-related,suchas canneal,raytrace ,and vips.This
112400.511.522.5Normalized Runtime
Prober Prober-All Electric Fence ASan3.9 4.8 T 6.2T T 16.8 5.6 T T 38.9 5.0 7.0 3.1 13.9
Figure 5: Performance overhead of Prober, Prober-All, Electric Fence and AddressSanitizer, where they are all normalized to
theruntimeofthedefaultLinuxlibraries.Applicationswiththebarmarkedas“T”(indicatingthetimeout)cannotfinishtheexecution in one hour.
Table 6: Characteristics of applications.
Application Total ObjectsProtected Objects Unprotected
Objects Static Dynamic Live
blackscholes 208 5 0 5 203
bodytrack 452,084 2,349 070 449,735
canneal 21,141,661 0 0 021,141,661
dedup 1,887,373 734336,747 140,630 1,549,892
facesim 4,908,999 2,302,579 432440,944 2,605,988
ferret 549,109 380,546 3,49681,736 165,067
fluidanimate 230,105 24 024 230,081
freqmine 8,699 7,555 0944 1,144
raytrace 20,000,619 12 11220,000,606
streamcluster 9,241 8,854 615 381
swaptions 48,001,995 48,001,796 01,826 199
vips 1,430,261 01,312 1,312 1,428,949
x264 37,332 4637,121 2,355 165
aget 319 38 029 281
memcached 848 276 33309 539
pbzip2 23,851 0 0 0 23,851
pfscan 238 3 1 3 234
sqlite 2,889,043 2,888,868 05,826 175
indicatesthatourkeyinsightiseffectiveinreducingthescopeof
protection.
Second,inProber,thenumberofobjectsthatareprotectedatthe
sametime(in“ Live”column)willaffecttheperformanceoverhead,
but not the number of protected objects, since freed objects arere-used in Prober. The overhead of each protected object comesfrom two aspects. First, it comes from the
mprotect system call
to insert the protected page. After that, page protection imposes
no additional overheadfor checking the overflow. Second, alarge
number of protected objects (in different pages) may increase page
faults.Thisexplainswhy dedup,ferret,and sqliteimposehigher
performanceoverheadthanothers.However, facesimimposesa
low overhead, although with the largest number of live objects.
Thisisduetothefactthat facesimrunsmuchlongerthanother
applications,wheretheaveragednumberofprotectionisstillsmall.
In addition to that, facesim has found to have serious memory
leaks[20],indicatingthatthenumberofliveobjectsissmallerthan
thatinTable6.Thisindicatesthat facesimmaynotincreasethe
number of page faults.Third,Table6explainsthatsomeapplicationsrequirealongexe-
cution with Prober-All, Electric Fence, such as canneal,raytrace ,
andswaptions , since there are a large number of objects inside.
Prober avoids this issue by protecting only array-related objects,instead of all objects. Table 6 also explains why Prober-All andElectric Fence performs well in
blackscholes ,streamcluster ,
memcached ,pbzip2, and pfscan, since only a few allocations exist
in these applications. Prober’s unique observation and its efficient
heap design (as discussed in Section 3.2.2) make it efficient enough
for the deployment environment, but without compromising its
effectiveness.
4.3 Memory Overhead
We also evaluated the memory overhead of Prober using the same
applicationsthatareusedintheperformanceevaluation.Tocollect
memoryconsumptionofserverapplications,suchas memcached ,
ascriptisdesignedtoperiodicallycollectthe /proc/PID/status
file.Thenthemaximumvalueofthe VmHWMfieldisutilizedasthe
maximum memory consumption. For other applications, memory
consumptioniscollectedfromtheoutputofthe timeutility,where
themaxresident fieldreportsthemaximummemoryconsumption
of an application [2].
Therealmemorydataisomittedduetospacelimitations.Intotal,
Prober utilizes 25.9% more memory when compared to the default
library. In contrast, Electric Fence utilizes around 3 .9×memory,
and AddressSanitizer’s memory overhead is around 69.7%. That is,
ProberutilizessignificantlylessmemorythanElectricFenceand
AddressSanitizer. Wealso observedthat applicationswitha small
footprinthaveahighermemoryoverhead,comingfromthestoring
ofthreadinformation,heapinformation,andothermetadatathat
are not proportional to their memory usage.
5 LIMITATIONS
Prober focuses on array-related heap overflows, representing over
86% of heap overflows based on our observations (Section 2). It
cannotdetectarray-relatedinternal-structureoverflows,whichis
itsbiggestlimitation.However,thereisnofundamentalreasonwhy
1125this cannot be done. It is possible to arrange the fields of the struc-
ture so that array(s) can be placed at the end of the corresponding
structure. Adding the support for internal-structure overflows will
be our future work.
Prober can only detect overflows landing on the protection
page(s).Probercanbeconfiguredtochangethepagesforthepro-
tection if necessary. In theory, it is able to detect more errors than
existingapproacheswithredzones,suchasAddressSanitizer[ 40].
Itcurrentlycannotdetectheapunderflows.However,heapunder-
flowscannotdoanyharm,sincetheycanonlylandonthenon-used
area.
Prober only detects overflows when the source code is analyzed
andinstrumentedbyProber-Static.Thislimitationisalsoshared
by all instrumentation-based tools, e.g., EffectiveSan [ 11]o rA d -
dressSanitizer [ 40]. When an overflowing object is allocated in a
library that is not instrumented, Prober cannot detect it. However,
different from existing work that detects overflows by checking
memory accesses, Prober can detect overflows caused by APIs of a
non-instrumented library. This is a significant difference.
6 RELATED WORK
Weclassifyexistingtoolsofdetectingheapbufferoverflowbased
on the type of approaches.
Static Detection: Many tools utilize static analysis to detect
buffer overflow bugs [ 14,22,23,27]. They only analyze software
source code in order to reason which statements could potentially
cause buffer overflows. However, some variables (e.g., indirect
branches) could not be determined without the execution. Thus,
theymaygeneratemanyfalsepositivesorfalsenegatives,which
requires further manual efforts to confirm the reported bugs. In
contrast, Prober never generates any false positives.
Dynamicdetection: Severaltoolsplaceaninaccessiblemem-
ory page around every heap object [ 32,33,37,49], which is similar
to Prober. Memory accesses to the protected pages will generate a
SIGSEGV signal.However,theseexistingworksufferfromaprohib-
itively high performance overhead by protecting all pages or even
probabilistically.AlthoughProberemploysthesamemechanism
todetectheapbufferoverflow,itnarrows downheapobjectsthat
canpotentiallyresultinbufferoverflows,whichdrasticallyreduces
its performance overhead. Also, Prober designs its runtime system
carefully to reduce its overhead.
Static instrumentation-assisted detection: Numerous tools
analyze source codeto identify necessary instrumentation,which
favors sanity checksat runtime [ 1,8,12,15,17,21,29,36,38,40].
Theyinstrumentallmemoryaccessesatcompilationphases,and
checkthevalidityofaccessesatruntime.AddressSantizer[ 40]is
thestate-of-artofthistypeofapproaches,whichfurtheremploys
thestaticanalysistopruneoutcertainunnecessarychecks.How-
ever, AddressSanitizer still imposes non-negligible performance
overhead, as further evaluated in Section 4.2. Different from these
tools, Proberdoes notcheck everymemory access,but relyingon
thepageprotectiontodetectoverflowswithoutcheckingoverhead,
if there is no overflow.
Dynamic instrumentation-assisted detection: A lot of dy-
namicanalysistoolsdetectmemoryerrorsbasedonthecheckingof memory accesses during runtime, such as Valgrind’s Memcheck
tool[30],Dr.Memory[ 5],Purify[ 18],IntelInspector[ 19],andSun
Discover [ 35]. Due to the expensive instrumentation and inspec-
tion,theytypicallyimposetoohigh-performanceoverheadtobe
employed in the production environment.
Hardware-assisted detection: Afewtoolsrelyonnewhard-
ware to detect buffer overflows. Intel MPX tries to reduce the over-
head of pointer checks by embedding checks into a new hard-
ware[34].BOGOreliesonIntelMPXtoprovidebothspatialand
temporal safety [ 50]. However, the overhead of validating every
memoryaccessistoohightobeadoptedinpractice.Sampling-based
techniques, such as CSOD [ 25] and Sampler [ 43], utilize hardware
watchpointsorPerformanceMonitorUnit(PMU)hardwaretomon-
itor a few heap objects at one time or validate a subset of memory
accesses. Although they impose low runtime overhead similarly
as Prober, they cannot guarantee the same effectiveness as Prober,
especially when there are a lot of heap objects. CHERI requiresthe cooperation of architecture, compiler, and operating system
togethertoenforcememorysafety[ 46],whichinevitablyincreases
developers’ effort. Prober, which is a dynamically linked library,
imposeslittlemanualeffort,withoutchangingtheunderlyingOS
and requiring new hardware.
Postmortemdetection: Someevidence-basedtoolsdetectbuffer
over-writes by appending canaries after each heap object and
checks if canaries are corrupted at memory deallocations or epoch
ends[24,26,48,49].Sincereadoperationsdonotleaveevidence,
they cannot detect read-based buffer overflow, while Prober can
detectbothbufferover-readsandbufferover-writes.Also,evidence-
basedapproachescannotbeappliedinthesecurityenvironment,
since the attacks may already be issued successfully before per-
forming the detection.
7 CONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel system to defend heap overflows. It is
based on a key observation that is obtained from the analysis of
48real overflowbugs: overflowingobjectsaretypicallyinvolved
witharrays.Basedonthisobservation,Probertakesatwo-phase
approachtodetectheapoverflows:itsstaticcomponentidentifies
all possible array-related allocations before the compilation, and
theninstrumentsthecodecorrespondingly;Itsdynamiccomponentfurtherinterceptstheallocations,andredirectstheallocationsfrom
susceptible allocation sites to the protected heap in order to detect
theoverflowswiththepageprotectionmechanism.Overall,Prober
onlyimposesaround1.5%performanceoverheadonaverage,but
without compromising its effectiveness. The low overhead and the
high effectiveness makes Prober an always-on approach for the
production environment.
8 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wewouldliketothankallanonymousreviewersfortheirconstruc-
tive suggestions and feedback. This paper is partially supported by
theNationalScienceFoundationunderAwardCCF-2024253,UMass
Amherst startup package, and William & Mary startup package.
1126REFERENCES
[1]PeriklisAkritidis, ManuelCosta,Miguel Castro,andSteven Hand.2009. Baggy
bounds checking: an efficient and backwards-compatible defense against out-of-
boundserrors.In Proceedingsofthe18thconferenceonUSENIXsecuritysymposium
(Montreal,Canada) (SSYM’09).USENIXAssociation,Berkeley,CA,USA,51–66.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1855768.1855772
[2]Andries Brouwer. 2015. time - time a simple command or give resource usage.
Linux Comunity.
[3]Emery D. Berger, Kathryn S. McKinley, Robert D. Blumofe, and Paul R. Wil-
son. 2000. Hoard: A Scalable Memory Allocator for Multithreaded Applica-
tions.InProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonArchitecturalSupportfor
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS-IX). Association for
ComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,UnitedStates,Cambridge,MA,117–128.
citeseer.ist.psu.edu/berger00hoard.html
[4]Christian Bienia, Sanjeev Kumar, Jaswinder Pal Singh, and Kai Li. 2008. The
PARSECBenchmarkSuite:CharacterizationandArchitecturalImplications.In
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and
CompilationTechniques.AssociationforComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,
United States, 1–10.
[5]DerekBrueningandQinZhao.2011.PracticalmemorycheckingwithDr.Memory.
InProceedings of the 9th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code
Generation and Optimization (CGO ’11). IEEE Computer Society, Washington,
DC, USA, 213–223. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2190025.2190067
[6]Bugzilla. 2010. "libHX: buffer overrun in HX_split()".
https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=625866.
[7]Bugzilla. 2013. "libtiff (gif2tiff): possible heapbased buffer overflow in readgifim-
age()". http://bugzilla.maptools.org/show_bug.cgi?id=2451.
[8]ZheChen,JunqiYan,ShuanglongKan,JuQian,andJinglingXue.2019. Detecting
Memory Errors at Runtime with Source-level Instrumentation. In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(Beijing,China) (ISSTA2019).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,341–351. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3293882.3330581
[9]The MITRE Corporation. 2016. CVE-2016-10269. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-
bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2016-10269.
[10]CVEdetails. 2019. Vulnerabilities By Type.
https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerabilities-by-types.php.
[11]Gregory J. Duck and Roland H. C. Yap. 2018. EffectiveSan: Type and MemoryError Detection Using Dynamically Typed C/C++. In Proceedings of the 39th
ACMSIGPLANConferenceonProgrammingLanguageDesignandImplementation
(Philadelphia, PA, USA) (PLDI 2018). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 181–195. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3192366.3192388
[12]Gregory J. Duck and Roland H. C. Yap. 2018. EffectiveSan: Type and MemoryError Detection Using Dynamically Typed C/C++. In Proceedings of the 39th
ACMSIGPLANConferenceonProgrammingLanguageDesignandImplementation
(Philadelphia, PA, USA) (PLDI 2018). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 181–195. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3192366.3192388
[13]Exploit. 2014. "Openssl heartbeat poc with starttls support".
https://gist.github.com/takeshixx/10107280.
[14] Micro Focus. 2019. Fortify Static Code Analyzer. https://www.ndm.net/sast/hp-
fortify. last visited: 02/08/2019.
[15] Frank Ch. Eigler. 2003. Mudflap: pointer use checking for C/C++. Red Hat Inc.
[16]SanjayGhemawatandPaulMenage.2005. TCMalloc:Thread-CachingMalloc.
http://goog-perftools.sourceforge.net/doc/tcmalloc.html.
[17]Niranjan Hasabnis, Ashish Misra, and R. Sekar. 2012. Light-weight bounds
checking.In ProceedingsoftheTenthInternationalSymposiumonCodeGeneration
and Optimization (San Jose, California) (CGO ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
135–144. https://doi.org/10.1145/2259016.2259034
[18]Reed Hastings and Bob Joyce. 1992. Purify: Fast detection of memory leaksand access errors. In In Proc. of the Winter 1992 USENIX Conference. USENIX
Association, Berkeley, Califonia, USA, 125–138.
[19]IntelCorporation.2012. IntelInspectorXE2013. http://software.intel.com/en-
us/intel-inspector-xe.
[20]Changhee Jung, Sangho Lee, Easwaran Raman, and Santosh Pande. 2014. Au-tomated Memory Leak Detection for Production Use. In Proceedings of the
36th InternationalConference on Software Engineering (Hyderabad, India) (ICSE
2014).AssociationforComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,USA,825âĂŞ836.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568311
[21]TaddeusKroes,KoenKoning,ErikvanderKouwe,HerbertBos,andCristiano
Giuffrida. 2018. Delta Pointers: Buffer Overflow Checks Without the Checks. In
ProceedingsoftheThirteenthEuroSysConference (Porto,Portugal) (EuroSys’18).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 22, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3190508.
3190553
[22]David Larochelle and David Evans. 2001. Statically Detecting Likely Buffer
OverflowVulnerabilities.In Proceedingsofthe10thConferenceonUSENIXSecurity
Symposium - Volume 10 (Washington, D.C.) (SSYM’01). USENIX Association,
Berkeley, CA, USA, Article 14, 177âĂŞ190 pages. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1251327.1251341[23]Wei Le and Mary Lou Soffa. 2008. Marple: A Demand-driven Path-sensitive
Buffer Overflow Detector. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT International
SymposiumonFoundations ofSoftwareEngineering (Atlanta,Georgia) (SIGSOFT
’08/FSE-16).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,272–282. https://doi.org/10.1145/1453101.
1453137
[24]Hongyu Liu, Sam Silvestro, Wei Wang, Chen Tian, and Tongping Liu. 2018.
iReplayer:In-situandIdenticalRecord-and-replayforMultithreadedApplications.
InProceedingsofthe39thACMSIGPLANConferenceonProgrammingLanguage
DesignandImplementation (Philadelphia,PA,USA) (PLDI2018).ACM,NewYork,
NY, USA, 344–358. https://doi.org/10.1145/3192366.3192380
[25]Hongyu Liu, Sam Silvestro, Xiaoyin Wang, Lide Duan, and Tongping Liu.
2019. CSOD:Context-SensitiveOverflowDetection.In Proceedingsofthe2019
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (Wash-
ington, DC, USA) (CGO 2019). IEEE Press, 50âĂŞ60.
[26]Tongping Liu, Charlie Curtsinger, and Emery D. Berger. 2016. DoubleTake: Fast
andPreciseErrorDetectionviaEvidence-basedDynamicAnalysis.In Proceedings
ofthe38thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering (Austin,Texas) (ICSE
’16).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,911–922. https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884784
[27]Checkmarx Ltd. 2019. Checkmarx. https://www.checkmarx.com. last visited:
02/08/2019.
[28]ShanLu,ZhenminLi,FengQin,LinTan,PinZhou,andYuanyuanZhou.2005.
Bugbench: Benchmarks for evaluating bug detection tools. In In Workshop on the
Evaluation of Software Defect Detection Tools. Chicago, IL, USA.
[29]GeorgeC.NeculaNecula,McPeakScott,andWeimerWestley.2002.CCured:Type-
Safe Retrofitting of Legacy Code. In Proceedings of the Principles of Programming
Languages. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, United States,
128–139.
[30]Nicholas Nethercote and Julian Seward. 2007. Valgrind: a framework for heavy-
weight dynamic binary instrumentation. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIG-
PLAN conference on Programming language design and implementation (San
Diego, California, USA) (PLDI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 89–100. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1250734.1250746
[31]Gene Novark and Emery D. Berger. 2010. DieHarder: securing the heap. In
Proceedingsofthe17thACMconferenceonComputerandcommunicationssecurity
(Chicago, Illinois, USA) (CCS ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 573–584. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1866307.1866371
[32]Gene Novark, Emery D. Berger, and Benjamin G. Zorn. 2007. Exterminator:automatically correcting memory errors with high probability. In Proceedings
of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation (PLDI 2007) (San Diego, California, USA). ACM Press, New York,
NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/1250734.1250736
[33]Gene Novark, Emery D. Berger, and Benjamin G. Zorn. 2009. Efficiently and
precisely locating memoryleaks and bloat. In Proceedings of the2009 ACM SIG-
PLAN conference on Programming language design and implementation (PLDI
2009)(Dublin,Ireland).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,397–407. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1542476.1542521
[34]OleksiiOleksenko,DmitriiKuvaiskii,PramodBhatotia,PascalFelber,andChristof
Fetzer. 2018. Intel MPX Explained: A Cross-layer Analysis of the Intel MPX
SystemStack. Proc.ACMMeas.Anal.Comput.Syst. 2,2,Article28(June2018),
30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3224423
[35]Oracle Corporation. 2011. Sun Memory Error Discovery Tool (Discover).
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E18659_01/html/821-1784/gentextid-302.html.
[36] parasoft Company. 2013. C and C++ Memory Debugging.
[37]BrucePerens.2005. ElectricFence. https://linux.softpedia.com/get/Programming/
Debuggers/Electric-Fence-3305.shtml.
[38]OlatunjiRuwaseandMonicaS.Lam.2004. APracticalDynamicBufferOverflow
Detector. In In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium. The Internet Society, San Diego, California, USA, 159–169.
[39]Kurt Seifried. 2012. "CVE Request: Heap-based buffer overflow in openjpeg".
https://seclists.org/oss-sec/2012/q3/300.
[40]Konstantin Serebryany, Derek Bruening, Alexander Potapenko, and Dmitry
Vyukov. 2012. AddressSanitizer: a fast address sanity checker. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 USENIX conference on Annual Technical Conference (Boston,
MA)(USENIX ATC’12). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, 28–28. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2342821.2342849
[41]Sam Silvestro, Hongyu Liu, Corey Crosser, Zhiqiang Lin, and Tongping Liu.
2017. FreeGuard:AFasterSecureHeapAllocator.In Proceedingsofthe2017ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (Dallas, Texas,
USA)(CCS ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2389–2403. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3133956.3133957
[42]Sam Silvestro, Hongyu Liu, Tianyi Liu, Zhiqiang Lin, and Tongping Liu. 2018.Guarder: A Tunable Secure Allocator. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 18). USENIX Association, Baltimore, MD, 117–133. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity18/presentation/silvestro
[43]Sam Silvestro, Hongyu Liu, Tong Zhang, Changhee Jung, Dongyoon Lee, and
Tongping Liu. 2018. Sampler: PMU-Based Sampling to Detect Memory Errors
1127Latent in Production Software. In 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Sym-
posium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 231–244.
[44]LaszloSzekeres,MathiasPayer,TaoWei,andDawnSong.2013. SoK:EternalWar
inMemory.In Proceedingsofthe2013IEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy
(SP ’13). IEEE Computer Society, USA, 48–62. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2013.13
[45]Talos. 2016. "Memcached Server SASL Autentication Remote Code Execution
Vulnerability". https://www.talosintelligence.com/reports/TALOS-2016-0221/.
[46]R. N. M. Watson, J. Woodruff, P. G. Neumann, S. W. Moore, J. Anderson, D.
Chisnall,N.Dave,B.Davis,K.Gudka,B.Laurie,S.J.Murdoch,R.Norton,M.Roe,
S.Son,andM.Vadera.2015. CHERI:AHybridCapability-SystemArchitecture
forScalableSoftwareCompartmentalization.In 2015IEEESymposiumonSecurity
and Privacy. 20–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.9
[47]T. Ye, L. Zhang,L. Wang, and X. Li. 2016. An Empirical Study on Detecting and
Fixing BufferOverflow Bugs.In 2016 IEEEInternational Conferenceon Software
Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST). 91–101. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST.
2016.21[48]Qiang Zeng, Dinghao Wu, and Peng Liu.2011. Cruiser: concurrent heap buffer
overflowmonitoringusinglock-freedatastructures.In Proceedingsofthe32nd
ACMSIGPLANconference onProgramminglanguagedesignandimplementation
(SanJose,California,USA) (PLDI’11).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,367–377. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1993498.1993541
[49] Qiang Zeng, Mingyi Zhao,and Peng Liu.2015. HeapTherapy:An Efficient End-
to-End SolutionAgainst HeapBuffer Overflows.In Proceedings ofthe 201545th
AnnualIEEE/IFIPInternationalConferenceonDependableSystemsandNetworks
(DSN ’15). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 485–496. https://doi.
org/10.1109/DSN.2015.54
[50]Tong Zhang, Dongyoon Lee, and Changhee Jung. 2019. BOGO: Buy Spatial
MemorySafety,GetTemporalMemorySafety(Almost)Free.In Proceedingsofthe
Twenty-FourthInternationalConferenceonArchitecturalSupportforProgramming
LanguagesandOperatingSystems (Providence,RI,USA) (ASPLOS’19).ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 631–644. https://doi.org/10.1145/3297858.3304017
1128