How Gamiﬁcation Affects Software Developers:
Cautionary Evidence from a Natural Experiment on
GitHub
Lukas Moldon
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, GermanyMarkus Strohmaier
RWTH Aachen University &
GESIS-Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
0000-0002-5485-5720Johannes Wachs
Vienna Uni. of Econ. and Business &
Complexity Science Hub Vienna
Vienna, Austria
0000-0002-9044-2018
johannes.wachs@wu.ac.at
Abstract —We examine how the behavior of software developers
changes in response to removing gamiﬁcation elements from
GitHub, an online platform for collaborative programming and
software development. We ﬁnd that the unannounced removal
of daily activity streak counters from the user interface (from
user proﬁle pages) was followed by signiﬁcant changes in be-
havior. Long-running streaks of activity were abandoned and
became less common. Weekend activity decreased and days
in which developers made a single contribution became less
common. Synchronization of streaking behavior in the platform’s
social network also decreased, suggesting that gamiﬁcation is
a powerful channel for social inﬂuence. Focusing on a set of
software developers that were publicly pursuing a goal to make
contributions for 100 days in a row, we ﬁnd that some of
these developers abandon this quest following the removal of
the public streak counter. Our ﬁndings provide evidence for the
signiﬁcant impact of gamiﬁcation on the behavior of developers
on large collaborative programming and software development
platforms. They urge caution: gamiﬁcation can steer the behavior
of software developers in unexpected and unwanted directions.
Index Terms —gamiﬁcation, behavior, software engineering,
natural experiment, GitHub
I. I NTRODUCTION
Online platforms often employ gamiﬁcation elements to
increase user participation and to steer user behavior in desired
directions. Points, badges, and leaderboards are known to
encourage people to spend more time interacting with a
system [1]. These elements also play an important role in
building user reputation and trust in a community. Points and
tokens users earn can have value beyond the platform in ques-
tion, for instance as credentials in the labor market. A good
gamiﬁcation system can grow user engagement and increase
social interaction and collaboration. However gamiﬁcation
can also steer users astray by promoting narrowly deﬁned
goals and encouraging unreasonable levels of activity. These
potential downsides present especially pressing problems when
the platform has signiﬁcant social and economic implications
for its users.
It is important to understand the inﬂuence of gamiﬁcation
on user behavior because it has spread to all corners of the
web. Ecommerce sellers on sites like eBay collect referencesto signal their trustworthiness [2]. Freelance workers cover-
ing a wide range of industries from digital design to food
delivery display badges of accomplishments on their personal
proﬁles [3], [4]. Gamiﬁcation is also used by governments to
nudge their citizens towards better decisions [5] and by educa-
tors to guide their students to better learning outcomes [6]. Yet
gamiﬁcation is no silver bullet: studies have shown that poorly
designed games can sap motivation [7], [8] and reorient effort
toward chasing metrics rather than substantive outcomes [2].
When games are used to rank people at work, the high stakes
can lead to overwork and interpersonal conﬂict [9].
Gamiﬁcation is especially prevalent on platforms used by
software engineers for collaborative work [10]. Two distin-
guished examples are Stack Overﬂow [11], a large Q&A com-
munity for programming related knowledge, and GitHub [12],
the largest forum for collaboration in open source software.
Gamiﬁcation plays an important role in open source software
because its tradition of decentralized, online collaboration [13]
creates a demand for ways to effectively signal commitment,
competence, and trustworthiness [14].
The promise of gamiﬁcation on online platforms in gen-
eral, and for open source software communities in particular,
then, is to increase participation and trust among users. It
accomplishes this by rewarding particular kinds of actions and
highlighting milestones and successes of a user’s career. A vast
literature of observational [15] and experimental [16] studies
suggests that gamiﬁcation works in a narrow sense: users
respond to these rewards by changing their behavior [1], and
revert to previous patterns when gamiﬁcation is removed [17].
But as we have noted, just because gamiﬁcation does steer
user behavior, does not mean that the resulting behavior is
desirable. Nor does gamiﬁcation work the same way for
everyone: some individuals may genuinely enjoy gamiﬁcation,
but others may “feel a compulsion [to participate] when the
system pulls on psychological levers such as social comparison
or rewards” [18]. In general the negative effects of gamiﬁcation
elements are understudied in the literature [19], especially
among software developers [10].
In this paper we demonstrate the behavioral affects of
5492021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00058
gamiﬁcation on software developers by studying individuals
contributing to GitHub and a natural experiment involving the
design of the platform. In May 2016 GitHub removed, without
warning or ofﬁcial announcement, two counters from devel-
oper proﬁles that tracked their current and all-time longest
streaks of uninterrupted daily contributions. As the change
was exogenous, the change in behavioral traces of developers
across this change contains more precise information about
their relation to gamiﬁcation than one can typically capture
with observational studies [20], [21]. And because it happened
“live”, on a platform used by hundreds of thousands of people
every day, these insights are likely more generalizable than
those derived from lab experiments.
We use this setting to test the following research questions
relating developer behavior and gamiﬁcation.
RQ1: Did developer streaking behavior change signiﬁ-
cantly after the design change?
RQ2: Did the timing and distribution of developer activity
change?
RQ3: Did developers use the counters to set and achieve
personal goals?
RQ4: Was there a signiﬁcant change in the correlation of
streaking behavior in the social network?
These questions serve as a framework to evaluate how gam-
iﬁed streak counters on GitHub affected developer behavior.
They also help us diagnose whether or not the counters were
effective, both in the sense that they fostered certain kinds of
behavior and whether that behavior was, in fact, desirable. To
address them, we compiled a database of developers active
around the site design change. We observe their activities
overtime to record the lengths of uninterrupted streaks of daily
activity. We analyze the distribution of these streak lengths
and activity in general across the change using a variety of
methods. This approach exploits the idea that sudden changes
in activity patterns related to streaking in the aftermath of the
design change are highly suggestive of gamiﬁed behavior.
Our analysis suggests that the removal of the counters was
followed by several changes in developer behavior. First we
document that many long streaks ongoing at the time of the
change are abandoned. In the long term, there are signiﬁcantly
fewer long streaks. This overall change in behavior manifested
in particular ways that suggest that the counters were steering
behavior in undesirable ways. For instance, developer activity
decreased on weekends compared to weekdays, suggesting
that the counters were pushing developers to contribute on
days they would have otherwise rested. We also ﬁnd that
developers were less likely to make a single contribution in a
day after the change, suggesting that developers had previously
been consciously maintaining their counters. We speculate that
contributions made for the sake of a streak do not represent
highly productive work. Finally, we ﬁnd that the tendency
for neighbors in the social network to synchronize in their
streaking behavior fell signiﬁcantly after the change. This
suggests that developers were pulled to maintain streaks by
peer effects.These ﬁndings provide insight into how gamiﬁcation
changes developer behavior on an important online platform,
especially in potentially negative ways. For example, streak-
chasing behavior likely had unhealthy externalities on the
quality of developer outputs - evidenced by the phenomenon
of single contribution days. Though GitHub has removed this
particular feature, the lessons we can learn from this particular
gamiﬁcation design can help platform owners design better
features in the future.
II. B ACKGROUND
In this section we review related work on gamiﬁcation.
We introduce some general ﬁndings about the effectiveness of
gamiﬁcation and the different ways it steers human behavior.
We then discuss previous work on gamiﬁcation in the context
of computer programming and software development.
A. Gamiﬁcation and Motivation
Gamiﬁcation seems to appear wherever people have mean-
ingful social or economic interactions online. Some kinds
of gamiﬁcation, for example feedback ratings or reputation
points, can help grow trust in a community [22]. Gamiﬁcation
is also used by platforms to increase the frequency, duration,
and intensity of user engagement [23], [24]. These goals can
be applied to virtuous ends, for example improving educational
outcomes among students [25], but can also lead to negative
outcomes. It can misdirect effort and incent dishonesty [26] or
lead to overwork or burnout [27]. Gamiﬁcation can commodify
labor by facilitating the monitoring of workers [28].
Different implementations of gamiﬁcation have varying
effects on user behavior. Some of this heterogeneity comes
from the design of the gamiﬁcation element in question. For
instance leaderboards , which publicly rank users over the
course of a project or task, seem to drive competitive behavior
as relative performance becomes more important [29]. Users
tend to temporarily alter their behavior in order to collect
badges , tokens which users can display after completing a
speciﬁed activity [11], [30]. On many platforms badges are
valuable both for their signal that a user has accomplished a
feat, and to grant the user special privileges.
An important recognition is that not all users are equally
interested in engaging with gamiﬁed elements. In one study
on a platform some users are eager to collect points, others are
happy with a more moderate scores, while others are totally
uninterested [31]. Several papers have shown that social and
cultural effects inﬂuence an individual’s propensity to respond
to gamiﬁcation [32], [33].
Previous works explain the adoption of gamiﬁed elements
by users by probing how they activate or amplify psychological
motivations. Some users chase gamiﬁed elements for their
value as a signal. Others use gamiﬁed elements to set goals,
either in relation to their own previous outcomes [34] or in
competition with others [29]. Some people may pursue points
to imitate others [35]. Several studies show how gamiﬁcation
can exploit motivations in ways that lead to bad outcomes [8],
[18].
550Fig. 1: Example of a GitHub user proﬁle’s activity data, prior to May 19th, 2016. On that date an unannounced design change removed the
two highlighted counters, tracking the lengths of the developer’s longest and current streaks of daily activity. Source: https://zachholman.
com/posts/streaks/
B. Gamiﬁcation in Software Development
As mentioned in the introduction, online communities re-
lating to software development and computer programming
tend to have a signiﬁcant gamiﬁcation footprint. Collaborative
work on software naturally takes place in an online context
and the open source software community in particular is highly
geographically dispersed [36], [37]. As a result, a signiﬁcant
share of interactions takes place on social platforms [38]. Trust
and reputation are important in these contexts, suggesting
that gamiﬁed elements have a signiﬁcant role to play in this
community.
As software development is a quickly changing labor mar-
ket, non-standard credentials are often used to evaluate job
candidates and potential collaborators. For example, instead of
ﬁrst considering an individual’s employment history, college
degrees, or self-described programming language experience,
a hiring manager may prefer to check out an individual’s
proﬁle on a platform like GitHub [39]. The signals sent
by a few key markers on these proﬁles can make a big
ﬁrst impression. Indeed, eye-tracking experiments conﬁrm that
visitors to a new proﬁle page dwell on counters, badges, and
statistics [40]. In this way, the way in which a developer’s
history of contributions is represented can have signiﬁcant
impact on how they are evaluated in the future.
The above-mentioned potential negative side-effects of gam-
iﬁcation are especially important in the software development
community. On the one hand, open source software commu-
nities are widely used throughout the digital economy, often
in mission-critical settings [41]. On the other, the people in
this community are often working long hours, multitasking
between many projects [42], and are highly stressed [43],
sometimes leading to burnout and project abandonment [44].
Because it is difﬁcult to evaluate the quality of contributions
to software projects in general, gamiﬁcation can only set goals
that proxy for quality in this context. This presents the riskthat gamiﬁed software developers chase metrics or optimize
behavior in ways that correlate with but do not cause good
outcomes. It is imperative that the research community better
understands the extent to which gamiﬁcation can cause harm.
One example of a platform relating to software develop-
ment with a signiﬁcant gamiﬁcation aspect is Stack Over-
ﬂow, the largest Q&A platform for questions about computer
programming. Several previous studies describe how Stack
Overﬂow users engage with gamiﬁcation. For instance, users
will signiﬁcantly change their behavior when they are close
to obtaining a so-called threshold badge [11], returning to old
habits soon after. Over the course of its history, Stack Overﬂow
has introduced several new badges - often leading to sudden
changes in behavior observable at the macro scale as users
chase these new tokens [45].
III. D ATA
In this section we describe GitHub’s gamiﬁed elements and
the sudden removal of one of these elements in 2016. We
then describe how we collected, ﬁltered, and processed the
data for the purposes of our analysis. The data and code used
to perform this ﬁltering are available at https://github.com/
lukasmoldon/GHStreaksThesis.
A. Gamiﬁcation on GitHub
GitHub has had several gamiﬁcation elements on its site. As
of 2020, developer proﬁles are still adorned with a contribution
calendar - a visual representation of the daily intensity of their
activity on the site in the last year. Previously GitHub included
two counters below each developer’s calendar, one reporting
the developer’s all-time longest streak of consecutive days
making a contribution on GitHub, and the other reporting the
developer’s ongoing streak. We share an example in Figure 1.
This external shock, which we interpret as a natural-
experimental perturbation of gamiﬁcation on GitHub, serves
as the lynch-pin of our analysis. We study changes in behavior
551relating to streaks around this date assuming that they are at
least partially made in response to the removal of the counters.
For instance, we will soon observe that there was a signiﬁcant
drop in the number of long streaks that were active shortly
following the design change. We interpret this as a response:
developers suddenly lost an incentive to maintain their streaks
and adjusted their behavior in response.
Besides the counters and the still-present activity calendar,
we note that GitHub also has gamiﬁcation elements in the
form of badges for projects. Previous work has demonstrated
that project owners seek out these badges, and that projects in
turn are evaluated more favorably when they have them [12].
B. Data processing
Our primary data source for GitHub data is GHTorrent, an
updating database of information retrieved from the GitHub
REST API [46]. We access data from the June 2019 dump.
The data set contains 32.5 million developers, 125 million
projects, 100 million opened issues and 1.368 billion unique
commits. To address our research questions we proceeded to
ﬁlter and modify the data.
As our primary focus is the platform’s design change, we
only consider developers who were active on the site around
the time of the change. From the original population, we
discarded all developers who did not have a commit in a non-
forked repository (17.3 million remaining). We also removed
developers with more than 100 invalid commit timestamps
to ﬁlter developers who may have manipulated their activity
histories and bot accounts. We consider a timestamp as invalid
if it has an illogical format or is unrealistic (i.e. before GitHub
was founded or after the data dump was created). Also bots
make a signiﬁcant number of contributions, so it is important
to ﬁlter them out carefully. Our end sample excludes over
99% of the bots identiﬁed in a recent paper on GitHub
bot detection, which we discovered after our analyses were
completed [47]. We kept the remaining developers who had
at least 100 commits, were assigned a “USR” type (excluding
organization accounts), and who had an associated geolocation
from GHTorrent, leaving 433,138 developers. We focus on
developers which are geolocated for a technical reason. To
accurately track daily activity streaks, it is necessary to know
a developer’s timezone as every timestamp is converted and
saved in UTC-0 by GitHub, but streaks are evaluated by local
time zones. For example, without knowing that a developer
lives in San Francisco, their commit at 8PM local time on
a Monday would be incorrectly evaluated as a commit on
a Tuesday (3AM in UTC-0). These coordinates are inferred
by GHTorrent, using the location free text ﬁeld on developer
proﬁles and the OpenStreetMap API. More than 85% of
developers in this population joined GitHub before the design
change.
Next we proceeded to tabulate the daily activities of each
developer in order to recreate the streak counters they had
on each day. Three kinds of contributions counted towards
streaks: commits, pull requests and issues. There were somespeciﬁc rules for these activities to count1. For instance, con-
tributions had to be associated with a standalone (non-forked)
project. For pull requests and issues, we checked if they
were made in a forked repository and ﬁlter such activity out.
However, because 48 million projects represent a forked copy
of a corresponding standalone project, commits are assigned to
projects 6.252 billion times. Whenever a project is forked, all
commits of this origin standalone project are duplicated and
assigned to the forked project copy, too. In this case we had
to discard commits to forks which were never merged back
to the original project. We created ﬁltered databases for each
contribution type for all observed developers.
The remaining dataset consists of 433,138 developers with
over 290 million valid contributions (including 12.8 million
issues and pull requests). In the last step, all contributions
were sorted by time and developer. We computed the resulting
data set of streaks (start, end) assigned to the corresponding
developer ID.
IV. A NALYSIS
Our overarching empirical strategy is to describe how de-
veloper behavior differs across the design change. We view
the removal of the counters as a shock: developers did not
anticipate this change. As a result, we interpret changes in
developer activity relating to streaking across the change as
evidence for the effect of gamiﬁcation on behavior.
A. RQ1: Changes in Developer Behavior
We ﬁrst address the question of whether or not we can
observe signiﬁcant changes in overall behavior. We begin
by introducing general ﬁndings about the share of streaking
developers over time. Afterwards we consider the distributions
of streaks starting on Mondays and compare the lengths of
such streaks before and after the design change.
We calculated the share of all observed developers having
a streak with a minimum length of 20, 60 and 200 days
for each day. Note that to compute these values we count
streaks for each group ( t=20, 50, 200) from the day they
passed the threshold tnot from the day they were started. This
emphasizes the impact of events such as holidays or service
outages. As we are calculating the share of developers with an
ongoing streak, we divide the count of such developers by the
number of developers in our dataset who had registered at least
t 1days before. This adjusts for the growing population of
GitHub developers over time. The resulting plot (Figure 2)
shows that the largest drop of streaking developers within
3 years happened immediately after the 19th of March in
2016. Moreover, we observe a long-term decline in the share
of developers on long streaks. However, developers having
streaks longer than 200 days did not change their behavior
directly after the change.
We can make two qualitative interpretations from this anal-
ysis. First, we note that many of the sudden drops in streaking
1For a complete list and description see: https://help.GitHub.com/
en/articles/why-are-my-contributions-not-showing-up-on-my-proﬁle
(September 28, 2019)
552Fig. 2: Share of developers having a streak of length ¿ t days for t 2 f20; 60;200g: One of the largest drops occurs right after the streak
counters were removed from GitHub (red line). Developers tend to abandon their streaks across holidays season (dotted lines). Server outages
also inﬂuence streaks. (dashed lines).
behavior around holidays or outages witness a subsequent,
quite symmetric recovery roughly tdays later. This suggests
that there is some natural base rate of streaking. The second is
that the decline in streaking in the immediate aftermath of the
design change is somewhat more gradual than the other major
declines observed around major holidays or platform outages.
We interpret this as a population of developers giving up their
streaks gradually in response to the design change.
Figure 3 focuses on the share of developers with an ongoing
streak of length t= 20, with developers broken up by their
country of origin. We use the same geolocation of developers
which we use to make time-zone adjustments. We ﬁnd that
while western countries are equally affected by the design
change, Chinese developers continue streaking on a similar
level (with one temporary drop across the US Independence
Day). One explanation could be that Chinese developers
often have signiﬁcantly more demanding working hours than
their counterparts in the Western world. This interpretation is
supported by recent protests against long working hours on
GitHub by Chinese developers and their supporters [48]. We
also note that the intensity of the decline in streaks across the
design change is similar for all four countries.
To test the statistical signiﬁcance of the change in share of
developers streaking, we zoom in on activity right around the
change. We compare the lengths of streaks starting exactly
three weeks before the design change with those starting
exactly three weeks after the change. A Mann-Whitney-U
test indicates that the former collection of streak lengths
Fig. 3: Share of developers from different countries having a streak of
length >20 days: While western countries are affected equally by the
design change, developers from China continue streaking afterwards
on a similar level.
has a signiﬁcantly higher average, signiﬁcant at p < : 01.
We then focus on Mondays to compare the characteristic
lengths of streaks around the design change because of the
well-documented “Monday Effect” [49], which notes that a
signiﬁcant amount of contributions to GitHub take place on
Mondays. We report characteristic streak lengths on various
Mondays around the removal of the counters in Table I, the
likelihood that they last more than a week, as well as odds of
a streak lasting more than 14 days conditional on reaching a
7 days.
Considering the change in streaking behavior in the long
run, we compare all streaks beginning on Mondays of the
553Fig. 4: Share of streaks surviving at least x days. Each line represents
the survival curve of streaks started in one of the ﬁrst ten weeks of
either 2016 (blue) or 2017 (red). We observe a clear separation - the
lower position of the red curves indicates that in 2017, after the site
design change, long streaks became less common.
ﬁrst ten weeks in 2016, before the design change, with those
from 2017. We plot the truncated survival curves of streaks
in Figure 4. These curves describe the chance that a streak
starting in a given weeks survives tdays. The clear separation
of most red curves, representing weeks in early 2017, from the
blue curves, representing the ﬁrst weeks from 2016, suggests
that a change has taken place. Indeed, we note that the average
length of a streak exceeding 14 days declined from nearly 26
days in early 2016 to 22 days in early 2017. At extreme values
the change is even more drastic: among streaks of length at
least 14, those started in early 2016 were more than twice as
likely to exceed 100 days (4.4%) than those started in early
2017 (2.0%).
In summary, we found evidence that long streaks were aban-
doned following the design change, and that new streaks be-
came signiﬁcantly less common. The difference in frequency
of streaks becomes larger as we consider longer streaks. We
see evidence for this effect when we zoom in on the weeks
Starting date Avg length P(len>7) P(len>14jlen>7)
2016/04/18 2.38 0.52% 15%
2016/04/25 2.29 0.40% 10%
2016/05/02 2.24 0.40% 11%
2016/05/09 2.36 0.43% 7%
2016/05/16 2.33 0.45% 9%
Change - - -
2016/05/23 2.30 0.39% 9%
2016/05/30 2.27 0.40% 6%
2016/06/06 2.27 0.31% 5%
2016/06/13 2.24 0.27% 1%
2016/06/20 2.28 0.35% 3%
TABLE I: Comparison of streaks starting on various Mondays around
the site design change. The sharper decrease in the probability of long
streaks suggests a loss of interest in behavior tracked by the counters
removed in the change.around the design change, and when we compare activity
across one year.
B. RQ2: Changes in Timing and Distribution of Activity
Having demonstrated that there is a signiﬁcant change in
streaking behavior following the design change, we now turn
to our second question, asking whether the timing and distri-
bution of developer activity changed. We consider two ways
in which developer activity may have changed qualitatively.
The ﬁrst is that developers may be more likely to take a
break from the platform on weekends. We ﬁnd evidence of
a small but signiﬁcant drop in the relative share of activity on
the weekends. The second is that developers no longer have
incentive to make contributions for the sake of extending an
ongoing streak. We also ﬁnd evidence for this phenomenon.
1) Weekend Activity: Even though a signiﬁcant share of
open source development activity occurs on nights and week-
ends [50], weekends are considered a time to rest and spend
with friends and family in most cultures around the world.
Moreover, sociologists have documented that time is a net-
worked good [51], meaning that time for work or recreation
is more valuable when it is synchronized with the time of
others. Without the incentive to extend a long ongoing streak,
we argue that developers will be more likely to take time off
on the weekends.
We present descriptive statistics of the relative share of
developer contributions before and after the change in Table II.
We see that the share of activity on the weekend drops among
all developers drops ( .09%), and moreso for those developers
who achieve long streaks (.28-.34%). To test the statistical
signiﬁcance of this change, we build a model.
In the following we focus on active developers with at least
30 contributions in the respective time interval. To test for
statistical signiﬁcance of the design change on weekend work,
we apply the regression discontinuity design method [52].
Our goal is to ﬁt a linear model on the share of weekend
activity per developer over time, which estimates the effect of
the design change with a treated variable and coefﬁcient. The
corresponding linear model is
y=0+1x+2T
whereydenotes the ratio of weekend activity for a developer
in weekxandTrepresents the treated variable, with T=
0ifxis before the change, T= 1 otherwise. We ﬁt our
model to the data using the python module RDD2. We ﬁt the
model with several bandwidths, denoting the number of weeks
we consider in total before and after the week of the design
change.
We report the results in Table III. Whether we consider 1, 2,
or 3 weeks before and after the design change (corresponding
to bandwidth values of 2, 4, and 6, respectively), we ﬁnd that
there was a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of contributions
made on weekends following the change.
2https://GitHub.com/evan-magnusson/rdd (February 23, 2020)
554All Developers With Streak20 With Streak30
Before After Before After Before After
Share of contrib. on weekend 0.2188 0.2179 0.2433 0.2399 0.2487 0.2459
Contrib. on weekends (millions) 45.3 48.6 13.5 10.3 9.5 7.6
TABLE II: Share and total amount of weekend activity for all developers and only streaking developers (achieving a streak of length 20
or 30 in the respective time interval) in the year before (B) and after (A) the change. The share of weekend work decreases especially for
streaking developers.
Bandwidth # Obs.0(intercept) 1(x coeff.) 2(treated coeff.) p-value2
2 73433 0.0582 0.0358 -0.0985 <0:001
4 144726 0.1843 0.0050 -0.0365 <0:001
6 214249 0.2016 0.0004 -0.0241 <0:001
TABLE III: Regression discontinuity design model estimates of the change in the share of activity carried out on the weekend. The bandwidth
column considers the number of weeks considered in total before and after the design change.
Fig. 5: Results of the RDD weekend placebo test with fake change
dates and bandwidth 4. The estimated treatment of the actual design
change on the share of weekend contributions is highlighted in red.
All other points represent the result of repeating the same analysis
with a hypothetical design change in other weeks. The green and
yellow shaded regions represent the 95% conﬁdence intervals around
the estimated coefﬁcient. Prior to the design change, no other week
saw such a large estimated treatment effect as the actual design
change week.
In order to test the robustness of our ﬁndings, we carried
out a series of tests using the same model with the design
change artiﬁcially set to different dates in 2016. Such tests
are known as placebo tests in the econometrics literature [52].
To keep results comparable, we again only focus on active
developers with at least 30 contributions in the respective time
interval and use bandwidth 4. Figure 5 shows the resulting
treated coefﬁcients for all tests with the placebo date in
weekx. Before the change, we observe no higher treated
coefﬁcient than the original one of -0.0365 and larger 2.5%
conﬁdence intervals in general. After the change we observe
ﬂuctuating coefﬁcients around the Independence Day but also
similar values in September and October. We make two points
here: ﬁrst, the fall in weekend work around the fourth of
July weekend seems to be compensated by overwork on
neighboring weekends. Second, all placebo points before the
design change show no difference as large as the real design
change, suggesting that this was in fact a signiﬁcant change.2) Single Contribution Days: Besides steering users to
make contributions on weekends, the counters likely exerted
signiﬁcant pressure on users with long ongoing streaks. If this
is the case, we expect that users on long streaks before the
change are signiﬁcantly more likely to have days in which
they do the minimum activity to extend their streak. We call
such days Single Contribution Days (SCD). In Figure 6, we
plot the distribution of SCDs by streak-length decile in streaks
of length 60 or higher before vs. after the change. We see
that SCDs were more common before the change overall
(36% of days vs 32%). At the end of long streaks before the
design change, over 40% of days were SCD, compared with
roughly 36% after the change. We interpret this as evidence
that developers went out of their way to keep their long streaks
alive.
Fig. 6: Share of days with one contribution by decile over all streaks
one year before and after the change with a minimum streak length of
60. Single Contribution Days are not uniformly distributed and have
a higher share at the end of a streak. After the change this tendency
weakens.
C. RQ3: Counters for Goal-Setting
We have seen evidence that many developers stopped streak-
ing after the counters were removed, and that this reﬂected
changing patterns of contribution. These ﬁndings suggest that
developers were interested in the value of the counter for
555Fig. 7: The streaking behavior of developers who forked a code 100
days in a row-type GitHub project. The largest drop in streaking
behavior occurred immediately after the design change on GitHub
(red line). Share of developers having streaks above the 100 days
goal decreased after the change permanently.
signaling purposes. Another possible motivation for engaging
with the counters was that they could help developers set and
stick to long term goals. Indeed there are many resources
offering to guide a learner to a goal through a program of daily
activity. One example in the world of computer programming
is the “100DaysOfCode” challenge3. As the name suggests,
the challenge’s goal is to code at least one hour a day for 100
days in a row. Participants are encouraged to fork a GitHub
repository, which serves as a journal template and can be ﬁlled
with daily individual progress updates. Though these daily
journal updates do not count as a valid contribution for the
streak counters as they are done in a forked repository, we
assume that the population of developers forking this repo is
signiﬁcantly more likely to engage in streaking behavior with
goal-based motivations. By observing this population across
the change, we can check whether the counters improved the
chances that developers would achieve their goal.
First we used the GitHub API to search for further goal
based communities on GitHub with similar 100 days of
contributions goals. The data we share online includes a list
of the projects we found. We also used the API to collect
developers forking the corresponding template repositories and
translates their usernames to IDs in our database. From a
collection of roughly 16,000 developers forking any one these
projects, we found more than 1,600 developers in our ﬁltered
data (recall that our ﬁltered dataset only contains developers
for which a location could be inferred). Figure 7 shows the
daily share of these developers over time having a streak of
lengthtfort= 50; 100;150. In the year before the change,
we observe a sharp increase in streaking with several drops
(most likely caused by developers who reached their goal).
But we also observe streaking beyond 150 days. Within the
days after the change, a large amount of developers stopped
streaking immediately for all thresholds t. Developers seem
3https://www.100daysofcode.com/
Fig. 8: The streaking achievements of developers who forked a
code 100 days in a row-type GitHub project. Number of developers
reaching streaks of length g days for g 2 f50; 100; 105; 155g over
time. The growth of g=50 achievers decreases after the change, but
developers still hit new goals. The large difference between achievers
of g=100 and g=105 emphasizes anchoring effect of the 100 day goal.
to be discouraged by the design change and gave up their
goal. However, we observe surviving and new streaks longer
than 50 days after the design change in 2017, but with less
developers participating compared to the year before. The
share of developers streaking above their goal over 150 days
decreased permanently. What is unclear from this ﬁgure is
whether the developers who are still streaking after the change
reach their goal of 100 days.
Figure 8 plots the total number of developers achieving
streaks of length g2 f50; 100;105;155g over time. The
design change seems to have a low impact on these statistics,
as many developers still achieve signiﬁcant streak lengths
after the change. But when comparing differences between
the number of achievers of different goals, we observe nearly
the same increasing gap between achievers of the 50 day/100
day real goal and achievers of 100 day/105 day streaks. Thus,
many developers stopped maintaining their streaks right after
hitting the 100 day goal, not even reaching a length of 105
days. These results suggest that developers still streak because
of the goal based challenge after the change, even without
having a streak feature. Moreover, the forked journal with daily
updates could have helped to keep track of a streak, as many
developers stop streaking quite exactly after reaching a length
of 100 days. This suggests that some developers did not need
the counters to achieve their goals.
D. RQ4: Imitation in the Social Network
GitHub, like many other online platforms for collaborative
work, includes a social network. Developers can follow each
other and receive updates about the activities of their network
neighbors. It is likely that developers visit the proﬁles of
their friends in the social network more often than those of
other developers, and so were more likely to observe the
streak counters of their friends. In this section we ask whether
there is any evidence that developers imitated their neighbors
in streaking behavior. Observing such a peer effect would
556demonstrate that gamiﬁcation can modify developers behavior
through social networks. Again we exploit the site design
change: we compare the correlation of streaking behavior of
network neighbors before and after the removal of counters.
Why do we expect that gamiﬁcation inﬂuenced behavior
through the social network? Observing the performance of
familiar others can inspire people to try harder. In fact, in
seeking to evaluate and benchmark our own performance, we
often seek out information about others [53]. In the context of
gamiﬁcation, in which points or badges may seem arbitrary,
a relative comparison seems essential to deﬁne the value of
rewards. Previous studies do ﬁnd signiﬁcant correlations in
engagement with gamiﬁcation between developers who are
connected and can view each others’ outcomes [35]. It is often
unclear, however, whether these correlations are due to sorting
or inﬂuence.
Sorting, sometimes called homophily, refers to the phe-
nomenon that similar individuals are more likely to become
friends. In the case of GitHub, developers may be more likely
to connect with developers with similar work schedules or de-
gree of motivation. This latent similarity would explain similar
degrees of streaking behavior among connected developers.
Inﬂuence, on the other hand, refers to the tendency of friends
to become more similar over time, whether because of imita-
tion, a desire to conform, or other social forces. Developers
on GitHub may be inﬂuenced by the activity patterns of their
neighbors. In the case of streaking behavior we suggest that
such inﬂuence was likely enhanced by the counters present on
developers proﬁles before the design change.
In general these two factors are confounded when con-
ducting observational studies [54]. For example, we cannot
easily tell if two connected developers both have high streak
scores because they are inﬂuencing one another to work
harder, or if they connected in the ﬁrst place because they are
similarly dedicated to working. Yet the removal of the streak
counters presents an opportunity to partially disentangle these
effects, if it is interpreted as a natural experiment [55], [56].
Indeed, the removal of the counters likely suddenly blocked
a channel of inﬂuence between developers. If streaking is a
behavior transmitted by social inﬂuence, we would expect the
correlation of streaking behavior to fall signiﬁcantly after the
change.
To carry out this analysis, we generated a social network
from the time-stamped following relations stored by GHTor-
rent. In this network, nodes represent developers while links
between them are mutual follower connections. Since we want
to focus on ties between mutual acquaintances, we do not
observe single/non-mutual follows and discarded all nodes
with a degree of 0. We visualize ﬁltering process used to
generate the network that we analyze in Figure 9. The resulting
undirected network snapshot, realized for May 18 in 2016 (the
day before the design change) contains 146k nodes and 253k
links with an average degree < k > = 3:46and a maximum
degree ofkmax= 2343 . The network is divided into 11k
components, while the largest component contains more than
81% of all nodes.
Fig. 9: This ﬁgure illustrates how we construct a network of social
connections of developers on GitHub to study network correlations
in streaking behavior. A) Developers on GitHub can follow other
developers to stay informed about their activity. We represent devel-
opers as nodes and their following relationships as links in a network.
Some following relationships are mutual. B) We keep only the
mutual connections as they are most likely to represent connections
between peers and acquaintances. For any given day, we annotate
each developer with the length of their current ongoing streak.
We labeled nodes as streakers or non-streakers based on the
maximum streak length the developer had attained, for differ-
ent thresholds t2f8;15;32g. If the maximum streak length of
a developer is at least tdays long, the developer is considered
to be a streaker, otherwise not. To calculate the correlation of
streaking status within the network we calculated Newman’s
attribute assortativity coefﬁcient [57]). Generally speaking, the
assortativity of a network ris a real number in [ 1;1], increas-
ing when neighbors tend to have similar attribute values. To
analyze the statistical signiﬁcant of streaking assortativity in
the network, we repeat the calculation of assortativity on 1,000
copies of the network in which the streaking label is randomly
shufﬂed. This randomization preserves the network structure
and overall prevalence of streaking. We calculate a z-score
comparing the observed assortativity with the distribution of
assortativity in the randomizations. As an alternative measure
of the tendency of streaking developers to be connected, we
also calculate a conditional probability: P(SNjS)=P(node
nhas streaking neighbor jnodenis streaker ).
Table IV shows that the streaker attribute is not randomly
distributed, as we observe an assortativity around 0 for the ran-
domized networks and between 0:04and0:09for the real net-
work. We calculated a z-score to test the statistical signiﬁcance
of the difference in assortativity between the empirical graph
and the random simulated graphs, with z1:96for all tests.
Values decrease with an increasing streaker threshold t, since
there are fewer streakers and remaining streaking nodes have
a higher fraction of non-streaking neighbors. The conditional
probability also suggests that there is signiﬁcant clustering of
streaking developers in the network. The probability that a
streaker is connected to another streaker is 38.6% compared
to the average of 17.7% in the randomizations for t= 8. With
an increasing tthe difference between the networks increases
too. Att= 32 we observe P(SNjS)= 25.3% compared an
557Before Change (2016/05/18) Observed network Streak-randomized networks (avg. of 1k)
Streaking Threshold (Days) Streaking assortativity P(SNjS) Streaking assortativity P(SNjS) Z-score (assortativity)
8 0.089 0.386 -0.0001 0.179 41.6
15 0.079 0.340 -0.0001 0.082 36.9
32 0.045 0.253 -0.0001 0.027 21.2
TABLE IV: Network assortativity and the conditional probability that a streaker node has a streaking neighbor for the empirical social
network on 2016/05/18. We compare these values against their average values under 1,000 randomizations of the streaking label. Both
empirical differ signiﬁcantly from the random experiments at all three thresholds we consider, indicating a connection between streaking
and the network structure.
After Change (2017/05/20) Observed network Streak-randomized networks (avg. of 1k)
Streaking Threshold (Days) Streaking assortativity P(SNjS) Streaking assortativity P(SNjS) Z-score (assortativity)
8 0.091 0.265 -0.0001 0.140 37.7
15 0.055 0.203 0.0001 0.047 22.6
32 0.021 0.112 -0.0001 0.011 8.3
TABLE V: Calculations repeated for the empirical network on 2017/05/20, one year after the removal of streak counters from GitHub. We
observe smaller but still signiﬁcant clustering by streaking users, compared with the randomizations.
average of 2.8% in the random networks.
This suggests that streaking developers are signiﬁcantly in-
terconnected, but does not tell us whether sorting or inﬂuence
are at play. If we repeat the analysis of homophily among
streakers after the change, we can test these factors. If only
sorting is at play, i.e. if individuals are more simply likely to
connect with people who have the same tendency to streak,
there should be no change in the observed assortativity levels.
If only inﬂuence is present, then there should be little or no
assortativity remaining after the counters are removed. Results
in between suggest that both effects were present before,
and that the design change blocked an important channel
for inﬂuence. Indeed this is what we hypothesize: that some
developers were driven to extend their streaks because they
observed higher totals among their neighbors in the network,
and that the design change ended this phenomenon.
We thus created the same network one year after the change
and only observed streak records in these 12 months for the
streaker attribute. Besides 20k new existing nodes, there is
an overall increase of 13.4% in the number of edges and a
general increase in connectivity among nodes. Table V shows
that streaking in the network remains assortative and that post-
change streakers are still connected. But the overall values
decreased signiﬁcantly compared with the random networks,
relative to what we observed in the network from 2016.
Notably smaller z-scores suggest a weaker level of streaking
assortativity after the change. For the threshold t= 8 only
every fourth developer is connected to another streaker, while
one year before we observed 38.6%. This suggests that the
signals provided by the streak counters were indeed a conduit
for peer effects in the social network of GitHub developers.
In other words, it appears that the counters spurred developers
to keep up with or exceed the streaks of their neighbors in
the social network. The remaining assortativity can likely be
attributed to sorting.
V. D ISCUSSION
Our use of a natural experiment on a widely-used online
platform offers a new perspective on some the main issues ofgamiﬁcation research today [58]. Methodologically, our results
are based on data on the scale typical of observational studies,
while retaining some ﬂavor of an experimental study (for
instance that we can exclude several confounding explanations
for our ﬁndings such as a secular change in behavior). Theo-
retically, our focus on the context of software development on
GitHub gives us a clearer lens through which to interpret the
interaction between developer and gamiﬁcation. Our ﬁndings
should give pause to decision makers considering whether to
implement gamiﬁcation, especially in software [59].
What lessons can platform designers, in particular those
designing for software developers, draw from our study? The
ﬁrst is that user responses to gamiﬁcation can be highly varied.
We speculate that some users respond to gamiﬁcation because
they would like to signal status or commitment. Others may
use gamiﬁed elements to set and stick to goals. Yet others
may learn behavior or even evaluate themselves by comparing
their gamiﬁed achievements with those of their friends and
collaborators. In sum, any game designer must consider that
users may engage with new games in unexpected ways. In
particular, some users may focus their efforts on collecting
points and badges to the detriment of the actual content of their
activity. This is worth keeping in mind even for designers who
seek to tweak systems and platforms to virtuous ends [60],
[61]. The observed effects of the removal of the counters
implies that platform designers have some responsibility to
consider how the introduction of gamiﬁcation elements steers
behavior.
Indeed, some users may chase the rewards of gamiﬁca-
tion to an unhealthy degree. Long streaks of uninterrupted
contributions may lead to burnout. Indeed, some emotional
responses to GitHub’s announcement that the streak counters
were no longer part of developer proﬁles suggest that some
developers had developed an unhealthy relationship with these
elements [62]. It also seems to us unlikely that developers
logging in to make a single contribution to maintain an
ongoing streak made useful or high quality contributions. This
sort of behavior reﬂects an optimization of individual behavior
558for the sake of the game, and not for the quality of the work.
These shortcomings of the counters might have been evident
to GitHub’s designers, who, after all, removed these features
from their platform. Nevertheless, the patterns of behavior we
observe could generalize to other platforms and games. As
gamiﬁcation proliferates in online platforms and labor markets,
we argue it is important to consider these ﬁndings.
A. Limitations
We now highlight several limitations of our data and tech-
nical approach. The streak computation itself is very sensitive
to small changes in the source data, as a single missing day
in our data would end all streaks immediately. Fortunately
we do not observe such patterns at the macro scale. Another
assumption that we make about our data is that developers
do not frequently edit the contribution time of commits.
In this way it was technically possible for developers to
create artiﬁcial streaks of arbitrary length. Besides ﬁltering
out developers that were clearly engaged in such behavior
(for example those with commits at times decades before the
creation of the GitHub platform), we assume that this behavior
was rare. Lastly, a more ideal natural experiment would have
observed both the introduction and the removal of the counters.
Considering our data sample, another limitation is that we
only consider developers for which GHTorrent could reliably
infer location. This is a necessary step to calculate streaks
but introduces bias to our sample, as developers who provide
information about their location are likely different in moti-
vation, attitude, and behavior from developers who do not.
Geolocation inferences are also more accurate for residents of
major cities and Western countries [63]. We also acknowledge
that developers may have moved time zones during our period
of analysis.
Finally, we note that even though GitHub removed the streak
counters from user proﬁles in 2016, the colored contribution
graph remains a part of proﬁles to this day. This gamiﬁed
element gives visitors to a proﬁle an impression of a user’s
activity over time at a glance. In this way incentives remain to
signal consistency of contributions over time, and the calendar
offers ways, if more limited than the counters, to track progress
towards goals and for collaborators to inﬂuence one another.
B. Future Work
To better understand potential effects of gamiﬁcation on
user behavior, it is important to understand how the gam-
iﬁed element in question taps into different psychological
motivations users have. For example, the ability to signal
commitment via a high streak counter can be useful for
individuals on the labor market, particularly in software de-
velopment. Yet chasing that signal can lead to bad outcomes
via single contribution days or overwork. More research is
needed to study how different kinds of gamiﬁcation (such as
counters, leaderboards, or badges) steer behavior by appealing
to different motivations [64], for example the desire to signal
abilities to others [65] or to track progress towards a speciﬁc
goal [66]. We know, for example, that extrinsic motivators suchas points or rewards can “crowd out” intrinsic motivations
for pro-social behavior in some contexts [67]. Any analysis
of the motivation of users should recognize that the socio-
demographic backgrounds and values of users are signiﬁcantly
related to their responsiveness to gamiﬁcation [31], [68].
We have not discussed how gamiﬁcation elements on online
platforms may lead to biased evaluations of its users [3],
[69]–[71]. Individual characteristics of users, such as their
gender, ethnicity, and cultural origins undoubtedly relate to
their propensity to engage with gamiﬁcation. If gamiﬁcation
rewards are then used to, say, rank top users, this can lead
to run-away inequalities in outcomes on a platform. There is
a signiﬁcant potential for such bias when algorithms interact
with gamiﬁed elements in a complex way [72]. Regarding the
ﬁeld of software development in particular, future work should
engage with the literature on engineer productivity to design
effective gamiﬁcation [73]. For instance, the lessons of recent
work on goal-setting methods to foster good habits among
software developers could be applied to this question [74].
Our paper has also focused, to a large extent, on the
responses of individuals to gamiﬁcation. Yet gamiﬁcation is
generally employed with the goal to improve communities
in some way, and sometimes this is the primary purpose of
such features [75]. Future work on the impacts of gamiﬁcation
should zoom out from the individual to study collective
outcomes, for example if projects or communities that engage
signiﬁcantly with gamiﬁed elements perform better [12].
C. Conclusion
In this paper we presented evidence from a natural ex-
periment that gamiﬁcation steers behavior and increases par-
ticipation among software developers, though potentially in
undesirable ways. We urge the designers of online platforms
to consider the potential consequences of adding gamiﬁcation
elements to their sites. Our ﬁndings suggest that some users
will change their behavior to collect digital tokens, but that
this behavior may optimize for the game, and not necessarily
for healthy and productive activity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ancsa Hannak, Srebrenka Letina, Theresa Gessler
and Zsoﬁa Czeman for helpful discussions and feedback. This
paper is based on the bachelor thesis of the ﬁrst co-author at
RWTH Aachen University.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa, “Does gamiﬁcation work?–a
literature review of empirical studies on gamiﬁcation,” in 2014 47th
Hawaii international conference on system sciences . Ieee, 2014, pp.
3025–3034.
[2] Y .-k. Chou, Actionable gamiﬁcation: Beyond points, badges, and leader-
boards . Packt Publishing Ltd, 2019.
[3] A. Hann ´ak, C. Wagner, D. Garcia, A. Mislove, M. Strohmaier, and
C. Wilson, “Bias in online freelance marketplaces: Evidence from
taskrabbit and ﬁverr,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , 2017,
pp. 1914–1933.
[4] P. Sch ¨orpf, J. Flecker, A. Sch ¨onauer, and H. Eichmann, “Triangular
love–hate: management and control in creative crowdworking,” New
Technology, Work and Employment , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 43–58, 2017.
559[5] S. K. Bista, S. Nepal, C. Paris, and N. Colineau, “Gamiﬁcation for
online communities: A case study for delivering government services,”
international Journal of Cooperative information Systems , vol. 23,
no. 02, p. 1441002, 2014.
[6] L. de Marcos, E. Garcia-Lopez, and A. Garcia-Cabot, “On the effec-
tiveness of game-like and social approaches in learning: Comparing
educational gaming, gamiﬁcation & social networking,” Computers &
Education , vol. 95, pp. 99–113, 2016.
[7] T. Yamakami, “Gamiﬁcation literacy: Emerging needs for identify-
ing bad gamiﬁcation,” in Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering .
Springer, 2013, pp. 395–403.
[8] M. D. Hanus and J. Fox, “Assessing the effects of gamiﬁcation in
the classroom: A longitudinal study on intrinsic motivation, social
comparison, satisfaction, effort, and academic performance,” Computers
& education , vol. 80, pp. 152–161, 2015.
[9] O. Sharone, “Engineering overwork: Bell-curve management at a high-
tech ﬁrm,” Fighting for time: Shifting boundaries of work and social
life, pp. 191–218, 2004.
[10] O. Pedreira, F. Garc ´ıa, N. Brisaboa, and M. Piattini, “Gamiﬁcation in
software engineering–a systematic mapping,” Information and Software
Technology , vol. 57, pp. 157–168, 2015.
[11] A. Anderson, D. Huttenlocher, J. Kleinberg, and J. Leskovec, “Steering
user behavior with badges,” in Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web . ACM, 2013, pp. 95–106.
[12] A. Trockman, S. Zhou, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “Adding sparkle
to social coding: an empirical study of repository badges in the npm
ecosystem,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering . ACM, 2018, pp. 511–522.
[13] K. Crowston and J. Howison, “The social structure of free and open
source software development,” First Monday , vol. 10, no. 2, 2005.
[14] B. Vasilescu, “Human aspects, gamiﬁcation, and social media in collab-
orative software engineering,” in Companion Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2014, pp. 646–649.
[15] L. E. Nacke and C. S. Deterding, “The maturing of gamiﬁcation
research,” Computers in Human Behaviour , pp. 450–454, 2017.
[16] J. Hamari, “Do badges increase user activity? a ﬁeld experiment on the
effects of gamiﬁcation,” Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 71, pp.
469–478, 2017.
[17] J. Thom, D. Millen, and J. DiMicco, “Removing gamiﬁcation from
an enterprise sns,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 2012, pp. 1067–1070.
[18] T. W. Kim and K. Werbach, “More than just a game: ethical issues in
gamiﬁcation,” Ethics and Information Technology , vol. 18, no. 2, pp.
157–173, 2016.
[19] S. Hyrynsalmi, J. Smed, and K. Kimppa, “The dark side of gamiﬁcation:
How we should stop worrying and study also the negative impacts of
bringing game design elements to everywhere.” in GamiFIN , 2017, pp.
96–104.
[20] M. M. Malik and J. Pfeffer, “Identifying platform effects in social media
data,” in Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media ,
2016.
[21] H. Dev, K. Karahalios, and H. Sundaram, “Quantifying voter biases in
online platforms: An instrumental variable approach,” Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 3, no. CSCW, pp. 1–27,
2019.
[22] D. Basten, “Gamiﬁcation,” IEEE Software , no. 5, pp. 76–81, 2017.
[23] L. F. Rodrigues, A. Oliveira, and C. J. Costa, “Playing seriously–how
gamiﬁcation and social cues inﬂuence bank customers to use gamiﬁed
e-business applications,” Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 63, pp.
392–407, 2016.
[24] J. Looyestyn, J. Kernot, K. Boshoff, J. Ryan, S. Edney, and C. Ma-
her, “Does gamiﬁcation increase engagement with online programs? a
systematic review,” PloS one , vol. 12, no. 3, 2017.
[25] L. da Rocha Seixas, A. S. Gomes, and I. J. de Melo Filho, “Effectiveness
of gamiﬁcation in the engagement of students,” Computers in Human
Behavior , vol. 58, pp. 48–63, 2016.
[26] D. T. Welsh and L. D. Ord ´o˜nez, “The dark side of consecutive high
performance goals: Linking goal setting, depletion, and unethical be-
havior,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , vol.
123, no. 2, pp. 79–89, 2014.
[27] F. R. Andrade, R. Mizoguchi, and S. Isotani, “The bright and dark
sides of gamiﬁcation,” in International conference on intelligent tutoring
systems . Springer, 2016, pp. 176–186.[28] S. Mason, “High score, low pay: Why the gig economy loves gamiﬁca-
tion,” The Guardian , vol. 20, 2018.
[29] R. N. Landers, K. N. Bauer, and R. C. Callan, “Gamiﬁcation of task
performance with leaderboards: A goal setting experiment,” Computers
in Human Behavior , vol. 71, pp. 508–515, 2017.
[30] J. Fanfarelli, S. Vie, and R. McDaniel, “Understanding digital badges
through feedback, reward, and narrative: a multidisciplinary approach to
building better badges in social environments,” Communication Design
Quarterly Review , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 56–60, 2015.
[31] C. Eickhoff, C. G. Harris, A. P. de Vries, and P. Srinivasan, “Quality
through ﬂow and immersion: gamifying crowdsourced relevance assess-
ments,” in Proceedings of the 35th international ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , 2012, pp. 871–
880.
[32] B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. van den Brand, A. Serebrenik,
P. Devanbu, and V . Filkov, “Gender and tenure diversity in github teams,”
inProceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors
in computing systems , 2015, pp. 3789–3798.
[33] A. AlMarshedi, V . Wanick, G. B. Wills, and A. Ranchhod, “Gamiﬁcation
and behaviour,” in Gamiﬁcation . Springer, 2017, pp. 19–29.
[34] A. Anderson and E. A. Green, “Personal bests as reference points,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 115, no. 8, pp.
1772–1776, 2018.
[35] J. Hamari and J. Koivisto, ““working out for likes”: An empirical study
on social inﬂuence in exercise gamiﬁcation,” Computers in Human
Behavior , vol. 50, pp. 333–347, 2015.
[36] J. M. Gonzalez-Barahona, G. Robles, R. Andradas-Izquierdo, and R. A.
Ghosh, “Geographic origin of libre software developers,” Information
Economics and Policy , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 356–363, 2008.
[37] G. Robles, L. Arjona Reina, A. Serebrenik, B. Vasilescu, and J. M.
Gonz ´alez-Barahona, “Floss 2013: A survey dataset about free soft-
ware contributors: challenges for curating, sharing, and combining,”
inProceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , 2014, pp. 396–399.
[38] M.-A. Storey, L. Singer, B. Cleary, F. Figueira Filho, and A. Zagalsky,
“The (r) evolution of social media in software engineering,” in Proceed-
ings of the on Future of Software Engineering , 2014, pp. 100–116.
[39] J. Marlow and L. A. Dabbish, “The effects of visualizing activity history
on attitudes and behaviors in a peer production context,” in Proceedings
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing , 2015, pp. 757–764.
[40] D. Ford, M. Behroozi, A. Serebrenik, and C. Parnin, “Beyond the
code itself: how programmers really look at pull requests,” in 2019
IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering:
Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 51–
60.
[41] N. Eghbal, “Roads and bridges,” The Unseen labor behind our digital
infrastructure , 2016.
[42] B. Vasilescu, K. Blincoe, Q. Xuan, C. Casalnuovo, D. Damian, P. De-
vanbu, and V . Filkov, “The sky is not the limit: multitasking across
github projects,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 994–1005.
[43] N. Raman, M. Cao, Y . Tsvetkov, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “Stress
and burnout in open source: Toward ﬁnding, understanding, and mit-
igating unhealthy interactions,” International Conference on Software
Engineering, New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER) , 2020.
[44] C. Miller, D. G. Widder, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “Why do people
give up ﬂossing? a study of contributor disengagement in open source,”
inIFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems . Springer,
2019, pp. 116–129.
[45] B. Bornfeld and S. Rafaeli, “Gamifying with badges: A big data natural
experiment on stack exchange,” First Monday , vol. 22, no. 6, 2017.
[46] G. Gousios, B. Vasilescu, A. Serebrenik, and A. Zaidman, “Lean
ghtorrent: Github data on demand,” in Proceedings of the 11th working
conference on mining software repositories , 2014, pp. 384–387.
[47] T. Dey, S. Mousavi, E. Ponce, T. Fry, B. Vasilescu, A. Filippova, and
A. Mockus, “Detecting and characterizing bots that commit code,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.03172 , 2020.
[48] L. Xiaotian, “The 996. icu movement in china: Changing employment
relations and labour agency in the tech industry,” Made in China Journal ,
2019.
[49] G. Gousios and D. Spinellis, “Ghtorrent: Github’s data from a ﬁrehose,”
in2012 9th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR) . IEEE, 2012, pp. 12–21.
560[50] M. Claes, M. V . M ¨antyl ¨a, M. Kuutila, and B. Adams, “Do programmers
work at night or during the weekend?” in Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2018, pp. 705–715.
[51] C. Young and C. Lim, “Time as a network good: Evidence from un-
employment and the standard workweek,” Sociological Science , vol. 1,
p. 10, 2014.
[52] G. W. Imbens and T. Lemieux, “Regression discontinuity designs: A
guide to practice,” Journal of Econometrics , vol. 142, no. 2, pp. 615–
635, 2008.
[53] L. Festinger, “A theory of social comparison processes,” Human rela-
tions , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–140, 1954.
[54] C. R. Shalizi and A. C. Thomas, “Homophily and contagion are generi-
cally confounded in observational social network studies,” Sociological
methods & research , vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 211–239, 2011.
[55] S. Aral and C. Nicolaides, “Exercise contagion in a global social
network,” Nature communications , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2017.
[56] J. Ternovski and T. Yasseri, “Social complex contagion in music
listenership: A natural experiment with 1.3 million participants,” Social
Networks , vol. 61, pp. 144–152, 2020.
[57] M. E. Newman, “Mixing patterns in networks,” Physical Review E ,
vol. 67, no. 2, p. 026126, 2003.
[58] J. Koivisto and J. Hamari, “The rise of motivational information systems:
A review of gamiﬁcation research,” International Journal of Information
Management , vol. 45, pp. 191–210, 2019.
[59] F. Garcia, O. Pedreira, M. Piattini, A. Cerdeira-Pena, and M. Penabad,
“A framework for gamiﬁcation in software engineering,” Journal of
Systems and Software , vol. 132, pp. 21–40, 2017.
[60] V . Grigoreanu, J. Cao, T. Kulesza, C. Bogart, K. Rector, M. Burnett,
and S. Wiedenbeck, “Can feature design reduce the gender gap in end-
user software development environments?” in 2008 IEEE Symposium
on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing . IEEE, 2008, pp.
149–156.
[61] D. Johnson, S. Deterding, K.-A. Kuhn, A. Staneva, S. Stoyanov, and
L. Hides, “Gamiﬁcation for health and wellbeing: A systematic review
of the literature,” Internet interventions , vol. 6, pp. 89–106, 2016.
[62] T. G. Blog, “More contributions on your proﬁle,” https://github.
blog/2016-05-19-more-contributions-on-your-proﬁle/, 2016, accessed:
29.02.2020.
[63] I. Johnson, C. McMahon, J. Sch ¨oning, and B. Hecht, “The effect of
population and” structural” biases on social media-based algorithms: A
case study in geolocation inference across the urban-rural spectrum,”
inProceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , 2017, pp. 1167–1178.
[64] M. Sailer, J. U. Hense, S. K. Mayr, and H. Mandl, “How gamiﬁcation
motivates: An experimental study of the effects of speciﬁc game design
elements on psychological need satisfaction,” Computers in Human
Behavior , vol. 69, pp. 371–380, 2017.
[65] D. Easley and A. Ghosh, “Incentives, gamiﬁcation, and game theory: an
economic approach to badge design,” ACM Transactions on Economics
and Computation (TEAC) , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–26, 2016.
[66] G. Fortes Tondello, H. Premsukh, and L. Nacke, “A theory of gami-
ﬁcation principles through goal-setting theory.” Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 2018.
[67] D. Ariely, A. Bracha, and S. Meier, “Doing good or doing well? image
motivation and monetary incentives in behaving prosocially,” American
Economic Review , vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 544–55, 2009.
[68] J. Koivisto and J. Hamari, “Demographic differences in perceived
beneﬁts from gamiﬁcation,” Computers in Human Behavior , vol. 35,
pp. 179–188, 2014.
[69] J. Thebault-Spieker, L. Terveen, and B. Hecht, “Toward a geographic
understanding of the sharing economy: Systemic biases in uberx
and taskrabbit,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1–40, 2017.
[70] J. Thebault-Spieker, D. Kluver, M. A. Klein, A. Halfaker, B. Hecht,
L. Terveen, and J. A. Konstan, “Simulation experiments on (the absence
of) ratings bias in reputation systems,” Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 1, no. CSCW, pp. 1–25, 2017.
[71] A. May, J. Wachs, and A. Hann ´ak, “Gender differences in participation
and reward on stack overﬂow,” Empirical Software Engineering , pp. 1–
23, 2019.
[72] E. Bok ´anyi and A. Hann ´ak, “Understanding inequalities in ride-hailing
services through simulations,” Scientiﬁc Reports , no. 6500, 2020.
[73] A. N. Meyer, L. E. Barton, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann, and
T. Fritz, “The work life of developers: Activities, switches and perceivedproductivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 43,
no. 12, pp. 1178–1193, 2017.
[74] A. N. Meyer, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann, and T. Fritz, “Enabling
good work habits in software developers through reﬂective goal-setting,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 2019.
[75] F. Irannejad Bisafar, A. Ponnada, A. Shamekhi, and A. G. Parker, “A
sociotechnical study of a community-based rewards program: Insights on
building social, ﬁnancial and human capital,” Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 1, no. CSCW, pp. 1–21, 2017.
561