Identifying Key Features from App User Reviews
Huayao Wu, Wenjun Deng, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology and
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Nanjing University, China
fhywu, niuxintao, changhainie g@nju.edu.cn, wenjundeng@smail.nju.edu.cn
Abstract —Due to the rapid growth and strong competition
of mobile application (app) market, app developers should not
only offer users with attractive new features, but also carefully
maintain and improve existing features based on users’ feed-
backs. User reviews indicate a rich source of information to
plan such feature maintenance activities, and it could be of great
beneﬁt for developers to evaluate and magnify the contribution
of speciﬁc features to the overall success of their apps. In this
study, we refer to the features that are highly correlated to app
ratings as key features , and we present KEFE, a novel approach
that leverages app description and user reviews to identify key
features of a given app. The application of KEFE especially
relies on natural language processing, deep machine learning
classiﬁer, and regression analysis technique, which involves three
main steps: 1) extracting feature-describing phrases from app
description; 2) matching each app feature with its relevant user
reviews; and 3) building a regression model to identify features
that have signiﬁcant relationships with app ratings. To train and
evaluate KEFE, we collect 200 app descriptions and 1,108,148
user reviews from Chinese Apple App Store. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of KEFE in feature extraction,
where an average F-measure of 78.13% is achieved. The key
features identiﬁed are also likely to provide hints for successful
app releases, as for the releases that receive higher app ratings,
70% of features improvements are related to key features.
Index Terms —key features, feature extraction, user reviews,
app store analysis
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the increasing popularity and revenue of mobile
application (app) market, app stores, such as Apple App
Store and Google Play, have become the primary source for
the distribution and acquisition of mobile applications [1].
A prominent nature of app stores is the exploitation of
knowledge and creativity of distributed crowds to establish
an open ecosystem. This also indicates a paradigm shift in
software engineering practices, and has greatly inﬂuenced app
development, maintenance, and evolution [2], [3].
One powerful mechanism of app stores is that they allow
users to rate, and also post reviews to express their opinions
and experiences on particular apps [4], [5]. Such a commu-
nication channel not only facilitates users for selecting their
favourable apps, but also provides app developers a rich source
of information for assisting release plannings [6]. However, the
volume of available user reviews is simply too large to be man-
ually analyzed [7]–[9]. Researchers have therefore developed
a variety of approaches to automatically digest the content
in user reviews to extract the most interesting information
they carry [10]–[19]. For example, some approaches aim tocategorize user reviews into different groups (e.g., bug report,
feature request, aspect evaluation, etc.) [20]–[24], while some
others attempt to cluster and prioritize user reviews to identify
the most crucial topics [7], [25].
Apart from the summarization of user reviews into in-
formative topics, it is also important for app developers to
understand the impact of particular features on the success
of their apps [26]. A feature of an app typically indicates
an essential functionality or a service that the app can pro-
vide for users [27]. To make the app survive in the highly
competing app market, developers might want to ﬁnd the
features that users complain a lot, so that they can try to
modify these features in the next releases to retain users [28],
[29]; developers might also be interested in the features that
are popular in competing apps, because such features can be
directly borrowed for requirement elicitation [27], [30].
In order to achieve an effective analysis of the many features
of a given app, a primary challenge (and also, an elementary
step) is the automatic and accurate extraction of app features.
App descriptions and user reviews are good candidate sources
for this purpose, but it is not easy to accomplish, because texts
in such sources are usually written in unstructured, noisy, and
ambiguous natural languages [27], [31]. Currently, despite that
there are approaches, such as SAFE [31], for handling English
text, the support for Chinese is yet to be investigated. Address-
ing Chinese app descriptions and reviews could be potentially
beneﬁcial for the ever growing and proﬁtable Chinese app
market. But this asks for novel approaches, because different
linguistic rules and workﬂows are generally required to process
Chinese text [32], and simply reusing existing English-oriented
approaches with automatic translation tools is unlikely to be
an effective choice [25].
Once features of a given app are extracted, the second chal-
lenge is the identiﬁcation of features that are important for de-
velopers’ consideration. Empirical studies have demonstrated
the inﬂuence of app ratings on the rank of app downloads [33],
[34], so it is rational to evaluate and magnify the “contribution”
of speciﬁc features on the app’s overall rating score. Currently,
Keertipati et al. [35] and Licorish et al. [36] have applied
regression-based approaches for prioritizing features, but their
approaches rely on a human rater for assigning severity scores
for each review sentence. Noei et al. [37] identiﬁed key topics
that share signiﬁcant relationships with app ratings, but their
approach works at the level of topics of a complete app
category, instead of concrete features of each speciﬁc app.
9222021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00088
Fig. 1. The overall workﬂow of the KEFE approach.
In this paper, we propose the KEFE approach to address the
above two challenges, i.e., feature extraction and evaluation. In
particular, we introduce the concept of key feature to refer to
the features that are highly correlated to app ratings. Such key
features indicate features that should be carefully addressed
by app developers in next releases, as proper maintenance of
these features is likely to result in more positive reviews and/or
fewer negative reviews, and correspondingly, a higher rating
score.
In order to identify key features of a given app, the KEFE
approach leverages the information in both app description
and user reviews. Speciﬁcally, 1) KEFE ﬁrst applies a textual
pattern-based approach and a deep machine learning classiﬁer
to extract feature-describing phrases from app description;
2) KEFE then matches each app feature with its relevant
user reviews by using another classiﬁer; and 3) ﬁnally, KEFE
applies a multi-linear regression model to yield a set of key
features, each of which has a signiﬁcant relationship with
positive and/or negative user reviews received for the given
app. We note that the ﬁrst two steps of KEFE are especially
developed to processing Chinese text. Nevertheless, as long as
the features can be extracted and associated with user reviews
(e.g., by using an approach like SAFE [31]), KEFE remains
capable for key features identiﬁcation.
The KEFE approach presented in this paper differs from
previous studies that rely on part of speech and traditional
classiﬁer to analyze app descriptions [27], [31], as it further
exploits grammatical relations of sentences and utilizes a
more powerful deep machine learning classiﬁer to address the
feature extraction challenge. Moreover, KEFE relies on the
contribution of features to app ratings to identify key features
of a speciﬁc app, instead of user sentiment or review frequency
to a feature [26], [28], [29], or key topics that are common to
an entire app category [37]. This indicates a different strategy
to address the feature evaluation challenge.
To train and evaluate the KEFE approach, we created a
dataset of Chinese Apple App Store, which includes 200 app
descriptions and 1,108,148 user reviews. The experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of KEFE in extracting
features from app descriptions, where a Precision of 82.49%
and a Recall of 74.83% are observed. KEFE also performs
well in matching app features with their relevant user reviews,
achieving an average F-measure of 62.02%. Moreover, theidentiﬁed key feature indeed indicate the features that are
important for app developers’ consideration. Especially, for
the app releases that receive higher app ratings, about 70% of
features improvements are related to key features.
Summing up, we make the following contributions in this
paper:
We propose a novel approach, KEFE, to identify key fea-
tures that have signiﬁcant relationships with app ratings,
i.e., the features that should be carefully addressed by
app developers.
We create a dataset from Chinese Apple App Store, which
includes 200 app descriptions and 1,108,148 user reviews.
We evaluate the performance of KEFE on our dataset, in
which experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness
and usefulness.
This rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section II
introduces the detailed process of the KEFE approach. Sec-
tion III explains the dataset and experiment design for eval-
uating the performance of KEFE. Section IV presents the
experimental results. Section V discusses potential threats to
validity. Section VI introduces related works, and Section VII
concludes this paper.
II. A PPROACH
Given an app, the primary goal of the KEFE approach
is to automatically identify key features that have signiﬁcant
relationships with its rating scores, based on the information
in app description and user reviews. Figure 1 gives the overall
workﬂow of KEFE, which includes the following four main
components:
(1)Preprocess: removing irrelevant and noisy information
from app description and user reviews;
(2)Feature Extraction: applying a textual pattern-based
ﬁlter and a deep machine learning classiﬁer to extract
feature-describing phrases from app description;
(3)User Review Matching: applying a deep machine learn-
ing classiﬁer to determine user reviews that are relevant
to each feature;
(4)Regression Analysis: applying a multi-linear regression
model to identify key features.
In the next sections, we will explain the detailed process
for each of the above components.
923TABLE I
THETEXTUAL PATTERNS FOR PHRASE EXTRACTION
# Pattern Sentence Phrase Extracted
1 VOB ( verb-object ) user can send messages send messages
2 ATT ( attribute ) provide a music player music player
3 VOB ( verb-object ) + [ATT ( attribute )] user can listen to classical music listen to classical music
4 FOB ( fronting-object ) any type of music can be searched search music
5 COO ( coordinate ) + VOB ( verb-object ) user can send pictures andvideos send pictures & send videos
6 COO ( coordinate ) + VOB ( verb-object ) + [ATT
(attribute )]users can listen to classical andpop
musiclisten to classic music & listen to pop
music
7 DBL ( double ) + VOB ( verb-object ) there are plenty of novels toread read novels
8 COO ( coordinate ) + RAD ( right adjunct ) + VOB
(verb-object )user can download information about
tickets ,hotels , etcdownload tickets information &
download hotels information
9 COO ( coordinate ) + RAD ( right adjunct ) + VOB
(verb-object ) + [ATT ( attribute )]user can download information about
train tickets ,air tickets , etc.download train tickets information &
download air tickets information
10 Individual word all resources are available upon
registrationregistration
A. Preprocess
The preprocess step removes noisy sentences and characters
from app description and user reviews. This is a common step
in studies of user review analysis [28], [37].
1) Preprocessing App Description: App description repre-
sents a relatively formal text that describes what the app is
about and what it can do for users. Given an app description,
KEFE removes sentences that describe contact and subscrip-
tion information (e.g., email address, telephone number, and
membership fees) and the sentences after them. Such sentences
typically appear at the end of the description, and do not
describe app features. KEFE also removes redundant punctu-
ation marks, special symbols (e.g., %, #, @, etc.), emojis, and
characters except for Chinese and English from the description
(we note that some features might be described in English
phrases in Chinese app stores).
2) Preprocessing User Reviews: In contrast to app descrip-
tions, user reviews are usually in short length, and contain
informal and mixed vocabularies. For each user review, KEFE
ﬁrst removes all characters that are not written in Chinese
and English, in order to reduce potential disturbance to future
analysis. Next, since there is no explicit boundary between
words in Chinese, KEFE applies the pyltp toolkit [38] to split
the review text into sentences, and segment each sentence into
words. At last, KEFE removes stop words that are common
in Chinese app reviews based on a stop-words list. This stop-
words list is created by extending a standard list of Chinese
language1, aiming to include words that are common in user
reviews but are not relevant to app features. At the end of this
step, if a sentence in user review contains no word after stop
words removal, this sentence will be removed.
B. Feature Extraction
Different studies usually have different ways to deﬁne a
feature [28], [31], [33]. In this study, we refer to a feature to an
essential functionality or a service that the app can provide for
users. This can indicate a description of functional capabilities
1https://github.com/goto456/stopwords
Fig. 2. An example of the phrase extraction process.
of the app (e.g., “upload images” and “online streaming”), or
a resource that users can access (e.g., “music library”).
In order to extract feature-describing phrases from app
description, KEFE applies a process that is similar to that of
Jiang et al. [27] (but with different techniques). This process
ﬁrst uses textual pattern-based approach to extract candidate
phrases, and then uses a classiﬁer to determine whether each
of these candidate phrases is feature-describing or not.
1) Phrase Extraction: Given an app description with clean
sentences, KEFE ﬁrst extracts candidate phrases (i.e., a small
group of words) that could represent app features. Figure 2
uses an example to illustrate this process.
The ﬁrst step of phrase extraction is words segmentation.
KEFE applies the pyltp toolkit [38] to segment the app
description into words. Here, to improve the performance of
the default words segmentation model of pyltp , an additional
924words segmentation directory is created and used. This direc-
tory contains common collocations of Chinese characters that
frequently appear in app descriptions.
After words segmentation, KEFE applies Part-Of-Speech
(POS) tagging to label each segmented word in the sentence
with its appropriate part of speech. With the above results,
KEFE further conducts dependency parsing to reveal the
syntactic structure of the sentence. This step will produce a
syntax parsing tree that indicates the grammatical relations
between words in the given sentence2. Take the sentence in
Figure 2 as an example. According to the syntax parsing tree,
we can see that the head predict of the sentence is send,
andsend andmessages follow a Verb-Object relation (VOB).
KEFE applies the pyltp toolkit [38] to implement POS tagging
and dependency parsing.
Once the syntax parsing tree is constructed, KEFE applies
a textual pattern-based approach to extract candidate phrases.
The use of textual patterns is a common choice for feature
extraction, and there are several patterns developed for En-
glish app descriptions (e.g., verbs, adjectives, and nouns are
usually considered as important parts of speech in deﬁning
features) [27], [31]. To derive the textual patterns for KEFE, in
this study, we ﬁrst examined the grammatical relations behind
existing POS patterns [27], [31] to investigate whether they
can be reused for processing Chinese text. Next, we collected
a large number of Chinese app descriptions, and performed
the above phrase extraction process to build their respective
syntax parsing trees. We then manually analyzed these trees to
identify grammatical relations that are related to app features.
After these steps, we have developed ten patterns for KEFE,
as shown in Table I.
Speciﬁcally, each pattern in Table I gives a combination
of grammatical relations, indicating a common linguistic rule
for describing features (the square bracket indicates that the
relation can appear more than once in the sentence). For
example, according to pattern VOB (verb-object relation), the
phrase “ send messages ” will be extracted as a candidate phrase
from the sentence in Figure 2.
2) Feature Classiﬁcation: Once a set of candidate phrases
is extracted, KEFE applies a deep machine learning classiﬁer
to determine whether each of these phrases is a feature-
describing phrase or a non-feature-describing phrase. This
represents a common binary classiﬁcation problem, where
each data instance consists of a candidate phrase f, and
a boolean label Lindicating whether this candidate phrase
describes a feature or not.
In this study, we choose to use BERT (Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers) [39] to implement the
classiﬁer. BERT is a recent method of pre-training language
representations, which allows users to ﬁne-tune a speciﬁc clas-
siﬁer based on a general-purpose pre-trained model (speciﬁ-
cally, the BERT-Base model for Chinese language3is used
2More details about the grammatical relations can be found at https:
//www.ltp-cloud.com/intro en
3https://storage.googleapis.com/bert models/2018 1103/chinese L-12
H-768 A-12.zipin this study). The use of BERT has achieved very promis-
ing results in a wide range of natural language processing
tasks [39]. We also compared BERT with several traditional
classiﬁers in our preliminary experiments (including Na ¨ıve
Bayes, C4.5, and Random Forest), and BERT tends to exhibit
the best performance.
C. User Review Matching
After extracting feature-describing phrases from app de-
scription, the next step of KEFE is to ﬁnd user reviews that
are relevant to each feature. Speciﬁcally, for a given set of
feature-describing phrases, F=ff1;f2;:::;f ng, and a set of
user reviews R=fr1;r2;:::;r mg, the user review matching
process will produce the set RF=fR1;R2;:::;R ng, where
RiRis the set of reviews that comment on feature fi
(1in), that is, feature fiis mentioned in every review
r2Ri. Here, sets RiandRjmay have overlaps, because a
user review may talk about multiple features. For example, the
review “I cannot send pictures and videos” is relevant to two
features: send pictures andsend videos .
To implement user review matching, we also choose to use
BERT [39] to train a deep machine learning classiﬁer (with
the same pre-trained model3). Similarly, this also represents
a binary classiﬁcation problem, where each data instance
consists of a feature-describing phrase f, a user review r, and
a boolean label Lindicating whether fis mentioned in r. The
trained BERT model will then assess the semantic similarity
between the given feature f0and user review r0, and produce
two class probabilities (matching and non-matching). We take
the class with higher probability, i.e., p>0:5, as the result of
classiﬁcation.
Note that the previous SAFE [31] approach also addresses
the user review matching problem. But it uses the same feature
extractor to extract feature-describing phrases from both app
description and user reviews, and applies a binary semantic
similarity function to determine matching. However, app de-
scriptions and user reviews usually have different characteris-
tics (e.g., user reviews are shorter, and more informal [27]). In
our preliminary experiments, we found that it is ineffective to
use the same textual pattern-based approach to extract features
from Chinese user reviews. We thus choose to use a classiﬁer
to implement the user review matching process.
D. Regression Analysis
The last step of KEFE is to apply regression analysis tech-
nique to identify key features that have signiﬁcant relationships
with app ratings. The input of this step includes the set of
feature-describing phrases F=ff1;f2;:::;f ng, and their
corresponding user reviews RF=fR1;R2;:::;R ng; the
output is a set of key features. In this study, since Apple App
Store uses a ﬁve-stars scale to represent user rating scores, we
consider ratings of one or two stars as negative reviews , and
ratings of four or ﬁve stars as positive reviews .
In order for an app to receive a higher rating score in
future releases, it is rational to increase the number of positive
reviews, and at the same time, decrease the number of negative
925reviews. KEFE thus uses a regression model to investigate the
relationships between the number of all positive (or negative)
reviews received (i.e., the dependent variable), and the number
of positive (or negative) reviews that are relevant to each
feature (i.e, the independent variables).
Speciﬁcally, KEFE ﬁrst calculates the number of all negative
(or positive) reviews received in each of the past mdays,
W= [w1;w2;:::;w m], as well as the number of negative (or
positive) reviews that are relevant to each feature fiover the
same time period, Wi= [wi;1;wi;2;:::;w i;m], for1in.
Here, because user reviews that are posted a long time ago
might contain no useful information for the current release,
we choose to use the reviews that are posted in the last m=
180 days only (about half a year). In addition, we remove
features that are not mentioned in any review of the past m
days, because such features tend to have no impact on the app
ratings. Then, KEFE builds a multi-linear regression model
that uses variables Wito predict the outcome of variable W.
The regression equation used is in the form of:
W=0+1W1+2W2++nWn
where0is a constant, and iis the correlation coefﬁcient
associated with variable Wi(1in).
KEFE uses the statsmodels package of Python to build the
regression model. This process will produce a p-value for each
independent variable to indicate whether the relationship be-
tween this variable and the outcome is statistically signiﬁcant.
Finally, we consider the variables with p-value<0:05as
signiﬁcant variables, and the features associated with these
variables are identiﬁed as key features.
KEFE will apply the above process based on positive and
negative reviews, respectively. The key features identiﬁed are
then merged together to produce the ﬁnal set of key features
of the given app. We note that the concrete improvement
strategies to address key features are left to app developers’
decision. For example, developers can choose to improve key
features of positive reviews (e.g., by adding functionalities)
to amplify their attractions, and/or to improve key features
of negative reviews (e.g., by ﬁxing bugs) to reduce users’
complaints.
III. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the research questions we
seek to investigate, and then the detailed approaches we used
for evaluation. In order to assist others to replicate our ﬁndings
and reuse the KEFE approach in further work, we provide our
dataset, natural language processing resources, classiﬁcation
models, and executable scripts of KEFE at this paper’s com-
panion website: https://github.com/GIST-NJU/KEFE.
The experiments of this study were conducted on several
machines, each of which is equipped with Intel Xeon@2.5GHz
CPU, 32GB memory, and Windows 10 operating system.
A. Research Questions
In this study, we set out the following three research
questions to investigate the performance of the three majorsteps of the KEFE approach. The ﬁrst two research questions
concern the effectiveness of feature extraction and user review
matching. While the last research question concerns the use-
fulness of the identiﬁed key features for app development.
RQ1How effective is KEFE in extracting feature-
describing phrases from app descriptions?
RQ2How effective is KEFE in matching app features with
their relevant user reviews?
RQ3How useful are the key features identiﬁed by KEFE
for release plannings?
B. Dataset
The dataset used in this study was retrieved from QiMai4,
which is a commercial platform for collecting and analyzing
app-related data of popular Chinese app stores (including
Apple App Store and nine app stores of Android platform).
Here, we chose Apple App Store as the source of this study,
because QiMai provides the most complete information for
this app store.
To create the dataset, we randomly selected ten categories
from Chinese Apple App Store. This helps to avoid intro-
ducing bias towards speciﬁc categories [3]. Then, for each
category, we randomly selected ten free apps and ten paid
apps from their respective top-20 ranked lists. We chose to
focus on those popular apps, because they tend to receive more
attentions from users, and thereby have enough information for
carrying out this study. In addition, to ensure that the features
of the app are well documented, the description of the app
selected should contain more than 100 Chinese characters. At
the end of this step, we had a collection of 200 apps (10
categories20 apps per category).
We extracted app descriptions of these 200 apps for an-
sweringRQ 1. We then selected ﬁve apps (we will explain
the selection of these subject apps in the next section), and
extracted their user reviews of a period of roughly ﬁve years
for answering RQ 2andRQ 3(including user name, title,
content, date, and rating score of each review). This results in
a total number of 1,108,148 raw user reviews in our dataset.
C. Evaluation Approaches
In this section, we present the approaches for answering
each of the three research questions posed in Section III-A.
1) Approach for answering RQ 1:The ﬁrst research ques-
tion concerns whether the feature-describing phrases can be
precisely extracted from app description. To this end, we
randomly selected 150 apps from our dataset for training the
feature classiﬁer of KEFE (15 apps per category)5, and used
the remaining 50 apps for evaluation.
Speciﬁcally, for each of the 150 apps used for training, we
applied the Preprocess and Phrase Extraction processes (see
Sections II-A and II-B) to extract candidate phrases from app
description. We then manually annotated each of these phrases
4https://www.qimai.cn
5The stop-words list and words segmentation directory (see Sections II-A
and II-B) used in KEFE were also created based on a deep observation and
analysis of these 150 apps.
926TABLE II
THECONFUSION MATRIX
Actual Value
Positive Negative
Predicted ValuePositive TP FP
Negative FN TN
as either feature-describing phrase or non-feature-describing
phrase. This process was performed independently by two
authors of this paper, and we have set a guideline to ensure that
they follow the same criteria to do the annotation. During this
process, if the two authors assign different labels to a data
instance (i.e., one author think that it is feature describing,
but the other author disagrees), a third author will be involved
and the ﬁnal label will be decided based on the vote of all
three authors. This annotation process ends with 3,121 feature-
describing phrases and 6,135 non-feature-describing phrases,
and these data were used as the training set to ﬁne-tune the
BERT classiﬁer for feature extraction.
Next, for each of the remaining 50 apps, we manually
extracted a set of golden features from its app description
as the ground truth for evaluation. This process was also
performed independently by two authors with a pre-deﬁned
guideline. We note that the extraction of golden features
is different from the annotation of phrases, as the former
requires to pick out feature-describing phrases directly from
app description, while the latter only requires to assign a
boolean label to each candidate phrase. We also note that
both of the two authors are major in computer science and
have enough experience with software development, so it is
not difﬁcult for them to perform the extraction task. Similarly,
if the two authors cannot reach consensus (i.e., there exists
any difference in the phrases extracted), a third author will be
involved in the discussion to resolve disagreements.
Finally, we applied KEFE to automatically extract feature-
describing phrase from app descriptions of the above 50 apps,
and compared these phrases against their corresponding golden
features. We then calculated the Precision ,Recall ,F-measure ,
andAccuracy that can be achieved:
Precision =TP
TP+FP
Recall =TP
TP+FN
F Measure =2PrecisionRecall
Precision +Recall
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN
where TP, FP, FN, and TN indicate the true positives, false
positives, false negatives, and true negatives of the confusion
matrix (as shown in Table II), respectively.TABLE III
THESUBJECT APPS AND RELEASES SELECTED FOR ANSWERING RQ2
ANDRQ3
Name # Reviews# Releases
Positive Negative
Alipay 99,837 9 9
DingTalk 34,637 7 6
NetEase Music 330,381 9 9
Tencent Video 187,553 7 6
WeChat 455,740 8 8
Sum 1,108,148 40 38
We note that KEFE is the ﬁrst approach for extracting
features from Chinese app descriptions. The previous state-
of-the-art feature extractors, SAFE [31] and SAFER [27],
cannot be directly applied in our dataset, because they rely
on several English-oriented textual patterns, and we ﬁnd that
most of them are not suitable for processing Chinese text.
Meanwhile, some additional treatments (e.g., word segmenta-
tion) are also required in Chinese-oriented natural language
processing tasks. Hence, we just chose to report the results
of these two previous extractors for handling English app
descriptions as references, in order to demonstrate that the
performance of KEFE is at a competitive level.
2) Approach for answering RQ 2:The second research
question concerns whether user reviews that comment on each
feature can be precisely extracted. In this study, we randomly
selected ﬁve apps from the 50 apps used in RQ 1(i.e., the
evaluation set) as the subjects for answering RQ 2andRQ 3.
Table III gives the number of user reviews collected for these
apps.
Here, since it is infeasible to manually annotate all the above
user reviews to evaluate the BERT classiﬁer, we randomly
selected 2,500 user reviews for each app to create the train
and test data sets. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst applied the Preprocess
step (see Section II-A) to remove irrelevant reviews from the
above review set. Then, for each combination of app feature
and user review, a boolean label was manually assigned to
indicate whether the content of the review is relevant to the
feature. Similar to the annotation process of candidate feature-
describing phrases (Section III-C1), we have set a guideline to
perform the annotation task of user review matching. Each data
instance here was annotated by one author only, because this
step involves a collection of roughly 300,000 data instances
(i.e., combinations of features and reviews).
Finally, for each app, we shufﬂed its data instances and
divided them into train-set (60% of instances), dev-set (20%
of instances) and test-set (20% of instances). All train-sets and
dev-sets were merged together and used to ﬁne-tune the BERT
classiﬁer, and the test-set of each app was used for evaluation.
Similarly, we calculated the Precision ,Recall ,F-measure , and
Accuracy that can be achieved.
3) Approach for answering RQ 3:The last research ques-
tion concerns whether the key features identiﬁed by KEFE
are useful for app development. To establish the connection
927TABLE IV
THERESULTS OF FEATURE EXTRACTION
App Category # Characters # Golden Features Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Business 755 43.8 89.83% 72.60% 80.30% 83.19%
Tool 589.6 23.6 84.35% 82.20% 83.26% 89.49%
Travel 986.0 39.0 85.05% 84.62% 84.83% 89.86%
Social 345.8 15.0 86.67% 69.33% 77.04% 87.55%
News 665.0 18.8 81.00% 86.17% 83.51% 89.97%
Navigation 565.4 20.8 79.17% 54.81% 64.77% 74.38%
Music 720.0 19.6 79.57% 75.51% 77.49% 86.31%
Life 466.6 28.2 86.21% 70.92% 77.82% 82.24%
Education 697.4 28.6 82.44% 75.52% 78.83% 87.76%
Entertainment 1250.8 9.4 70.59% 76.60% 73.47% 96.37%
Average 704.2 24.7 82.49% 74.83% 78.13% 86.71%
SAFE [31] 55.90% 43.40% 45.80% NA
SAFER [27] 61.79% 80.27% 69.11% 69.57%
between key features and decisions made for the next releases,
we consider the positive and negative changes in app ratings,
and investigate whether these changes are related to the
improvements of key features. Here, we refer to activities that
seek to optimize a feature to better satisfy users’ needs as the
improvement of the feature (including adding functionalities,
enhancing efﬁciency, ﬁxing bugs, etc.). As such, a key feature
is considered useful, if improving this feature can lead to a
higher rating score.
To this end, we used release notes as the practical ground
truth [37], as they usually contain the major updates of app
features [11], [40]. We ﬁrst selected a series of releases with
positive, or negative, changes in rating scores for evaluation
(we refer to such releases as positive, or negative, releases).
Given an app with treleases,fr1;r2;:::;r tg, a release ri
(1<i<t ) will be selected if it satisﬁes the following criteria:
the release note of riexplicitly mentions the improvement
of at least one feature;
there is a positive, or negative, change between A1=the
average of ratings received during [ri;ri+1], andA2=
the average of ratings received during [ri 1;ri](i.e., =
A1 A2>0for positive releases, and <0for negative
releases);
the number of reviews received during both [ri;ri+1]and
[ri 1;ri]are greater than 500. This avoids to introduce
bias from unreliable rating changes.
By ﬁltering release notes of the ﬁve apps used in RQ 2, we
retrieved a total number of 78 releases as the subjects for
answeringRQ 3. The numbers of positive and negative releases
selected for each app are shown in the last column of Table III.
For each subject release ri, we followed the same process
of golden feature extraction (as explain in Section III-C1)
to manually extract a set of features Nthat are improved
in this release. Here, a feature is extracted if and only if
some optimizations of this feature are explicitly mentioned
in the release note of ri(e.g., “now you can receive money in
group chats” indicates an improvement of the feature “group
chats”); Vague descriptions (e.g., “several bug ﬁxes”) will not
be considered as feature improvement. In addition, We ignoredTABLE V
THERESULTS OF USERREVIEW MATCHING
Name Precision Recall F-measure Accuracy
Alipay 92.96% 43.42% 59.19% 98.58%
DingTalk 95.20% 88.26% 91.60% 99.82%
NetEase Music 94.74% 42.35% 58.54% 99.28%
Tecent Video 95.00% 25.00% 39.58% 98.45%
WeChat 94.92% 45.16% 61.20% 99.30%
Average 94.56% 48.84% 62.02% 99.09%
features that are newly introduced, because the main focus of
this study is on the improvements of existing features.
We then applied KEFE based on the set of existing features
and user reviews received before rito identify key features.
Finally, by comparing the set of key features obtained against
N, we calculated the Hit Ratio ( Hit) of key features:
Hit=# key features in N
# features in N:
Here, if we can observe a high value of Hit for positive
releases and a low value for negative releases, we can conclude
that the improvement of key features is more likely to receive
higher rating scores.
IV. R ESULT
This section presents results for answering our research
questions posed in Section III-A.
A.RQ 1: Feature Extraction
The ﬁrst research question investigates the effectiveness of
the feature extraction approach used in KEFE. The ﬁrst three
columns of Table IV give the average number of Chinese
characters in app descriptions, and the average number of
golden features extracted for the 50 apps used for evaluation
(10 categories5 apps per category). From Table IV, we can
see that the number of features mentioned in app descriptions
varies across different categories, where the apps of Business
andTravel categories tend to describe the most features. Over-
all, an average number of 24.7 golden features are extracted
for each app.
928TABLE VI
THERESULTS OF KEYFEATURES IDENTIFICATION
Name # Features # Key FeaturesHit (KEFE) Hit (Random)
Positive Release Negative Release Positive Release Negative Release
Alipay 15 5.9 71.30% 20.37% 42.69% 42.72%
DingTalk 56 8.5 65.24% 26.19% 16.73% 10.24%
NetEase Music 17 7.9 77.78% 46.30% 44.88% 42.84%
Tecent Video 16 4.2 85.71% 58.33% 28.02% 28.89%
WeChat 22 7.9 49.79% 12.50% 35.59% 35.42%
Average 25.2 6.9 69.96% 32.74% 33.58% 32.02%
The last four columns of Table IV give the Precision ,Recall ,
F-measure , and Accuracy obtained by applying the feature
extraction approach of KEFE. From these results, we can see
that KEFE generally performs well for all kinds of apps. On
average, it can achieve a Precision value of 82.49%, and a
Recall value of 74.83%; while in terms of F-measure and
Accuracy , these values are 78.13% and 86.71%, respectively.
In particular, KEFE tends to exhibit the best performance for
theBusiness ,Tool,Travel , and News categories, where the
F-measure s observed are all higher than 80%.
In addition, the last two rows of Table IV give the overall
average results of two state-of-the-art feature extractors for
English app descriptions as references [27], [31]. Note that it
is difﬁcult to directly compare with these data here, because
the previous extractors cannot be directly applied in our
dataset. But according to the data reported in Table IV, we
are comfortable to claim that the performance of KEFE is
indeed at a competitive level for feature extraction.
Answer to RQ1: KEFE can effectively extracts feature-
describing phrases from app descriptions, where an average
F-measure of 78.13% can be achieved.
B.RQ 2: User Review Matching
The second research question investigates the effectiveness
of the user review matching approach used in KEFE. Table V
gives the Precision ,Recall ,F-measure , and Accuracy that can
be achieved.
From Table V, we can see that KEFE can precisely extract
user reviews that are relevant to each app feature. Speciﬁcally,
thePrecision observed is at least 92% for all ﬁve apps, and an
average value of 94.56% can be achieved. However, we can see
that the approach tends to have a relatively poor performance
in terms of Recall , where only an average value of 48.84% is
achieved. Nevertheless, the approach can still achieve a Recall
value of 88.26% for DingTalk , and the average F-measure is
62.02%.
The relatively low Recall obtained indicates that the user
review matching approach of KEFE might miss some user
reviews. In practice, since there are usually a large volume of
user reviews, developers might want to extract substantially
more relevant user reviews for further analysis rather than
irrelevant ones (in this study, building the model with the
most accurate data). In this case, the low Recall might not
greatly inﬂuence the performance of the following key features
identiﬁcation.Answer to RQ2: KEFE is highly precise in matching
app features with their relevant user reviews, but the Recall
observed is relatively low. The average F-measure of user
review matching is 62.02%.
C.RQ 3: Key Feature Identiﬁcation
The last research question concerns the usefulness of the key
feature identiﬁcation approach. Because there is no available
approach that can analyze Chinese app description and user
reviews to derive important features, we choose to implement a
random approach as the baseline for comparison. Speciﬁcally,
for each of the 78 subject releases (see Table III), we ﬁrst
apply KEFE to perform user review matching and identify the
set of key features. Then, the random approach will randomly
pick up the same number of ‘key’ features from the set of all
features as the results (their executions are repeated 30 times
in each release to account the randomness).
Table VI gives the number of features for each app, the
average number of key features that KEFE identiﬁes, and
the average value of Hit that can be achieved by KEFE
and random approaches. From Table VI, we can see that key
features account for a relatively small proportion of features
that are described in app descriptions. This is important for the
practical application of a key feature identiﬁcation approach,
because app developers might want to take only a few yet
important features into consideration. In particular, DingTalk
has the largest number of features among all ﬁve apps studied,
while only 15% (8.5/56) of these features are identiﬁed as key
features. On average, there are 25.2 features in the subject
apps, and KEFE suggests only 27% (6.9/25.2) of them for
developers’ consideration.
We then consider the usefulness of key features identiﬁed
by KEFE. From Table VI, generally, we can observe a high
value ofHit in positive releases, and a low value in negative
releases. For example, for Alipay , the average Hit observed
for positive releases is 71.3%. This indicates that 71.3% of
features improvements in these release are related to key
features (i.e., key features play a more important role in
these releases than non-key features). By contrast, for the
negative releases of Alipay , this proportion is only 20.37%
(i.e., most improvements in these releases are related to non-
key features). This ﬁnding reveals that improving key features
in the next release is more beneﬁcial than improving non-
key features. On average, the identiﬁed key features account
929for 69.96% of features improvements in releases that receive
higher app ratings.
With respect to the random approach, we can see that it
tends to achieve similar Hit values for both positive and
negative releases, and the Hit observed is substantially lower
than that of KEFE in all positive releases. On average, the
randomly selected features can only account for 33.58% of
features improvements in positive releases; and the lowest
proportion, 16.73%, is observed for the app that has the largest
number of features, i.e., DingTalk . This ﬁnding indicates that it
is unlikely to receive higher app ratings by improving features
that are randomly determined. KEFE can thus play a better role
in the identiﬁcation of important features.
Answer to RQ3: the identiﬁed key features indeed indicate
features that should be carefully addressed by app developers.
For the releases that receive higher app ratings, about 70% of
features improvements are related to key features.
V. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
As far as internal threats to validity are concerned, the
results reported in this study might be inﬂuenced by manual
analysis involved in the annotation of training data (for two
machine learning classiﬁers) and the extraction of golden
features (from both app descriptions and release notes). To
mitigate this risk as much as possible, we have set guidelines to
specify the procedure, criteria and examples, to avoid potential
subjective bias or mistakes, and have carefully examined the
annotation results. We note that the authors responsible for
performing these tasks are all major in computer science and
have a good understanding of software development.
Another potential threats to validity derives from the eval-
uation of usefulness of the identiﬁed key features, because
planning next app releases can be a very complex problem
and involve many trade-offs in the real world. It is ideal to
invite actual app developers to determine whether the identiﬁed
key features are useful to them, but it is labor intensive and
can also introduce subjective bias. Instead, we choose to use
release notes as a practical ground truth, which can reﬂect
real-world decisions made by developers to some extent. In
addition, the performance of feature extraction and user review
matching processes might be inﬂuenced by the stop-words list
and words segmentation directory used. We choose to make
these data publicly available in our dataset, so that others can
replicate and extend our approaches.
As far as external threats to validity are concerned, in this
study, we used 50 app descriptions for evaluating the perfor-
mance of KEFE in feature extraction (on average, each app
has 24.7 features), and collected 1,108,148 user reviews and 78
releases for evaluating the performance of key features identi-
ﬁcation. Despite that these apps all come from Chinese Apple
App Store, they are selected from ten different categories, and
thereby cover a diverse set of feature descriptions and user
groups. We acknowledge that KEFE might exhibit different
performance on different apps. Especially, since KEFE usually
requires a number of user reviews for building a statistically
signiﬁcant regression model, a poor performance might beobserved for apps with few user reviews (it is nevertheless
easy to conduct manual analysis in this case). In the future,
we plan to evaluate the performance of KEFE on more apps
across different app stores.
VI. R ELATED WORK
App store analysis is a popular ﬁeld of software engineering
researches, in which a wide and diverse range of approaches
have been developed [6]. In this section, we discuss related
works from two directions: 1) summarization of user reviews,
and 2) feature extraction and evaluation.
A. Summarization of User Reviews
User reviews are usually in large volumes and contain
noisy and irrelevant information. In order to extract useful
information from user reviews, a variety of studies have been
conducted [8], [9], [14], [16], [18], [20], [41]. For example,
Guzman et al. [21], Panichella et al. [22], and Ciurumelea
et al. [23] proposed approaches to classify user reviews into
speciﬁc groups according to the information they carry. Mcil-
roy et al. [24] assigned multiple labels to each user review to
indicate different types of issues. Di Sorbo et al. [12] took both
review topics and user intentions into account, and developed
the SURF approach to generate user review summaries.
In addition to the summarization of user reviews into infor-
mative topics, there are also studies that attempt to prioritize
topics in order of importance. AR-Miner [7] is an exemplary
approach for this purpose. It employs a pre-trained classiﬁer
to identify informative reviews, and then groups these reviews
into topics and ranks these topics by priority. Later, Scalabrino
et al. [25] developed the CLAP approach. CLAP especially
categorizes user reviews into seven groups (e.g., functional bug
reports, suggestion for new features, etc.), and uses a classiﬁer
to assign high or low priority to each review cluster; the cluster
with high priority indicates topics that developers are advised
to address in the next release.
Topics in user reviews can also be time-sensitive with
ﬂuctuations over releases. Gao et al. [11] developed the PAID
approach to investigate the changes in topics of user reviews.
Gao et al. [15] also developed IDEA, which uses an anomaly
detection method to identify abnormal topics. Here, a topic is
considered abnormal, if it frequently appears in current user
reviews but not previously. Later, the DIVER [17] approach
was developed to enhance the effectiveness and efﬁciency of
IDEA in an industrial environment.
In order to further support app developers in accommodating
change requests in user reviews, there are also studies that seek
to link user reviews to other software artifacts. For example,
Palomba et al. [13] devised an approach that can base structure,
semantics, and sentiments of use reviews to recommend and
localize source code changes. Zhang et al. [19] propose to use
Word2Vec to map user feedbacks to issues reports, which can
achieve a high accuracy in change localization.
More recently, Noei et al. [37] investigated the key topics
of user reviews that are signiﬁcantly correlated to app ratings.
930They found that different app categories typically have dif-
ferent sets of key topics, and these topics are not always the
topics with the highest frequency.
B. Feature Extraction and Evaluation
Unlike the above studies that mainly focus on the topics
covered by user reviews, there are also studies that seek to
analyze speciﬁc (ﬁne-grained) features, i.e., essential function-
alities or services, that the app provides [26]–[31], [33], [35],
[36].
A common and elementary step of such feature-related
studies is feature extraction. Harman et al. [33] proposed a data
mining approach to extract features from app description. Jo-
hann et al. [31] developed the SAFE approach, which employs
a set of pre-deﬁned textual patterns to extract features from
both app descriptions and user reviews. The extracted features
were then compared to determine whether each feature is
actually mentioned in user reviews. The feature extraction
challenge was also highlighted by Jiang et al. [27], while they
built a classiﬁer to extract features from app description, and
then recommended missing features for similar apps.
Once the features are extracted, developers might want
to evaluate the relative importance of different features for
release plannings. Guzman and Maalej [28] scored the features
based on user sentiments, where app features were extracted
from user reviews by a collocation ﬁnding algorithm. Gu
and Kim [29] also concentrated on the sentiment of users
about app features. Likewise, they identiﬁed features from
user reviews, but they distinguished between feature evaluation
and feature request. Keertipati et al. [35] and Licorish et
al. [36] proposed approaches for prioritizing features extracted
from negative user reviews. They combined review frequency,
rating, emotion, and deontic to build a regression model, and
illustrated the use of their approaches by case studies.
Recently, Malik et al. [26] introduced the concept of hot
features , i.e., the features that are most frequently mentioned
in user reviews, for feature evaluation and recommendation.
They used sentiment analysis to explore users’ opinions on
the hot features, where the features that users prefer could be
recommended for similar apps.
Discussions . The KEFE approach presented in this paper
aims to identify key features based on app description and
user reviews. It differs from the above studies in two main
aspects. First, the feature extraction and user review matching
approaches used in KEFE are designed to process Chinese
text, while previous studies [27], [31] mainly focus on English
text and provide few multi-language supports. Moreover, pre-
vious studies [27], [31] typically rely on part of speech and
traditional classiﬁer to extract features, while KEFE further
exploits grammatical relations of sentences and utilizes a more
powerful deep machine learning classiﬁer.
Second, KEFE studies the features that are most closely
related to app ratings, instead of user sentiments [28], [29], or
frequency of reviews [26]. There is one study [37] that seeks
to investigate the correlation between topics and app ratings,
but it focuses on topics of a complete app category, instead ofconcrete features of a speciﬁc app. The studies of Keertipati et
al. [35] and Licorish et al. [36] are the closest existing studies
to KEFE, where they build a regression model to prioritize
features based on negative user reviews. KEFE differs from
their studies, as it additionally uses the information in app
description, and built the regression model based on different
variables (both positive and negative reviews are accounted).
KEFE is also automatic, and empirically evaluated, while the
previous studies [35], [36] rely on a human rater to decide the
severity of each sentence, and only report results of two case
studies.
In addition, KEFE aims to extract existing features from app
description, and analyzes user reviews that comment on these
features. This differs from the analysis of feature request based
on user reviews [20], [25], because the key features identiﬁed
must be an existing feature of the given app. Accordingly, if a
review talks about new feature requests only, this review will
not be used to perform regression analysis in KEFE.
VII. C ONCLUSION
The features greatly impact the success of apps. This study
presents the KEFE approach to identify key features of a given
app based on its app description and user reviews. Such key
features indicate features that have signiﬁcant relationships
with user rating scores, and thereby should be carefully ad-
dressed by app developers. In order to effectively identify key
features, KEFE ﬁrsts applies a textual pattern-based ﬁlter and
a BERT classiﬁer to extract feature-describing phrases from
app description. KEFE then matches each app features with
its relevant user reviews by another BERT classiﬁer. Finally,
KEFE builds a regression model to investigate the relationships
between features and positive/negative user reviews, where
the features associated with statistically signiﬁcant explanatory
variables are identiﬁed as key features. The KEFE approach is
trained and evaluated on a dataset with 200 app descriptions
and 1,108,148 user reviews. The experimental results reveal
that KEFE is effective in both feature extraction and user
review matching, achieving average F-measure s of 78.13%
and 62.02%, respectively. The key features identiﬁed could
also provide useful information for developers’ consideration,
because for the releases that receive higher app ratings, key
features account for about 70% of all features improvements.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2018YFB1003800),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61902174,
No. 62072226), and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (No. BK20190291).
REFERENCES
[1] A. Holzer and J. Ondrus, “Mobile application market: A developer’s
perspective,” Telematics and informatics , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 22–31, 2011.
[2] R. Francese, C. Gravino, M. Risi, G. Scanniello, and G. Tortora,
“Mobile app development and management: results from a qualitative
investigation,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Mobile Software Engineering and Systems , 2017, pp. 133–143.
931[3] A. AlSubaihin, F. Sarro, S. Black, L. Capra, and M. Harman, “App
store effects on software engineering practices,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , to be published, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2019.2891715.
[4] D. Pagano and W. Maalej, “User feedback in the appstore: An empirical
study,” in Proceedings of the 21st International Requirements Engineer-
ing Conference (RE) , 2013, pp. 125–134.
[5] F. Palomba, M. Linares-Vasquez, G. Bavota, R. Oliveto, M. Di Penta,
D. Poshyvanyk, and A. De Lucia, “User reviews matter! Tracking crowd-
sourced reviews to support evolution of successful apps,” in Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME) , 2015, pp. 291–300.
[6] W. Martin, F. Sarro, Y . Jia, Y . Zhang, and M. Harman, “A survey of app
store analysis for software engineering,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 817–847, 2016.
[7] N. Chen, J. Lin, S. C. Hoi, X. Xiao, and B. Zhang, “AR-Miner: Mining
informative reviews for developers from mobile app marketplace,” in
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engi-
neering (ICSE) , 2014, pp. 767–778.
[8] C. Gao, H. Xu, J. Hu, and Y . Zhou, “AR-Tracker: Track the dynamics
of mobile apps via user review mining,” in Proceedings of the 2015
Symposium on Service-Oriented System Engineering , 2015, pp. 284–
290.
[9] N. Genc-Nayebi and A. Abran, “A systematic literature review: Opinion
mining studies from mobile app store user reviews,” Journal of Systems
and Software , vol. 125, pp. 207–219, 2017.
[10] P. M. Vu, T. T. Nguyen, H. V . Pham, and T. T. Nguyen, “Mining
user opinions in mobile app reviews: A keyword-based approach,”
inProceedings of the 30th International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE) , 2015, pp. 749–759.
[11] C. Gao, B. Wang, P. He, J. Zhu, Y . Zhou, and M. R. Lyu, “PAID:
Prioritizing app issues for developers by tracking user reviews over
versions,” in Proceedings of the 26th International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) , 2015, pp. 35–45.
[12] A. Di Sorbo, S. Panichella, C. V . Alexandru, J. Shimagaki, C. A.
Visaggio, G. Canfora, and H. C. Gall, “What would users change in my
app? Summarizing app reviews for recommending software changes,”
inProceedings of the 24th International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering (FSE) , 2016, pp. 499–510.
[13] F. Palomba, P. Salza, A. Ciurumelea, S. Panichella, H. Gall, F. Ferrucci,
and A. De Lucia, “Recommending and localizing change requests
for mobile apps based on user reviews,” in Proceedings of the 39th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2017, pp.
106–117.
[14] W. Luiz, F. Viegas, R. Alencar, F. Mour ˜ao, T. Salles, D. Carvalho,
M. A. Gonc ¸alves, and L. Rocha, “A feature-oriented sentiment rating for
mobile app reviews,” in Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference
(WWW) , 2018, pp. 1909–1918.
[15] C. Gao, J. Zeng, M. R. Lyu, and I. King, “Online app review analysis for
identifying emerging issues,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2018, pp. 48–58.
[16] C. Gao, J. Zeng, D. Lo, C.-Y . Lin, M. R. Lyu, and I. King, “Infar: Insight
extraction from app reviews,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM Joint
Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE) , 2018, pp.
904–907.
[17] C. Gao, W. Zheng, Y . Deng, D. Lo, J. Zeng, M. R. Lyu, and I. King,
“Emerging app issue identiﬁcation from user feedback: Experience
on wechat,” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP) ,
2019, pp. 279–288.
[18] S. Hassan, C.-P. Bezemer, and A. E. Hassan, “Studying bad updates of
top free-to-download apps in the google play store,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 773–793, 2018.
[19] T. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Zhan, X. Luo, D. Lo, and H. Jiang,
“Where2change: Change request localization for app reviews,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , to be published, doi:
10.1109/TSE.2019.2956941.
[20] W. Maalej and H. Nabil, “Bug report, feature request, or simply praise?
On automatically classifying app reviews,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , 2015, pp.
116–125.
[21] E. Guzman, M. El-Haliby, and B. Bruegge, “Ensemble methods for
app review classiﬁcation: An approach for software evolution,” in Pro-ceedings of the 30th International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) , 2015, pp. 771–776.
[22] S. Panichella, A. Di Sorbo, E. Guzman, C. A. Visaggio, G. Canfora,
and H. C. Gall, “Ardoc: App reviews development oriented classiﬁer,”
inProceedings of the 24th International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering (FSE) , 2016, pp. 1023–1027.
[23] A. Ciurumelea, A. Schaufelb ¨uhl, S. Panichella, and H. C. Gall, “Ana-
lyzing reviews and code of mobile apps for better release planning,” in
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) , 2017, pp. 91–102.
[24] S. McIlroy, N. Ali, H. Khalid, and A. E. Hassan, “Analyzing and
automatically labelling the types of user issues that are raised in mobile
app reviews,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1067–
1106, 2016.
[25] S. Scalabrino, G. Bavota, B. Russo, M. Di Penta, and R. Oliveto,
“Listening to the crowd for the release planning of mobile apps,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 68–86, 2019.
[26] H. Malik, E. M. Shakshuki, and W.-S. Yoo, “Comparing mobile apps by
identifying ‘hot’ features,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol.
107, pp. 659–669, 2020.
[27] H. Jiang, J. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Ren, D. Lo, X. Wu, and Z. Luo, “Recom-
mending new features from mobile app descriptions,” ACM Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) , vol. 28, no. 4, pp.
1–29, 2019.
[28] E. Guzman and W. Maalej, “How do users like this feature? A ﬁne
grained sentiment analysis of app reviews,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , 2014, pp.
153–162.
[29] X. Gu and S. Kim, “What parts of your apps are loved by users?”
inProceedings of the 30th International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE) , 2015, pp. 760–770.
[30] T. Iqbal, N. Seyff, and D. Mendez, “Generating requirements out of
thin air: Towards automated feature identiﬁcation for new apps,” in
International Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW) ,
2019, pp. 193–199.
[31] T. Johann, C. Stanik, W. Maalej et al. , “SAFE: A simple approach for
feature extraction from app descriptions and app reviews,” in Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Requirements Engineering Conference
(RE) , 2017, pp. 21–30.
[32] K.-F. Wong, W. Li, R. Xu, and Z.-S. Zhang, “Introduction to chinese
natural language processing,” Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–148, 2009.
[33] M. Harman, Y . Jia, and Y . Zhang, “App store mining and analysis: MSR
for app stores,” in Proceedings of the 9th Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR) , 2012, pp. 108–111.
[34] G. Bavota, M. Linares-Vasquez, C. E. Bernal-Cardenas, M. Di Penta,
R. Oliveto, and D. Poshyvanyk, “The impact of API change- and fault-
proneness on the user ratings of android apps,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering , vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 384–407, 2014.
[35] S. Keertipati, B. T. R. Savarimuthu, and S. A. Licorish, “Approaches
for prioritizing feature improvements extracted from app reviews,” in
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering , 2016, pp. 1–6.
[36] S. A. Licorish, B. T. R. Savarimuthu, and S. Keertipati, “Attributes
that predict which features to ﬁx: Lessons for app store mining,” in
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Evaluation and
Assessment in Software Engineering , 2017, pp. 108–117.
[37] E. Noei, F. Zhang, and Y . Zou, “Too many user-reviews, what should app
developers look at ﬁrst?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
to be published, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2019.2893171.
[38] W. Che, Z. Li, and T. Liu, “Ltp: A chinese language technology
platform,” in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations , 2010, pp. 13–16.
[39] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/1810.04805, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.04805
[40] J. Foerderer, T. Kude, S. Mithas, and A. Heinzl, “Does platform owner’s
entry crowd out innovation? Evidence from google photos,” Information
Systems Research , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 444–460, 2018.
[41] N. Jha and A. Mahmoud, “Mining non-functional requirements from
app store reviews,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
3659–3695, 2019.
932