Neurological Divide: An fMRI Study of Prose and Code Writing
Ryan Krueger
University of Michigan
ryankrue@umich.eduYu Huang
University of Michigan
yhhy@umich.eduXinyu Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
xinyuliu@umich.edu
Tyler Santander
UC Santa Barbara
t.santander@psych.ucsb.eduWestley Weimer
University of Michigan
weimerw@umich.eduKevin Leach
University of Michigan
kjleach@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
Softwareengineeringinvolveswritingnewcodeoreditingexisting
code. Recent efforts have investigated the neural processes asso-
ciatedwithreadingandcomprehendingcode—however,welack
a thorough understanding of the human cognitive processes un-
derlying code writing. While prose reading and writing have been
studied thoroughly, that same scrutiny has not been applied to
codewriting.Inthispaper,weleveragefunctionalbrainimaging
to investigate neural representations of code writing in compari-
son to prose writing. We present the first human study in which
participantswrotecodeandprosewhileundergoingafunctional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) brain scan, making use of a
full-sized fMRI-safe QWERTY keyboard.
We find that code writing and prose writing are significantly
dissimilar neural tasks. While prose writing entails significant left
hemisphereactivityassociatedwithlanguage,codewritinginvolves
more activations of the right hemisphere, including regions associ-
ated with attention control, working memory, planning and spatial
cognition.Thesefindingsareunlikeexistingworkinwhichcode
and prose comprehension were studied. By contrast, we present
the first evidence suggesting that code and prose writingare quite
dissimilar at the neural level.
KEYWORDS
medical imaging, spatial, memory, attention, synthesis, keyboard
ACM Reference Format:
Ryan Krueger, Yu Huang, Xinyu Liu, Tyler Santander, Westley Weimer,
andKevinLeach.2020.NeurologicalDivide:AnfMRIStudyofProseand
Code Writing. In 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’20),May23–29,2020,Seoul,RepublicofKorea. ACM,NewYork,NY,
USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380348
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthe firstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7121-6/20/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.33803481 INTRODUCTION
Writing code is a crucial activity in software engineering. With
software-relatedinnovationsdrivinga$3.8trillionglobalITmar-
ket [24] and demandfor university computer science courses out-
stripping the supply of professors [ 107], the value of developing
and maintaining software is increasing rapidly. This importance
is already reflected at an industrial scale, with Fortune 500 compa-
nies, such as Amazon and AT&T, committing massive resources
to retrainup tohalf of theirworkforce inprogramming-intensive
areas[20,27].Despitethisincreasingprevalenceofsoftwareand
demand for skilled programmers, we rely on traditional survey
instruments and self-reporting, rather than an understanding of
fundamentalhumanbrainfunction,whendevelopingmethodsto
support, improve, teach and evaluate code writing and editing. We
present findings from the first study to use medical imaging to
investigate the cognitive processes underlying the writing of code.
Problem. Thereisasignificantbodyofworkstudyingthepsy-
chology of programming, ranging from the cognitive prerequisites
ofprogramming[ 80]toentiretheoriesofthecodingprocess[ 13],
butthisresearchhasreliedlargelyonobservationalevidence.Re-
centadvancesinmedicalimaging,particularlyfunctionalmagnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), have improved researchers’ ability to
measure brain activity associated with various cognitive processes.
Asanon-invasive, invivotechnique,fMRIisaneffectivetoolfor
clinical researchers studying brain function [ 1,42,110] and the ef-
fects of various treatments [ 76,102,113], as well as for psychology
researchers mapping brain areas in activities as diverse as musical
performance[ 65]andfoodcravings[ 86].Findingsusingmedical
imaginghavesuccessfullytransitionedtoguidingbehavioraland
developmental improvement in domains like mathematics [ 30] and
education[ 87].Whilemedicalimagingstudiesarestillnewincom-
puter science, software engineering researchers have used fMRI
tohelpunderstandtaskslikecodecomprehension[ 103],codere-
view [39] and data structure manipulation [ 52]. Imaging advances
hold out the promise of helping computer science as they have
helpedotherfields:fromunderstandingexpertise[ 4,67,98]tor e-
traininganagingworkforce[ 19,74]toguidingpedagogy[ 5,97]to
augmenting unreliable self-reporting [66, 90].
Challenge and Insight. While there have been fMRI studies of
codereading(e.g., [39,103]) andnon-fMRI studies of code writing
(e.g.,[12,68]),tothebestofourknowledgetherearenoprevious
fMRIstudiesofcodewriting.Weattributethistotwochallenges:
physicsanddesign.First,normalkeyboardscannotbesafelyplacedoraccuratelyreadnearmagneticresonancescanners.Theyinterfere
6782020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
I got in my |,
and I drove into
town.
intsum(int a,intb)
{
/*YOUR CODE HERE*/return
| ;
}
Figure1:Weinvestigatetherelationshipbetweenproseand
code writing using functional brain imaging. Experimentalcontrolssystematicallyvarycontent(codevs.prose)andsize
(fill-in-the-blankvs.longresponse).Docodeandprosewrit-
ing exhibit the same patterns of neural activity?
withthefMRImeasurementsandthefMRIinterfereswithkeyboard
reporting. Second, imaging studies require carefully-controlled ex-
periments,andnohigh-leveldesignforacodewritingcontrasthas
been proposed (cf. Behroozi et al.’s contrast of whiteboard inter-
view questions with pencil-and-paper versions [ 7], which changes
themodalitybutusesidenticaltasks,orHuang etal.’scontrastof
data structure problems with mental rotation problems [ 52], which
changes the task but not the modality). We combine two corre-
sponding insights to overcome these challenges. First, we propose
to employ a bespoke keyboard that moves all metal and control
logictoaseparateroom.Second,weproposeatwo-by-twocontrastsetup:codevs.prosewritingandfill-in-the-blankvs.longresponse
(informally, single-word production vs. longer creativity).
Ouruseofprosewritingasabaselinegroundsourexperiment
and clarifies our results. Prose writing is a well-studied activityin psychology [
6,26,47,57,64], and medical imaging has aided
understandingofitsunderlyingcognitiveprocesses.Forexample,
fMRIstudieshaveprovidedinsightsintobrainareasassociatedwithprosewriting[
73]andthespecificityofsuchregionsacrossdifferent
prosewritingtasks[ 89],inadditiontoaddressingneuralcorrelates
of the roles of expertise [ 95] and creativity [ 101]. The contrast
betweencodeandprosewritinginourexperimentilluminatestheir
differences and similarities at a neurological level.
Experiment. Weconductedahumanstudyinwhich30partici-
pants performed prose and code writing tasks in an fMRI scanner
(Figure 1). Participants completed two types of tasks: fill-in-the-
blank(FITB)andlongresponse(LR).FITBtaskspresentedeither
a sentence or program containing a blank space, requiring theparticipant to provide the missing word or code snippet. In LR
tasks,participantswroteproseorcodefromscratchtoansweran
open-ended question or meet a program specification.
Results.Ourprimaryfindingisthatcodewritingandprosewrit-
ing feature significantly different patterns of neural activity, par-ticularly in parts of the brain associated with attention control,
working memory, and spatial cognition. While prose writing in-
volves activation in canonical areas associated with language, code
writing involves a very different set of right-lateralized regions
associated with attention, memory, planning and spatial ability.Ourexperimentprovidesthefirstevidenceofsignificantneuraldif-ferencesbetween prosewriting (whichisneurallysimilartonatural
language) and code writing (which, we find, is not).
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•An fMRI study of 30 participants comparing code writingto prose writing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
firstfMRIstudytofeaturekeyboardcodewriting.Ourexper-
imental design contrasts code, prose, fill-in-the-blank and
long-response questions.
•Amathematicalanalysisoftheresults.Aftermitigatingnoiseandcorrectingforfalsediscoveryrate(
q<0.05),wefindthat
generalcodeandprosewritingfeaturedistinctpatternsof
neuralactivity (2 .4≤t≤6.2)related toattention, working
memory and spatial cognition. For long-response writing
questions,wefindtheclearestdistinctionweareawareofin
theliterature( −7.0≤t≤−3.1and3.5≤t≤5.8)between
code(attention,memory,planningandspatialability)and
prose (language, letters and words).
•Forreplicationandreproducibleresearch,wemakeavailable
ourmaterialsandmethodsonourprojectwebsite.1These
includeourcorpusofstimuli;ourde-identifiedmedicalimag-
ing data; our method for adapting a 101-key QWERTY USB
keyboard for the fMRI environment; and a configurable pro-
gram for stimuli presentation, editing and data collection.
2 BACKGROUND
Inthissection,wesummarizehowmedicalimagingcanuncover
neuralcorrelatesofcognitiveprocesses,previousnon-writingstud-
ies of code, and previous non-imaging studies of writing.
2.1 Medical Imaging and Software Engineering
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a measurement
technique that has provided many neuroscience and cognitive sci-
enceinsights.Ofthenon-invasive, invivofunctionalneuroimaging
approachesavailable,fMRIhasemergedasthemostpopularover
the last 30 years, appearing in over 100,000 studies [ 44]. fMRI re-
lies on the hemodynamic response or rapid change in blood flow to
deliver metabolites (e.g., oxygen, glucose) to neuronal tissues. Oxy-
genated and deoxygenated blood cells vary in their magnetic prop-
erties,allowingfMRItoindirectlymeasurethesechangesviathe
application of magnetic fields. Using the energy released to locate
these bloodcells, fMRIcalculates the blood-oxygen leveldependent
(BOLD) signal, defined as the ratio of oxygenated to deoxygenated
hemoglobin.
The use of medical imaging to study software engineering is
relatively new. There have been fewer than a dozen studies at
major conferences that use fMRI to investigate software engineer-
ing[22,34,36,39,52,53,75,84,84,103,104].Othermedicalimaging
modalitieshavebeenusedtoexaminesoftwareengineering(e.g.,
fNIRS[36,75]orEEG[ 25,63])butHuang etal.demonstratedtheim-
portance of fMRI’s penetrating power and spatial resolution when
studying computing tasks [ 52, Sec. V-D]. All previous fMRI studies
ofsoftwareengineeringhavefocusedonreadingorreviewingcode;
we make use of fMRI to study code writing.
1https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~weimerw/fmri.html
679Fill in the blank below.
Angered that the book arrived in the mail in such
shabby condition, Elliot insisted that the book-seller
it with a new copy.
(a) Prose Fill-in-the-BlankWhat would happen if everyone lived in space?(e.g., what type of houses would they live in?What type of clothing would they wear?)
(b) Prose Long ResponseGiven two 3× 5 2D arrays of integers x1andx2,
write the code needed to copy every value from x1
to its corresponding element in x2.
1for (int i=0; i<j;i++) {
2 for (int j=0; j<5 ; j++) {
3 /* YOUR CODE HERE */
4 }
5}
(c) Code Fill-in-the-BlankImplement a function issorted that accepts a
vector of integer values and returns true if it isnon-decreasing, and false otherwise.
(d) Code Long Response
Figure2:Illustrativeexamplesofstimulishowntoparticipants.Weinvestigatedfourcategoriesofstimulicoveringcodeand
prose in fill-in-the-blank and long response scenarios.
fMRI’srelianceonthehemodynamicresponseanduseofmag-
nets both restrict study design and ecological validity. First, the
temporalstructureofthehemodynamicresponselimitsmeasure-mentstosmall(typicallylessthanoneminute)windows.Second,
the fMRI scanner and magnetic fields preclude proximate metallic
orelectronicdevices:previousstudiesusedasmall,fixednumber
of“multiplechoice”responses(e.g.,selectedbypneumaticbutton
press or similar device). In this work, we lift this second restriction
by making use of a full keyboard.
2.2 Writing and Cognition
There is strong interest from both academia and industry in im-
provingprogrammers’abilitytowritecode[ 40,60,68,70].While
thesuccessofahandfulofprojects(e.g.,Scratch[ 93])hintsatthe
opportunity present in understanding the mental processes associ-
ated with writing code, modern research is limited by our lack of a
foundational, neurobiologically-grounded understanding [52].
Researchers since the 1950’s have sought to understand the psy-
chology of programmers, but have largely relied on observational
data (e.g., [ 14]). These efforts have ranged from studies of exper-
tise [46,78,114,117], to entiretheories of the coding process [ 13],
tohowprogrammersusetheInternet[ 12].PeaandKurland,who
conducted research in the 1980’s on the cognitive prerequisites
and effects of computer programming, emphasized the need to un-
derstand programmers’ psychology given the rising importance
ofcomputerliteracy[ 80,81].Despitethemassivegrowthofsoft-
wareengineeringsincethen,PeaandKurland’scallhasnotbeen
answered with a grounded neurological understanding.
There is also a significant body of research outside of com-
puter science to study the cognitive processes of prose writing (see
Berninger and Winn [ 10] for a survey). Unlike code, prose writing
has been studied using medical imaging to establish a more objec-
tiveunderstanding.Thefindingsfromthesemedicalimagingprose
writing studies, such as the brain regions associated with prose
writingandthespecializationofsuchregions[ 9,73,88,89,95,101],
have in turn successfully informed subsequent research in peda-
gogy [10, 57, 87].
Previous work simultaneously studying code and prose writing
hasfocusedonnon-imaging usesof onetoaid inthe instructionoftheother.Moreexplicitly,researchinstorytellinghasusedprogram-
ming as a means to improve children’s prose writing [ 17], and vice
versa [16,56]. In either direction, researchers reported similarity
in the processes of code and prose writing, such as their sequence,
structure,and object-orientednature [ 35].However,these qualita-
tive findings have not been substantiated by medical imaging.2.3 Motivation: Imaging of Code Writing
Medical imaging has made remarkable contributions in guidingbehavioral enhancement and development in different domains,
suchasmathematics[ 30]andeducation[ 87].Forinstance,cogni-
tive understanding of numeracy has inspired researchers to use
differentmeasurestopredictindividualdifferencesinmathematical
development and achievement [ 11,48,55,62]. Based on medical
imaging research in music training, researchers successfully devel-
oped interventions to enhance executive functioning and working
memoryinolderadults[ 15].Similarly,imagingfindingsinreading-
related brain activitiesmade it possible to design interventionsto
improve reading skills over time in dyslexic children [71, 106].
Surveyededucatorslargelybelieveunderstandingthebrainis
importanttothedesignanddeliveryofteaching[ 87].Berningerand
Winn foundthat integrationof neuroscience andlearning science
maypromoteeducationalevolution[ 10].Dahlin etal.foundthat
trainingcantransferbetweentwotasksthatengageoverlapping
processing components and brain regions [ 29]. Specifically, the
neuroimaging findings of the role of working memory in prose
writing [ 9,94] have led to a series of instructional intervention
studies showing writing problems can be improved [ 51,58,112].
Inspired by research on prose writing and other domains using
medical imaging, we believe similar benefits for code writing may
be available.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no previous imaging
studies of code writing in general, nor studies comparing code and
prose writing in particular; we return to non-imaging code writing
research, including software psychology studies, in Section 7.
3 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND METHODS
We present a human study in which 30 participants underwent
anfMRIscanwhilecompletingproseandcodewritingtasks.We
discuss(1)themakeupandrecruitmentofourparticipantcohort,(2)howwedevelopedourtaskmaterials,(3)theexperimentalprotocol,
(4) our method for collecting fMRI data, and (5) the construction
of an fMRI-safe keyboard that enabled participants to freely write
text and code during an fMRI scan.
3.1 ParticipantDemographicsandRecruitment
We recruited 30 undergraduate and graduate computer science stu-
dents at the University of Michigan. The protocol was approved by
the University’s IRB (HUM00138634). Table 1 summarizes demo-
graphicinformationforthiscohort.Studentswhohadcompleted
coursework in data structures and who could safely undergo an
MRIscan wereeligibletoparticipate. Allparticipantswere native
680Table 1: Demographics of the participants in our study.
Demographic Variables # Participants
SexMale 20
Female 10
GenderMen 20
Women 9
Fluid 1
Degree PursuingUndergraduate 27Graduate 3
English speakers, right-handed, and had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. Each participant was offered a $75 cash incentive
and a 3D model of their brain upon completion.
When participants elected to participate in the study, we col-
lectedbasicdemographicdata(sex,gender,age,cumulativeGPA,
andyearsofexperience)andsocioeconomicstatus(SES)data.In
addition, each participant completed three standard psychological
measurement surveys: Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS,
emotional health), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and Needfor Cognition (NFC, inclination for effortful cognition). Finally,
weadministeredashortprogrammingquiztoassessbasicC/C++
programming skills.
Although we conducted a correlation analysis between these
demographicandpsychologicalmeasuresandbrainactivities,none
survived a strict false discovery rate correction ( q<0.05). We
claim no significant demographic or attitudinal correlation with
codeorprosewritinginourstudy.Intheremainderofthispaper,
wethustreatourparticipantsasawhole,ratherthanconsidering
any subpopulation analyses.
3.2 Participant Tasks
ParticipantsunderwentanfMRIscanduringwhichtheycompleted
a sequence of tasks associated with code and prose writing. Par-ticipants were shown a sequence of sentences or code snippetsand asked to type a response while inside the MRI machine. We
divided tasks into Fill-in-the-Blank (FITB) and Long-Response (LR)
activities. In FITB, participants were shown a nearly-completed
sentenceor codesnippetand had30seconds totypea shortword
or expression that they thought best completed the sentence orsnippet. In LR, participants had 60 seconds to write a completeresponse to a high-level task or question. Participant completed
four categories of tasks, each lasting 20 minutes: (1) 17 FITB Prose
tasks, (2) 9 LR Prose tasks, (3) 17 FITB Code tasks, and (4) 9 LR
Code tasks. Examples of stimuli under each of these categories are
shown in Figure 2.
Code Tasks. We developeda corpus of code stimuli by adapting
tasks from Turing’s Craft [ 3], a library of short programming exer-
cises used in web teaching evaluations [ 2], each with prompts and
examplecorrect solutions.Forthe FITB Codetasks,we selecteda
setof17prompt-answerpairs,andreplacedarandomportionof
thesolutionwithablankline.Participantswereaskedtofillinthat
blank line. For the LR Code tasks, we selected a set of 9 prompts
that our pilot study suggested as answerable within 60 seconds.ProseTasks. Forcontrolledexperimentationandtoadmitacontrast-
based analysis, we selected prose stimuli that were analogous to
thecodestimuli.AsprosewritingfMRIstudieshaverevealeddif-
ferences in brain activation based on writing content [ 89,101], we
carefullydevelopedourprosewritingstimuli.First,weusedaset
of non-math analogies that have been shown to be useful in the
teachingofmathematics[ 28,99]todevelopalistoftermsassoci-
atedwithquantitativereasoning.Synonymsofthesewordswere
addedtoexpandthesearchspace.TogenerateProseFITBprompts,
wefirstmatchedthelistofsearchwordstoasetofScholasticAs-
sessment Test (SAT)fill-in-the-blank questions and chose17 such
matches. We then replaced the blanks used in the original SAT
promptwiththeappropriatewordsfromtheSATanswer,selectingeasiersynonymswhenourpilotstudyrevealedthattheymightnot
be accessible to a wide population. We replaced the search word
foundinthepromptwithablankline;participantswereaskedto
fill in that blank line. Our Prose LR prompts were generated by
matching search words with a set of English as a Second Language
(ESL) long response prompts and choosing 9 matching prompts.
29outofthe30recruitedparticipantssuppliedvalidinputsfor
thetasks.Pertask,the29participantsprovidedamaximumof82
keystrokes (mean: 13) for FITB prose and 116 keystrokes (mean:
36)forFITBcode.FortheLRtasks,wecollectedamaximumof435
keystrokes (mean: 258) for prose and 244 keystrokes (mean: 121)for code. In general, the FITB tasks required fewer keystrokes to
complete; participants had twice the time to complete the LR tasks.
Weobservedthatparticipantswereabletowritemultiplecomplete
sentences for prose tasks and to complete variable declarations,
loops, and function calls in the time allotted.
3.3 Experimental Protocol
In this subsection, we provide details on the process that partici-
pants completed before and during their fMRI scans. During a two-
hoursession,wecollectedinformedconsentandsafetyscreening
information.Participantsclearedtoparticipateweregivenacoding
quiz and psychological surveys. Participants were then shown a
brieftrainingvideoaboutthetaskbeforeenteringthescanner.Eachmachinesessionbeganwithahigh-resolutionanatomicalscandur-
ing which participants were given a text editor interface and were
instructed to practice typing on the keyboard while lying inside
theboreofthemachine(showninFigure3).Thispracticetyping
was not recorded. Participants then completed four task blocks
associatedwithcodeandprosewriting:ProseFITB,ProseLR,Code
FITB, and Code LR. To mitigate training and fatigue effects, we
randomized both the category order and the task order. A fixation
cross was presented between each question for a random 2–10s
duration to provide a brief rest and settle brain activity.
3.4 fMRI Data Acquisition
MRIdatawereacquiredwithprotocolsensuringhighspatialand
high temporal resolution. We summarize the details (e.g., for thepurposes of replication and meta-analysis), but generally attestthat the scanning measurement hardware and steps align with
contemporarybestpractices[ 39,52,103].Allscanswereconducted
on a 3T General Electric MR750 scanner with a 32-channel head
coilattheUniversityofMichiganFunctionalMRILaboratory.First,
681Figure3:TypinginthefMRImachine.Duringascan,thepar-
ticipantwouldbeplacedfurtherintheboreofthemachine,but the keyboard and visual interface remain as shown.
MRI-safe Display
MRIFaraday Cage Control Room
Participant
w/ Keyboard
RF-safe waveguide
KB to
USB
logicExperiment PCvideo output
MRI technician
and investigator
Figure4:IllustrationoffMRIwritingsetup.TheparticipantliesintheboreofthefMRImachine,andthekeyboard’sca-blesareconnectedthroughanRF-andMRI-safewaveguide.
The waveguide connects to the control room, where we at-
tachthekeyboardlogictoanexperimentPCdisplayingourediting environment. The video output of the experimentPC feeds through the waveguide to connect to an MRI-safemonitor which can be seen by the participant in the MRIbore via mirror projection.
high-resolutionanatomicalscanswerecollectedwitha T1-weighted
spoiled gradient recall (SPGR) sequence ( TR=2300.80 ms, TE=24
ms,TI=975 ms,FA=8◦; 208 slices, 1 mm thickness). An estimate
ofmagneticfieldhomogeneitywasthenacquiredusingaspin-echo
fieldmap( TR=7400ms,TE=80ms;2.4mmslicethickness).All
foursubsequenttaskrunsemployeda T∗
2-weightedmultibandecho
planar imaging sequence ( TR=800 ms,TE=30 ms,FA=52◦;
accelerationfactor=6)withwhole-braincoverageover60slices
(2.4 mm3isotropic voxels, or three-dimensional pixels).
3.5 fMRI-Safe Keyboard and Editing
Because the fMRI machine involves an extremely powerful mag-net and very strong electromagnetic fields, typical electronic de-
vices cannot be used safely nearby. For example, a traditional USB
keyboardwillnotfunctionintheMRImachinebecauseitwillin-
duce current on the USB cable, causing erratic keystroke signalsor unpredictable behavior. Moreover, large metal masses withinthe MRI’s magnetic field can cause disastrous signal noise andruin brain images (and also pose fire and collision hazards). Pre-
vious fMRI studies of software engineering all employed special
hand-held button-press devices for selecting among a small, fixed
set of choices (e.g., [ 39,52,103]). These devices do not meet the
requirements for code writing.
In this work, we adapted a 101-key QWERTY USB keyboard for
the fMRI environment. All control logic and metal are removed
fromthekeyboard,andmovingmetallicpiecesarereplacedwith
3D-printed(plastic)equivalents.Briefly,eachindividualkeyisat-
tached to its own shielded wire that extends 30 feet to provideadequate distance from the core of the MRI machine. The wires
were fed through an RF-safe waveguide to the fMRI control room,
where a custom-built device reads the state of each key and out-
putsastandardUSBsignal.Becausenocontrollogicwaspresent
near the MRI machine and keystrokes were processed from the
controlroom,weeliminatedissuescausedbyelectromagneticin-
terference.Inaddition,mostfMRIstudiesusesequencesofstatic
pre-renderedstimuli controlledbysoftware(e.g., E-Prime[ 91])to
record responses. We instead employed a more indicative dynamic
editor environment, including syntax highlighting, available in our
replication materials. We found this organization, illustrated in
Figure 4, to work well, although imperfectly-printed plastic pieces
caused occasionally-duplicated keystrokes for two participants.
Whileresearchershaveconsideredtheproblemforpianokey-
boards[109],keyboardswithnoscreen(andthusnoback-and-forth
editing,e.g.,[ 92])orsignificantrestrictionsonwhichkeyscouldbe
pressed(e.g.,[ 50]),tothebestofourknowledge,theclosestrelated
fMRI-keyboard work tends to be about a decade old (e.g., [ 54,92]).
Existingworkhasprimarilyfocusedonexperimentaldesignthat
reduces signal noise affecting brain scan quality. Our custom-built
keyboardintroducesnegligiblesignalnoiseonthefMRIbrainscan,
but also supports our additional use case for live editing duringscanning. We make our engineering notes on our successful ap-proach (and failed attempts) available as part of our replication
materials.
4 ANALYSIS APPROACH
Caremust be takenwhenanalyzingfMRI resultstobothmitigate
noise and also to avoid false positive correlations [ 8]. Informally,
wefollowathreestepprocess:preprocessthedatatoaccountfor
noise,analyzeindividualparticipants,andcomparebetweenpartici-pants.Ourapproachfollowsthestate-of-the-artinmedicalimaging
(bothforcognitiveneuroscienceingeneralandforsoftwareengi-
neeringinparticular,e.g.,[ 39,52,103]).Wepresentourresultsin
Section 5; the remainder of this section summarizes our analysis
for replication and comparison purposes.
Statistical analysis of fMRI data is inherently multi-level. The
datafirstrequireextensive preprocessing toremovevarioussources
of systematic noise (e.g., due to head motion or inhomogeneities in
the magnetic field). An additional goal of this procedure is to align
all individual participant brains with a standard anatomical tem-
plate—thisallowsforinter-participantcomparisonandlocalizationofsignalstospecificbrainstructures.Followingpreprocessing,eachparticipant’s data are submitted to a first-level, fixed effects general
linear model (GLM). Here, voxel timeseries are modeled against an
682idealizedtimeseries,giventhecanonicalhemodynamicresponse
functionandtheoccurrenceofeach event(i.e.,stimulus)overthe
courseofthescan.Thisyieldsasetof betaimages thatdescribehow
sensitive each voxel is to the conditions of our experiment. Finally,
the beta images for each participant are combined in a second-level,
randomeffectsGLM,whichyieldsaveragemapsofbrainactivity
whencontrasting one condition versus another (e.g., code vs. prose
tasks). Importantly, because these statistical tests are conducted
on a voxel-by-voxel basis (covering tens of thousands of voxels),
weapply a falsediscovery rate (FDR)correction toprotectagainst
spuriously-significant effects across the brain.
Preprocessing—RemovingNoise. Thepreprocessingstepremoves
noise(suchasfrommotionduringthescan).Weemployedarobust
preprocessing pipeline using the Statistical Parametric Mapping 12
Matlab package [ 115]. First, the functional timeseries were slice-
time corrected — this accounts for the fact that interleaved slice
acquisitionduringscanningcausesslightdifferencesintherelativetimingofdatacollectionwithinaTR(i.e.,the800msintervalduring
whichwhole-brainvolumesaresampled).Next,weappliedhead
motion correction and unwarped the data using voxel displacement
mapsderived from the fieldmap sequence (see Section 3.4). This
stepisarguablythemostcrucialaspectofpreprocessing,ashead
motion is the leading cause of signal artifacts in fMRI data, fur-ther interacting with baseline distortion in the magnetic field to
geometrically warp voxels. We then segmented and skull-stripped
theanatomicalimages,whichweresubsequentlycoregisteredto
the functional data; both anatomical and functional scans werethen spatially-normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI152) template [
69]. Finally, we constructed a brain mask for
each participant, whichensures theexclusion ofvoxels outsideof
brainspace during statistical analysis.
First-levelAnalysis—WithinOneParticipant. Thefirst-levelanal-
ysis focuses on each participant individually. We specified four
GLMs for each participant (corresponding to each of the FITB and
LR code and prose tasks). The onsets and durations of each trial
weredefinedandconvolvedwiththecanonicalhemodynamicre-
sponse function [ 77] to yield a predicted timeseries of activity (i.e.,
how we would expect the signal in a voxel to behave if it were
sensitivetoourtask).Thedatawerehigh-passfiltered( σ=128s)
to remove low-frequency noise, and the model was fit using robust
weightedleastsquares (rWLS)[32].Sincethesedatamaybemore
susceptible to head motion (as a result of typing on the keyboard),
we view rWLS as essential for ensuring unbiased parameter esti-
mates: the objective function first obtains an estimate of the noise
variance at each scan, and the model is subsequently re-fit after
reweightingthedatabyafactorof1/variance.Thus,anyscansbi-
asedbyheadmotionaregivenlessinfluenceinthemodel,allowing
for homogeneous error variance and optimal parameter estimates.
Second-levelAnalysis—BetweenParticipants. Thesecond-level
analysis compares how different participants approached the same
task.Priortosecond-levelGLM,thebetaimagesforeachparticipant
werespatiallysmoothedusinga5mm3full-widthathalf-maximum
(FWHM) Gaussian kernel. These were submitted to an omnibus
model (i.e., a factorial analysis of variance) fit using restricted max-
imum likelihood (ReML). To test for average differences in activitybetweenconditions,wespecifiedseveral t-contrasts:Code >Prose,
FITB Code >FITB Prose, and LR Code >LR Prose. The contrast
A>Breferstothecomparisonbetweentaskconditions AandB:
voxelsorfeaturesthataremoresensitiveto Aratherthan B,orthat
drive the modeled distinction between AandB. In general, fMRI
cannotbeusedtoexamineacondition Cdirectly;asubtractivecon-
trolled experiment isused instead to compute A−B. For example,
in our experiments both the FITB and LR tasks feature reading a
writtenprompt,butingeneraltheneuralactivityassociatedwith
reading the prompt “cancels out” when the two are contrasted,and any remaining difference can be attributed to non-identical
partsoftheexperimentalcondition(i.e.,writingcodevs.writing
prose). The ultimate result of this process is a statistical parametric
mapthat displays significant contrast-related activity across the
brain, quantified using t-statistics — the magnitude of the mean
difference between AandB, scaled by model error. Traditionally,
brainregionsshowingsignificantlymoreactivityin Arelativeto
Bare represented with a gradient of ‘hot’ colors (red to yellow),
while regions that are more active during BthanAare represented
byagradientof‘cool’colors(bluetogreen).Suchcontrast-based
analyses arestandard forfMRI [ 39,52,103]. Allresults wereFDR-
corrected( q<.05)andthresholdedforaminimumclusterextent
of 20 voxels.
5 RESULTS
We analyze our results with respect to four research questions:
RQ1.Do self reports claim code writing is like prose writing?
RQ2.Does the brain treat code writing like prose writing?
RQ3.What low-level features explain code and prose writing?
RQ4.What high-level features explain code and prose writing?
To guide the interpretation of our results, we consider an infor-
malmodelinwhichlongresponsecoding(thetaskwestudiedthat
is most indicative of coding practice) is made up of the iterative,low-level selection of individual pieces of syntax guided by top-
downcontrol.Thatis,writingasmallprocedure(thelongresponse
task)consistsofrepeatedlywritingthenextindividualword(the
fill-in-the-blanktask)whileguidedbyahigher-levelgoal.Exam-ining the FITB task sheds light on the lower-level basis for code
writing, while examining the LR task may illuminate aspects of
higher-level “creativity” at the heart of software engineering.
In our fMRI analyses, after filtering incomplete and noisy brain
scans, we used data from 24 (8 female, 16 male) of the 30 partici-
pantsinourexperiment.Whenreportingpatternsofneuralactivity
wemakeuseofthestandardBrodmannanatomicalclassification
system, which divides the brain into 52 areas (BA 1 through BA52) [
43] based on cytoarchitectural (i.e., cellular-level) similarity.
ThefMRIresultsdiscussedinthissectionareobtainedfollowing
the contrast-based analysis methodology described in Section 4.
5.1 RQ1 — Self-Reporting on Code and Prose
Weconductedaqualitativeanalysisofparticipants’self-reported
post survey data. Of our 30 participants, 26 provided their inter-
pretationsof similaritiesbetween proseand codewritingtasks in
the post survey. Over a third (38.5%) of these participants reported
some similarity between code writing and prose writing. Repre-sentative examples include explaining how “filling in the blank
683Figure5:Codewritingvs.prosewritingcontrast.Hottercol-
ors indicate greater t-values (i.e., more activity during cod-
ing relative to prose).
was like adding variables in code” (we investigate such similarities
in Section 5.3) and that both tasks “use logic” (we consider men-tal representations and problem solving in Section 5.4). Another
participantattributedsimilaritybetweenthetwotaskstohaving
“alreadyformed”an ideaofthesolutionthat hadonlytobetrans-
lated to text (we consider working memory and attentional control
in Section 5.2).
Asourimagingresultswillreveal,thesesubjectivereportsdonot
alignwithmeasurementsoftheneuralcorrelatesofcodeandprose
writing.Unreliable self-reportingis well-establishedin bothcom-
puter science [ 31,41,52,96] and psychology [ 66,90], highlighting
the need to augment surveys with more objective metrics.
5.2 RQ2 — Code Writing vs. Prose Writing
Weinvestigatewhetherthereare generaldifferencesinneuralac-
tivitybetweenwritingcodeandwritingprose.Wethusconsider
all of our code writing tasks (FITB and LR) against all of our prose
writingtasks(FITBandLR).ThisbroaderCode >Prosecontrast,
shown in Figure 5, revealed a widely-distributed set of brain re-gions showing significantly greater activity when writing code.
Only significant regions are shown: the colors correspond to the t
statistic,whichmeasuresthesizeofthedifferencerelativetothe
variation in the sample data ( tvalues closer to 0 are not significant
after FDR-correction). While care must be taken when comparing
such statistics across experiments, as an example baseline we note
thatthegreatest t-valuereportedinHuang etal.’sfMRIstudyof
datastructuresandspatialabilitywas2 .0≤t≤4.2[52,Fig.5].We
view our 2 .4≤t≤6.2 contrast as a very strong result.
In detail, a particularly large cluster peaked near the left post-
central gyrus and superior parietal lobule (BA 5), extending for-
ward through the primary motor cortex (BA 4) and the premo-
tor/supplementarymotorcortex(BA6).Thispatternwasalsoob-
servedintherighthemisphere,albeityieldingsomewhatsmaller
differencesinactivity(reflectedinthesmaller t-statistics).However,
therighthemispherediddemonstratemorediffuseactivitythrough
the lateral prefrontal cortex, including the superior and middle
frontalgyri(BA9–10).Therighthemispherefurthershowedwiderclustersofactivityinthelateraltemporo-occipitalandtemporopari-
etal cortex, spanning from the inferior and middle temporal gyridorsally to the angular gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, and inferior
parietal lobule (BA 18–19, 39–40). Finally, we observed comparable
patternsofactivityinbilateralanteriorinsula(BA13)andacross
Figure 6: Fill-in-the-blank code vs. fill-in-the-blank prosecontrast.Hottercolorsindicatemoreactivityduringcodingrelative to prose; cooler colors indicate the reverse.
the midline of the brain, particularly the medial face of the sup-
plementary motor area (BA 6) and the cingulum (both middle and
anterior; BA 24, 32).
We find a significant (2 .4≤t≤6.2) and widely-distributed
difference in neural activity between code writing and prose
writing in general. The brain does nottreat code writing and
prose writing as similar tasks.
5.3 RQ3 — Code and Prose Foundations
Having established that the brain treats code writing and prose
writingdifferently,we focus attentiononour lower-leveltasks to
explainthatdifference.WethusconsiderthecontrastFITBCode
>FITB Prose, shown in Figure 6. While there was considerable
overlapbetweenthiscontrastandthegeneralCode >Proseanal-
ysis (informally, we expect some similarity between writing one
word and writing a full sentence), we find that focusing on FITB
Code>FITB Prose reveals even stronger ( −5.1≤t≤−4.2 and
2.3≤t≤7.0;conservativelythresholdedformultiplecomparisons)
differences in activity across a number of regions. For example, we
observedstrongbilateralactivityacrosstheentiretyofbothprecen-tralandpostcentralgyri(i.e.,theprimarymotorandsomatosensory
cortices, respectively; BA 1–4). While these areas are essential for
somatomotor function, they are not cognitive — that is, activity
intheseregionsdoesnotdirectlyinvolve‘thought’or‘planning’.
Theseaspectsofmotorbehavioraregenerallysupportedbythedor-
sal premotor cortex and (pre-)supplementary motor area (BA 6, 8),
whichshowsignificantlygreaterbilateralactivitywhenperforming
FITBCodevs.Prosetrials. Thissuggeststhattheproductionofevena
single element of code may require more careful, top-down control to
effectivelyplanandproduceacontext-relevantanswer. Thisisfurther
supported by significant differences in activity along the frontaleye fields, including the prefrontal eye fields and supplementary
eyefields (BA 8–9):these regions are known tohelp guide theeyestowardrelevantstimulusfeaturestogenerateanappropriatemotor
plan [49, 116].
We additionally observed significant increases in activity within
otherregionscomprisingtheso-called‘dorsalattentionnetwork’
(of which the frontal eye fields are a part). This includes the su-
periorparietallobuleandintraparietalsulcus(BA7)—structures
criticalforguidingandmaintainingattentioninatop-downfash-
ion [23,61]. Although not part of the dorsal attention network,
the bilateral activity found in the anterior insula (BA 13) furthersupports the notion that FITB Code likely requires more careful
684Figure 7: Long response code vs. long response prose con-
trast.Hottercolorsindicatemoreactivityduringcodingrel-ative to prose; cooler colors indicate the reverse. This rep-resentsastrongandexcitingresult:asignificantlateralizeddifferencebetweenprosewriting(canonicallefthemispherelanguage areas) and code writing (right hemisphere atten-tion, memory, planning and spatial ability areas).
monitoringoftherelevantinformationneededtoprovidetheap-
propriate response.
Finally,wenotesignificantdifferencesinactivityalongposterior
temporal/occipital-temporal regions.In general, theseappear left
dominant,althoughbilateralactivationsemergedintheposterior
superior temporal gyrus and superior temporal sulcus (BA 21–
22). Interestingly, we also observed bilateral activity in the ventral
temporalcortex,includingthefusiformgyrus(BA20,37).Whilethefusiformgyrusisperhapsbestknownforitsroleinfaceperception,
it (along with other areas of the ventral temporal cortex) is also
heavilyinvolvedinstimuluscategorization,particularlyforstimuli
with which one has developed expertise. This poses the possibility
thatcode—despitebeingacollectionofnumbers,letters,andwords
— is nevertheless treated as a categorically distinct visual stimulus
compared to English prose.
At a low level, writing code requires significantly ( −5.1≤t≤
−4.2and2.3≤t≤7.0)moreactivityinpartsofthebrainassoci-
atedwithcarefultop-downcontrol,planning,andcategorization
than does writing prose.
5.4 RQ4—High-LevelCodingvs.ProseWriting
Finally, but perhaps most excitingly, we analyze long response
code and prose writing tasks. Long response tasks (i.e., writing an
entire method) are the most indicative of critical aspects of real-
worldsoftwareengineering.Ifweconsiderlongresponsecodingto
includeboththeiterativeproductionofsinglecodeelementsaswellastop-downattentionalcoveroftheoverarchingprocess,thenany
difference betweenthis analysis andRQ3 reveals theneurological
correlates of that high-level “creativity” in coding.
Figure7showstheLRCode >LRProsetrialscontrast.Thisanaly-
sisremainsstronglysignificant( −7.0≤t≤−3.1and3.5≤t≤5.8;
conservatively thresholded for multiple comparisons) and more
precisely pinpoints particular regions. Note how the regions asso-
ciated with high t-values (hotter colors, more active for code than
prose) are largely localized to the right side of the brain. Dually,note how the left hemisphere largely features regions with verylow
t-values (cooler colors, more active for prose than code). In
cognitive neuroscience, such a left vs. right distinction is calledlateralization.Thesecontrast-basedresultsprovidepowerfulevi-
dence that the production of code vs. prose relies on highly distinct
cognitive substrates.
Prose production was strongly associated with left temporal re-
gions classically associated with natural language (which is almost
entirely left-lateralized in right-handed individuals). Namely, wesaw increased recruitment of the middle temporal gyrus (MTG)
and superior temporal gyrus (STG) (BA 21–22). The left MTG has
previouslybeenshowntoactivatewhenaccessingsemanticaspects
oflanguageandisthoughttosupportalexiconofwords[ 59,82].
The STG extends into Wernicke’s area, which is notably the pri-
marycenteroflanguagecomprehension[ 21].Althoughitgenerally
appears most active during comprehension of spokenlanguage,
the act of writing often involves a sort of internal narration thatmay similarly recruit these regions. This is further supported by
increasedactivationofthecalcarine(visual)cortex,particularlythe
lingualgyrusalongtherightmedialwall(BA17–18).Thelingual
gyrus, while not playing a role in higher-order language processes
perse, is often associated with the recognition of letters and words,
perhapscontributingtotheirsemanticunderstanding[ 72].Wealso
observed a small cluster of activity in the inferior frontal gyrus
(BA44)—partofBroca’sarea,whichunderliestheproductionof
language(although,again,ismorecommonlylinkedtospeech)[ 37].
Code production, by contrast, was largely right-lateralized. The
exception to this observation was a bilateral activation of the su-
perior parietal lobule, extending dorsolaterally into the precuneus
along the midline (BA 7). The superior parietal lobule (see Sec-
tion 5.3) is involved in top-down control processes related to atten-
tion and memory; the precuneus is associated with processes such
asmentalimagery[ 118].Similarly,weobservedrighttemporaland
temporoparietal activations along a number of regions supporting
visual association (tying visual information together) and other
forms of mental imagery, including spatial cognition (BA 19, 39).
The angular gyrus, in particular, may support various aspects of
spatial and mathematical reasoning, including the manipulation of
mental representations and other aspects of problem-solving [ 45].
Importantly, it is thought to act as a bridge between perception,
recognition,andaction,suggestingthatcodesynthesismayrequire
amorecomplexinterplayofunderstandingaproblemandformu-
latingacomprehensiveplantosolveit[ 100].Thisswathofactivity
extendedventrallyintoregionsoftheinferioroccipital-temporal
cortex,whichpartiallyoverlapwithclustersidentifiedbyHuang
etal.asbeingmoreactiveduringdifficultdatastructuremanipu-
lations (relative to difficult mental rotation tasks) [ 52]. Together,
thesefindingssuggestthatcodeproductionisperhapsmore‘spatial’
innature,requiringthe formulationofa mentalmapthat guides
problem-solving.
Very informally, finding activity in the (expected, standard) lan-
guage areas for prose writing gives us high confidence that wedesigned and carried out our controlled experiment correctly in
general. However, that high confidence makes the observation thatlong-formcodewritingdoesnotheavilyrecruittheseareas(instead
usingpartsofthebrainassociatedwithplanningandspatialabil-
ity)allthemorestartling.PartofthemotivationforSiegmund et
al.’spioneeringfirstuseoffMRIinsoftwareengineering[ 103]was
toprovide directevidence,one wayoranother,regardingclaims
such as Dijkstra’s that “exceptionally good mastery of one’s native
685tongue is the most vital asset of a competent programmer” [ 33].
Whilethatmaybetrueforcodereading(e.g.,comprehension[ 103]
and reviewing [ 39]), our results suggest that it is nottrue for code
writing at a neural level.
High-levellongresponsecodingissignificantlydifferent( −7.0≤
t≤−3.1 and 3.5≤t≤5.8) from prose writing. Prose writing
involves areas of the brain canonically associated with language.
Coding involves a different set of right-lateralized regions as-
sociated with attention, memory, planning, and spatial ability.
This provides the first evidence of significant neural differences
betweenprosewriting (whichisneurallysimilartonaturallan-
guage) and code writing (which, we find, is not).
5.5 Summary of Results
At a high level, an analysis of all code writing tasks against all
prosewritingtasksshowedthatthetwooperateviadistinctneuralmechanisms.Weanalyzedthesedifferencesatamoregranularlevelbyconsideringimagingdatafromtasksofthesametype(i.e.,FITB,LR).TheFITBCode>FITBProsecontrastestablishedthelow-levelcognitivefeaturesdistincttocodewriting:brainregionsassociated
withtop-downcontrol,planning,andcategorization.Subsequent
analysesofLRtasks revealedaclear lateralizeddistinctionbetween
codewritingandprosewriting.Largely,wefoundthatcodewriting
involves right hemisphere brain regions involved in spatial ability
and planning while prose writing involves the canonical left hemi-
sphere regions associated with language production. In additionto supporting previous medical imaging studies of prose writing
andsoftwareengineeringtasks,thesefindingsintroduceanewand
alternativerelationshipbetweencodeandproseinwhichreading
and writing are notsimilar (cf. [33, 39, 103]).
6 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Ourchoiceofwritingtaskspresentsafirstpotentialthreattothe
validity of our experiment. While various forms of code writing
existinsoftwareengineeringcontexts(e.g.,testing,debugging),we
restricted our task set to prompted code writing tasks. We mitigate
thethreat thatthis limitedbenchmark posesviaour robustexper-
imentaldesign,wherebyparticipantscompletedifferenttypesof
writing tasks (i.e., FITB, LR). We further address this concern by
including a variety of fundamental programming concepts (e.g.,
bothcontrol-anddata-flowoperations)inourselectedcodingtasks
indicative of many real-world coding tasks. Nevertheless, our re-
sults may not generalize to all in-the-wild programming; we leave
a more thorough investigation to future research.
Secondly, the design of our tasks may have impacted our ability
to measure brain activity strictly associated with code and prose
writing.Forexample,ourstimuliincludedwritteninstructionsthat
participantsreadbeforetypingtheirresponses.Thisconstruction
introduces the possibility that we measure brain activity beyond
strictly writingresponses. We designed ourcontrast-based exper-
iment to mitigate this threat. As fMRI analyses are subtractive
(described above in Section 5), the effects of reading the prompt
cancel out, leaving only the differences between prose writing and
codewriting.Ho wever,wenote thatdifferencesexist intheprompt
textcontainedinFITBstimuli(i.e.,ProseFITBandCodeFITBtasksrequire the participant to read prose and code, respectively, see
Figures2aand2c).Overall,wemaintainthatFITBtasksmeasure
the process of low-level selection of individual code elements, a
distinct activity to pure comprehension.
Lastly, our results may be limited by our participant cohort. For
thisexperiment,werecruitedundergraduateandgraduatestudents
withanaverageof5.2semestersofprogrammingexperience.Thus,
our results may not extend to programmers with different back-
groundsorexpertise.Indeed,previousfMRIstudieshaveinvesti-
gatedtheroleofexpertiseanddemographicsindetail(e.g.,[ 18,39]).
Weclaimnosignificantfindingsregardingindividualdifferences
and report results for our participants as a whole.
7 RELATED WORK
In this section we place our contributions in context, comparing
our technique and results to other approaches.
7.1 Medical Imaging and Software Engineering
Asof2019,theapplicationofmedicalimagingtounderstandthe
cognitive processes associated with computer science is still inits infancy. In a 2014 study, Siegmund et al.were the first to use
fMRI in the context of software engineering, identifying five brain
regions associated with code comprehension [ 103]. Peitek et al.
conducted follow up studies of program comprehension, using
fMRItostudyprogrammers’cognitiveload[ 83]andtheneuraleffi-
ciencyoftop-downandbottom-upmethods[ 85].Researchershave
also adopted alternative medical imaging modalities to study code
comprehension, including functional near-infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS)[36,75],electroencephalography(EEG)[ 25,63],andelec-
tromyography(EMG)[ 79];weselectedfMRIinpartbecauserecent
researchsuggestsitisnecessarytofindneuralcorrelatesofsome
subtle programming activities [52].
Ofthepreviousmedicalimagingstudiesofsoftwareengineering,
weconsiderFloyd etal.’sinvestigationofcodecomprehension,code
review, and prose review to be the closest to our work. Their study
contrasted the cognitive processes of code and prose review tasks,
finding the neural representations of natural and programming
languagestobedistinct,butthatthosedifferencesaremodulatedby
expertise [ 39]. However, no previous study, including Floyd et al.’s
work, hasused fMRIto studycode writing. Floyd et al.’s previous
useofnaturallanguageasa baseline,combinedwithHuang etal.’s
findings on the importance of fMRI’s spatial resolution to study
software engineering tasks [ 52], serves as supporting evidence for
our experimental design.
7.2 Code Writing and Cognition
Developing methods to make code writing more productive, ac-
curate,andaccessiblehaslongbeenasoftwareengineeringgoal.
Such methods are often motivated by an understanding of pro-
gramming psychology, such as block-style languages designed for
younger ages (e.g., Scratch [ 93]) and IDEs intended to increase
productivity [108].
Researchersfromasearlyasthe1950shavesoughttounderstand
the psychology of writing code. Early efforts focused on cognitive
load [14], psycholinguistic theory [ 105], and expertise [ 46,117],
amongothertopics.In1977,Brooksproposedanentiretheoryof
686programming behavior oriented toward explaining transcriptions
of participants asked to talk aloud while performing programming
tasks[13].Morerecentwork includesstudiesonhowexpertsand
novices classify algorithms [ 78,114] and programmers’ use of the
Web whenwriting code[12]. Incontrast toour work, allprevious
studiesusedobservationaltechniques(i.e.,theywereunabletotake
advantage of medical imaging).
7.3 Prose Writing and Cognition
Like code writing, early research dedicated to the cognitive pro-
cesses of prose writing was conducted without medical imaging.Similar to Brooks’ theoretical framework of the coding process,Hayes and Flowers proposed a theory of the cognitive processes
of writing in 1981 [ 38]. Research in the field continued throughout
the 80’s and 90’s, focusing on more nuanced aspects of prose writ-
ingcognition,includingsecond-languageproficiency[ 26,64]and
studies on gaining writing expertise (e.g., [6]).
Unlikecodewriting,researchershavesinceleveragedmedical
imaging to establish objective models of the prose writing process
and have used such an understanding to improve prose writing as
a whole. Menon and Desmond were among the first to use fMRI to
understand prose writing. Their study, in which participants wrote
bydictationinanfMRImachine,foundactivationinonlytheleft
hemisphere, particularly the left superior parietal lobe [ 73]. Our
studysimilarlyfoundactivationinlefttemporalregionforprose,
butalsofoundtherighttemporalregiontobeassociatedwithcode
writing.Shah etal.laterusedfMRItostudytheneuralcorrelates
ofcreativewritingwithanexperimentthatseparatedthe“brain-
storming”phaseofprosewritingfrom“theactofwritinganewand
creative continuation of a given literary text” [ 101]. We consider
this more analogous to the planning and implementation stages of
the software engineering lifecycle, and note that our experiments
cover the act of code writing but not explicit planning.
Therehasalsobeenparticularinterestinstudyingthespecial-
ization of writing-specific brain regions. Sugihara et al.studied the
brain’swritingcenterduringbothleft-andright-handedwriting
tasks[111],identifyingregionscrucialtothecoreprocessofwrit-
ing.Planton etal.lateridentifiedbrainregionsthatareconsistently
involvedinprosewritingtasks,aswellasdifferencesinbrainac-
tivationacrosswriting,drawing,andoralspelling[ 89].Similarly,
Purcellet al.studied the neural basis of spelling and its relation
that of reading: their study used a QWERTY keyboard to study
prosewritingwithfMRI[ 92]. However, theirexperimentaldesign
was restricted to typing single words by dictation and without the
participants having any live feedback while typing.
Historically, the development of a fundamental, neurological
understandingofotheractivities,suchasprosewriting,hasproved
usefulasaguideinpedagogyandresearch.BerningerandWinn
creditadvancedbrain-imagingtechnologiesastheprimarydevelop-
ment near the end of the 20th century that reformed prose writing
research and education [ 10]. Examples of brain imaging contribut-
ing to pedagogy include the use of verbal and non-verbal cues and
strategiestoimprovelearning[ 51,58],aswellasteachingsuchcues
andstrategiestoovercomeinefficienciesintemporally-constrained
verbal working memory [ 112]. In comparison, researchers lack a
corresponding fundamental understanding of code writing thatmight illuminate new ways to improve code writing skills. Our
workispartiallymotivatedbythebeliefthatsuchafoundational
understanding could guide more focused training and teaching
strategies for code writing.
7.4 Code Writing and Prose Writing
Despiteapparentdifferences(e.g.,syntax)betweenprosewriting
andcodewriting,previousresearchhasfoundconnectionsbetween
the two activities. Such research largely focuses on the use of code
writing or prose writing as a tool in the instruction of the other.
Kelleher and Pausch conducted a seminal study to investigate
this pedagogical approach in 2007, using the Storytelling Alice pro-
grammingenvironmenttoinspiremiddleschoolgirls’interestin
programming [ 56]. Later, Burke extended this work to a formal
classroom setting with the language Scratch, highlighting the simi-
laritiesinproduct,process,andperceptionbetweenthecodeand
prose writing [16].
In the other direction, in a 2010 study, Burke and Kafai used
computer program writing to help children develop their story-telling and creative writing abilities [
17]. The study highlighted
theshared characteristicsof sequence,structure, andclarity ofex-
pression between thetwo activities, and emphasized the utilityof
programming as a means of reflecting on the storytelling process.
These studies form a call to arms for a more thorough investiga-
tion into the relationship between code and prose production, but
nopreviouspaperhasexaminedthatfundamentalwritingrelation-
ship using medical imaging. The stark differences that we present
betweentheneurologicalrepresentationsofcodeandprosewrit-
ing,inlightofthesimilaritiesreportedbythesepreviousstudies,
highlight the need for such quantitative research.
8 CONCLUSION
Over the decades, researchers from Dijkstra and Pausch to Pea and
Kurland,amongmanyothers,havemadeobservationalinvestiga-
tionsinto,theoriesof,andcallstoarmsregardingthepsychological
aspects of programming. Understanding cognition hashelped im-
prove prose reading, prose writing, and code reading — but code
writing has lacked neurologically-grounded, indicative research.
Indeed,sincethefirstfMRIstudyofsoftwareengineeringfiveyearsago,therehavebeenfewerthanadozenfMRIexperimentsreported
at major SE conferences [22, 34, 36, 39, 52, 53, 75, 84, 84, 103, 104].
We present the first fMRI study of code writing. We employ a
controlled,contrast-basedexperimentinwhichcodewriting,prose
writing,fill-in-the-blankandlongresponsetasksarepresentedto
participants,whomakeuseofaspecialfMRI-safekeyboardtotype
their responses in a realistic live editing setting.
We report three primary results. First, there is a significant and
widely-distributed difference in neural activity between code writ-
ing and prose writing in general: the brain does nottreat code
writing and prose writing as similar tasks. Second, at a low level
(i.e., producing a single word or code element), writing code re-
quires significantly more activity in brain areas associated with
careful, top-down control, planning and categorization: despite su-
perficialsimilarity,codeappearstobeacategoricallydistinctvisual
stimulus compared to prose. Third, and most excitingly, high-level
longresponsecoding—thestudiedtaskperhapsmostindicative
687ofreal-worldprogramming—issignificantlydifferentfromprose
writing.Whileprosewritinginvolvesleft-brainregionscanonically
associated with language, we find a sharp lateralized distinction:
code writing does notsignificantly recruit those regions compared
to prose writing, instead showing activation in right-brain areas
associated with attention, memory, planning and spatial ability.
Whilepreviousstudieshavefoundthatcodeandprose readingmay
be similar at an observational or neurological level, we present
thefirstevidencesuggestingthatcodeandprose writingare
quite dissimilar at the neurological level .Thisunexpectedre-
sult—thattheproductionofcodeandproserelyonhighlydistinctcognitive substrates — though quite preliminary, paves the way for
future investigations analogous to those based on medical imag-ing for prose writing. In addition to developing a foundational
understandingofcode-writing,thisempiricaldistinctionmaybe
leveragedtodeveloptoolsandpedagogies(e.g.,transfertraining),
subsequently affecting large scale workforce retraining and edu-cational reform. Moreover, neurological evidence that code and
prosewritingarenotasintertwinedasconventionallythoughtmay
encourage more diverse participation in computer science.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Kevin Angstadt, Ian Bertram, Madeline Endres, Michael
Flanagan, Nicholas McKay, and Zohreh Sharafi for their help man-
aging participants and with feedback and revisions to early drafts.
REFERENCES
[1]B. P. Acevedo, E. N. Aron, A. Aron, M.-D. Sangster, N. Collins, and L. L. Brown.
The highly sensitive brain: an fMRI study of sensory processing sensitivity and
response to others’ emotions. Brain and behavior, 4(4):580–594, 2014.
[2]D.ArnowandO.Barshay. On-lineprogrammingexaminationsusingwebto
teach. InConferenceonInnovationandTechnologyinComputerScienceEducation,
pages 21–24, 1999.
[3]D. Arnow and G. Weiss. Turing’s craft. In https://www.turingscraft.com/ , 2019.
[4]M.Atherton,J.Zhuang,W.M.Bart,X.Hu,andS.He. AfunctionalMRIstudyof
high-levelcognition.I.Thegameofchess. CognitiveBrainResearch,16(1):26–31,
2003.
[5]D. S. Bassett, N. F. Wymbs, M. A. Porter, P. J. Mucha, J. M. Carlson, and S. T.
Grafton. Dynamicreconfigurationofhumanbrainnetworksduringlearning.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(18):7641–7646, 2011.
[6]A. Beaufort. Learning the trade: A social apprenticeship model for gaining
writing expertise. Written communication, 17(2):185–223, 2000.
[7]M. Behroozi, A. Lui, I. Moore, D. Ford, and C. Parnin. Dazed: measuring thecognitive load of solving technical interview problems at the whiteboard. In
InternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering:NewIdeasandEmergingResults
(ICSE NIER), pages 93–96, 2018.
[8]C.M.Bennett,M.Miller,andG.L.Wolford. Neuralcorrelatesofinterspecies
perspectivetakinginthepost-mortematlanticsalmon:Anargumentforproper
multiple comparisons correction. NeuroImage, 47, July 2009.
[9]V. W. Berninger, T. L. Richards, P. S. Stock, R. D. Abbott, P. A. Trivedi, L. E.
Altemeier, and J. R. Hayes. fMRI activation related to nature of ideas generated
anddifferencesbetweengoodandpoorwritersduringideageneration. In BJEP
Monograph Series II, Number 6-Teaching and Learning Writing , volume 77, pages
77–93. British Psychological Society, 2009.
[10]V. W. Berninger and W. Winn. Implications of advancements in brain research
andtechnologyforwritingdevelopment,writinginstruction,andeducational
evolution. Handbook of writing research, pages 96–114, 2006.
[11]J. L. Booth and R. S. Siegler. Numerical magnitude representations influence
arithmetic learning. Child Development, 79(4):1016–1031, 2008.
[12]J.Brandt,P.J.Guo,J.Lewenstein,M.Dontcheva,andS.R.Klemmer. Twostudiesofopportunisticprogramming:interleavingwebforaging,learning,andwriting
code. InConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1589–1598,
2009.
[13]R.Brooks. Towardsatheory ofthecognitive processesin computerprogram-
ming.International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 9(6):737–751, 1977.
[14]J. S. Bruner, J. J. Goodnow, and G. A. Austin. A study of thinking. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1956.[15]J. A. Bugos, W. M. Perlstein, C. S. McCrae, T. S. Brophy, and P. H. Bedenbaugh.
Individualizedpianoinstruction enhancesexecutivefunctioningandworking
memory in older adults. Aging and Mental Health, 11(4):464–471, 2007.
[16]Q.Burke.Themarkingsofanewpencil:Introducingprogramming-as-writingin
the middle school classroom. Journal of Media Literacy Education, 4(2):121–135,
2012.
[17]Q.BurkeandY.B.Kafai. Programming&storytelling:opportunitiesforlearning
about coding & composition. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Interaction Design and Children, pages 348–351. ACM, 2010.
[18]T.Busjahn,R.Bednarik,A.Begel,M.Crosby,J.H.Paterson,C.Schulte,B.Sharif,
and S. Tamm. Eye movements in code reading: Relaxing the linear order. In
International Conference on Program Comprehension, pages 255–265, 2015.
[19]R. Cabeza, S. M. Daselaar, F. Dolcos, S. E. Prince, M. Budde, and L. Nyberg.
Task-independentandtask-specificageeffectsonbrainactivityduringworking
memory, visual attention and episodic retrieval. Cerebral Cortex, 14(4):364–375,
2004.
[20]S. Caminiti. AT&T’s $1 billion gambit: Retraining nearly half its workforce for
jobsofthefuture. In https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/13/atts-1-billion-gambit-
retraining-nearly-half-its-workforce.html , Mar 2018.
[21]R. Campbell. The processing of audio-visual speech: empirical and neuralbases.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
363(1493):1001–1010, 2007.
[22]J.Castelhano,I.C.Duarte,C.Ferreira,J.Duraes,H.Madeira,andM.Castelo-
Branco. TheRole of the Insula in Intuitive ExpertBug Detection in Computer
Code: An fMRI Study. Brain Imaging and Behavior, May 2018.
[23]M.Corbetta,G.L.Shulman,F.M.Miezin,andS.E.Petersen. Superiorparietal
cortex activation during spatial attention shifts and visual feature conjunction.
Science, 270(5237):802–805, 1995.
[24]K. Costello and G. Omale. Gartner says global it spending to reach $3.8 trillion
in 2019. In https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2019-01-28-
gartner-says-global-it-spending-to-reach--3-8-trillio , Jan 2019.
[25]I. Crk, T. Kluthe, and A. Stefik. Understanding programming expertise: an
empiricalstudyofphasicbrainwavechanges. TransactionsonComputer-Human
Interaction, 23(1):2, 2016.
[26]A. Cumming. Writing expertise and second-language proficiency. Language
learning, 39(1):81–135, 1989.
[27]C.Cutter. AmazontoretrainathirdofitsU.S.workforce. In https://www.wsj.
com/articles/amazon-to-retrain-a-third-of-its-u-s-workforce-11562841120 , Jul
2019.
[28]R. G. Cuya, G. Nivera, and E. C. Fortes. The use of non-math analogies in
teaching mathematics. The Normal Lights, 11(1), 2017.
[29]E.Dahlin,A.S.Neely,A.Larsson,L.Bäckman,andL.Nyberg. Transferoflearn-
ingafterupdatingtrainingmediatedbythestriatum. Science,320(5882):1510–
1512, 2008.
[30]B.DeSmedt,D.Ansari,R.H.Grabner,M.M.Hannula,M.Schneider,andL.Ver-
schaffel. Cognitive neuroscience meets mathematics education. Educational
Research Review, 5(1):97–105, 2010.
[31]N. Dell, V. Vaidyanathan, I. Medhi, E. Cutrell, and W. Thies. Yours is better!:
participantresponsebiasinHCI. In HumanFactorsinComputingSystems,pages
1321–1330. ACM, 2012.
[32]J.DiedrichsenandR.Shadmehr. DetectingandadjustingforartifactsinfMRI
time series data. NeuroImage, 27(3):624–634, 2005.
[33]E. Dijkstra. How do we tell truths that might hurt? In Selected Writings on
Computing: A Personal Perspective, pages 129–131. Springer, 1982.
[34]J. Duraes, H. Madeira, J. Castelhano, C. Duarte, and M. C. Branco. WAP: Un-
derstandingtheBrainatSoftwareDebugging. In InternationalSymposiumon
Software Reliability Engineering, pages 87–92, 2016.
[35]R. English and G. Edwards. Programming as a writing activity. Computing
Teacher, 11(6):46–47, 1984.
[36]S. Fakhoury, Y. Ma, V. Arnaoudova, and O. Adesope. The effect of poor source
code lexicon and readability on developers’ cognitive load. In International
Conference on Program Comprehension, pages 286–296, 2018.
[37]A.Flinker,A.Korzeniewska,A.Y.Shestyuk,P.J.Franaszczuk,N.F.Dronkers,
R. T. Knight, and N. E. Crone. Redefining the role of Broca’s area in speech.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(9):2871–2875, 2015.
[38]L. Flower and J. R. Hayes. A cognitive process theory of writing. College
Composition and Communication, 32(4):365–387, 1981.
[39]B. Floyd, T. Santander, and W. Weimer. Decoding the representation of codein the brain: An fMRI study of code review and expertise. In International
Conference on Software Engineering, pages 175–186, 2017.
[40]M.Fowler. Refactoring:improvingthedesignofexistingcode. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2018.
[41]Z.P. Fry,B.Landau,and W.Weimer. Ahumanstudyofpatch maintainability.
InInternational Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, pages 177–187,
2012.
[42]W.D.Gaillard,B.C.Sachs,J.R.Whitnah,Z.Ahmad,L.M.Balsamo,J.R.Petrella,S.H.Braniecki,C.M.McKinney,K.Hunter,B.Xu,etal. Developmentalaspects
oflanguageprocessing:fMRIofverbalfluency inchildrenandadults. Human
688Brain Mapping, 18(3):176–185, 2003.
[43]L.J.Garey. Brodmann’s“LocalisationintheCerebralCortex”. WorldScientific,
2006.
[44]G.H.Glover. Overviewoffunctionalmagneticresonanceimaging. Neurosurgery
Clinics, 22(2):133–139, 2011.
[45]R.H.Grabner,A.Ischebeck,G.Reishofer,K.Koschutnig,M.Delazer,F.Ebner,
and C. Neuper. Fact learning in complex arithmetic and figural-spatial tasks:
The role of the angular gyrus and its relation to mathematical competence.
Human brain mapping, 30(9):2936–2952, 2009.
[46]E. E. Grant and H. Sackman. An exploratory investigation of programmer
performanceunderon-lineandoff-lineconditions. IEEETransactionsonHuman
Factors in Electronics, (1):33–48, 1967.
[47]L. W. Gregg and E. R. Steinberg. Cognitive processes in writing. Routledge, 2016.
[48]J.Halberda,M.M.Mazzocco,andL.Feigenson. Individualdifferencesinnon-
verbal number acuity correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455(7213):665,
2008.
[49]H. R. Heekeren, S. Marrett, P. A. Bandettini, and L. G. Ungerleider. A gen-
eral mechanism for perceptual decision-making in the human brain. Nature,
431(7010):859, 2004.
[50]Y.Higashiyama,K. Takeda,Y.Someya,Y.Kuroiwa,andF.Tanaka. Theneural
basis of typewriting: A functional MRI study. PLOS ONE, 10(7):1–20, 07 2015.
[51]S.R.Hooper,L.-J.C.Costa,M.McBee,K.L.Anderson,D.C.Yerby,A.Childress,
and S. B. Knuth. A written language intervention for at-risk second grade
students: a randomized controlled trial of the process assessment of the learner
lessonplansinatier2response-to-intervention(RtI)model. AnnalsofDyslexia,
63(1):44–64, 2013.
[52]Y. Huang, X. Liu, R. Krueger, T. Santander, X. Hu, K. Leach, and W. Weimer.
DistillingneuralrepresentationsofdatastructuremanipulationusingfMRIandfNIRS. In InternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering,pages396–407,2019.
[53]Y. Ikutani and H. Uwano. Brain activity measurement during program compre-
hensionwithNIRS. In SoftwareEngineering,ArtificialIntelligence,Networking
and Parallel/Distributed Computing, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2014.
[54]G.A.James,G.He,andY.Liu. Afull-sizeMRI-compatiblekeyboardresponse
system.Neuroimage, 25(1):328–31, Mar. 2005.
[55]L. Kaufmann, S. E. Vogel, G. Wood, C. Kremser, M. Schocke, L.-B. Zimmerhackl,
andJ.W.Koten. AdevelopmentalfMRIstudyofnonsymbolicnumericaland
spatial processing. Cortex, 44(4):376–385, 2008.
[56]C. Kelleher and R.Pausch. Using storytelling to motivate programming. Com-
munications of the ACM, 50(7):58–64, 2007.
[57]R.T.Kellogg. Trainingwritingskills:Acognitivedevelopmentalperspective.
Journal of Writing Research, 1(1):1–26, 2008.
[58]R.T.KelloggandA.P.Whiteford. Trainingadvancedwritingskills:Thecase
for deliberate practice. Educational Psychologist, 44(4):250–266, 2009.
[59]D. Kemmerer. Word classes in the brain: Implications of linguistic typology for
cognitive neuroscience. Cortex, 58:27–51, 2014.
[60]D.E.Knuth. Theartofcomputerprogramming,volume3. PearsonEducation,
1997.
[61]M. Koenigs, A. K. Barbey, B. R. Postle, and J. Grafman. Superior parietal cortex
iscriticalfor themanipulationofinformation inworkingmemory. Journalof
Neuroscience, 29(47):14980–14986, 2009.
[62]K.LanderlandC.Kölle. Typicalandatypicaldevelopmentofbasicnumerical
skillsinelementaryschool. JournalofExperimentalChildPsychology,103(4):546–
565, 2009.
[63]S.Lee,A.Matteson,D.Hooshyar,S.Kim,J.Jung,G.Nam,andH.Lim.Comparing
programminglanguagecomprehensionbetweennoviceandexpertprogram-
mers using EEG analysis. In International Conference on Bioinformatics and
Bioengineering, pages 350–355, Oct 2016.
[64]I. Leki. Building expertise through sequenced writing assignments. Teachers of
English to Speakers of Other Languages Journal, 1(2):19–23, 1992.
[65]C.J.LimbandA.R.Braun. Neuralsubstratesofspontaneousmusicalperfor-
mance: An fMRI study of jazz improvisation. PLoS one, 3(2):e1679, 2008.
[66]P.MabeandS.West. Validityofself-evaluationofability:Areviewandmeta-
analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(3):280–296, 6 1982.
[67]E.A.Maguire,K.Woollett,andH.J.Spiers. Londontaxidriversandbusdrivers:
AstructuralMRIandneuropsychologicalanalysis. Hippocampus,16(12):1091–
1101, 2006.
[68] S. Maguire. Writing solid code. Greyden Press, LLC, 2013.
[69]J. B. A. Maintz and M. A. Viergever. A survey of medical image registration.
Medical Image Analysis, 2(1):1–36, 1998.
[70]R.C.Martin. Cleancode:ahandbookofagilesoftwarecraftsmanship. Pearson
Education, 2009.
[71]B. McCandliss, I. L. Beck, R. Sandak, and C. Perfetti. Focusing attention on
decoding for children with poor reading skills: Design and preliminary tests of
thewordbuildingintervention. ScientificStudiesofReading,7(1):75–104,2003.
[72]A. Mechelli, G. W. Humphreys, K. Mayall, A. Olson, and C. J. Price. Differential
effects of word length and visual contrast in the fusiform and lingual gyri
during.ProceedingsoftheRoyal Society ofLondon.SeriesB:BiologicalSciences,
267(1455):1909–1913, 2000.[73]V. Menon and J. Desmond. Left superior parietal cortex involvement in writing:
integrating fMRI with lesion evidence. Cognitive Brain Research, 12(2):337–340,
2001.
[74]M.P.Milham,K.I.Erickson,M.T.Banich,A.F.Kramer,A.Webb,T.Wszalek,
and N. J. Cohen. Attentional control in the aging brain: Insights from an fMRI
study of the Stroop task. Brain and Cognition, 49(3):277–296, 2002.
[75]T.Nakagawa,Y.Kamei,H.Uwano,A.Monden,K.Matsumoto,andD.M.German.
Quantifyingprogrammers’mentalworkloadduringprogramcomprehension
based on cerebral blood flow measurement: A controlled experiment. In Com-
panion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering,
pages 448–451, 2014.
[76]T.Nakao,A.Nakagawa,T.Yoshiura,E.Nakatani,M.Nabeyama,C.Yoshizato,
A.Kudoh,K.Tada,K.Yoshioka,M.Kawamoto,O.Togao,andS.Kanba. Brain
activation of patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder during neuropsycho-
logicalandsymptomprovocationtasksbeforeandafter symptomimprovement:
afunctionalmagneticresonanceimagingstudy. BiologicalPsychiatry,57(8):901–
910, 2005.
[77]S. Ogawa, T. M. Lee, A. R. Kay, and D. W. Tank. Brain magnetic resonanceimaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 87(24):9868–9872, 1990.
[78]T.Ormerod. Humancognitionandprogramming. In PsychologyofProgramming,
pages 63–82. Elsevier, 1990.
[79]C.Parnin. Subvocalization-towardhearingtheinnerthoughtsofdevelopers. In
International Conference on Program Comprehension, pages 197–200. IEEE, 2011.
[80]R.D.PeaandD.M.Kurland. Onthecognitiveprerequisitesoflearningcomputer
programming. Technical Report 18, Center for Children and Technology, 1983.
[81]R. D. Pea and D. M. Kurland. On the cognitive effects of learning computer
programming. New Ideas in Psychology, 2(2):137–168, 1984.
[82]M.V.Peelen,D.Romagno,andA.Caramazza. Independentrepresentationsof
verbsandactionsinleftlateraltemporalcortex. Journalofcognitiveneuroscience ,
24(10):2096–2107, 2012.
[83]N. Peitek, J. Siegmund, C. Parnin, S. Apel, and A. Brechmann. Beyond gaze:
preliminaryanalysisofpupildilationandblinkratesinanfMRIstudyofpro-
gram comprehension. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Eye Movements in
Programming, page 4. ACM, 2018.
[84]N. Peitek, J. Siegmund, C. Parnin, S. Apel, J. Hofmeister, and A. Brechmann.Simultaneous Measurement of Program Comprehension with fMRI and Eye
Tracking: A Case Study. In Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, 2018.
[85]N.Peitek,J.Siegmund,C.Parnin,S.Apel,J.Hofmeister,C.Kästner,A.Begel,
A. Bethmann, and A. Brechmann. Neural efficiency of top-down program
comprehension. Software Engineering und Software Management 2018, 2018.
[86]M.L.Pelchat,A.Johnson,R.Chan,J.Valdez,andJ.D.Ragland. Imagesofdesire:
food-craving activation during fMRI. Neuroimage, 23(4):1486–1493, 2004.
[87]S.J.PickeringandP.Howard-Jones.Educators’viewsontheroleofneuroscienceineducation:FindingsfromastudyofUKandinternationalperspectives. Mind,
Brain, and Education, 1(3):109–113, 2007.
[88]S. Planton, M. Jucla, F.-E. Roux, and J.-F. Démonet. The “handwriting brain”: a
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of motor versus orthographic processes.
Cortex, 49(10):2772–2787, 2013.
[89]S.Planton,M.Longcamp,P.Péran,J.-F.Demonet,andM.Jucla. Howspecialized
are writing-specific brain regions? an fMRI study of writing, drawing and oral
spelling. Cortex, 88:66–80, 2017.
[90]P. M. Podsakoff and D. W. Organ. Self-reports in organizational research:
Problems and prospects. Journal of Management, 12(4):531–544, 1986.
[91]PsychologySoftwareTools,Inc. E-Prime. https://pstnet.com/products/e-prime/.
[92]J.J. Purcell,E. M.Napoliello, andG.F. Eden. Acombined fMRIstudy oftyped
spelling and reading. NeuroImage, 55(2):750 – 762, 2011.
[93]M. Resnick, J. Maloney, A. Monroy-Hernández, N. Rusk, E. Eastmond, K. Bren-
nan, A. Millner, E. Rosenbaum, J. Silver, B. Silverman, and Y. Kafai. Scratch:
Programming for all. Commun. ACM, 52(11):60–67, Nov. 2009.
[94]T.L.Richards,V.W.Berninger,andM.Fayol.fMRIactivationdifferencesbetween
11-year-oldgoodandpoorspellers’accessinworkingmemorytotemporaryand
long-term orthographic representations. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 22(4):327–
353, 2009.
[95]T. L. Richards, V. W. Berninger, P. Stock, L. Altemeier, P. Trivedi, and K. R.
Maravilla. Differences between good and poor child writers on fMRI contrasts
forwritingnewlytaughtandhighlypracticedletterforms. ReadingandWriting,
24(5):493–516, 2011.
[96]S. Riley. Password security: What users know and what they actually do.
Usability News, 8(1):2833–2836, 2006.
[97]M. Ritchey, A. P. Yonelinas, and C. Ranganath. Functional connectivity rela-
tionships predict similarities in task activation and pattern information during
associative memory encoding. J. Cognitive Neuroscience, 26(5):1085–1099, May
2014.
[98]J.S. Ross,J.Tkach, P.M. Ruggieri,M.Lieber,andE. Lapresto. Themind’seye:
Functional MR imaging evaluation of golf motor imagery. American Journal of
Neuroradiology, 24(6):1036–1044, 2003.
689[99]V. Sarina and I. K. Namukasa. Nonmath analogies in teaching mathematics.
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2(2):5738–5743, 2010.
[100]M. L. Seghier. The angular gyrus: multiple functions and multiple subdivisions.
The Neuroscientist, 19(1):43–61, 2013.
[101]C. Shah, K. Erhard, H.-J. Ortheil, E. Kaza, C. Kessler, and M. Lotze. Neural
correlatesofcreativewriting:anfMRIstudy. HumanBrainMapping ,34(5):1088–
1101, 2013.
[102]Y. I. Sheline, D. M. Barch, J. M. Donnelly, J. M. Ollinger, A. Z. Snyder, and M. A.
Mintun. Increased amygdala response to masked emotional faces in depressed
subjectsresolveswithantidepressanttreatment:anfmristudy. BiologicalPsy-
chiatry, 50(9):651–658, 2001.
[103]J.Siegmund,C.Kästner,S.Apel,C.Parnin,A.Bethmann,T.Leich,G.Saake,and
A. Brechmann. Understanding understanding source code with functional mag-
neticresonanceimaging. In InternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering,
pages 378–389, 2014.
[104]J.Siegmund,N.Peitek,C.Parnin,S.Apel,J.Hofmeister,C.Kästner,A.Begel,
A. Bethmann, and A. Brechmann. Measuring Neural Efficiency of Program
Comprehension. In Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 140–150, 2017.
[105]M.Sime,T.Green,andD.Guest. Psychologicalevaluationoftwoconditional
constructionsusedincomputerlanguages. InternationalJournalofMan-Machine
Studies, 5(1):105–113, 1973.
[106]P.G.Simos,J.M.Fletcher,E.Bergman,J.Breier,B.Foorman,E.Castillo,R.Davis,
M.Fitzgerald,andA.Papanicolaou. Dyslexia-specificbrainactivationprofile
becomes normal following successful remedial training. Neurology, 58(8):1203–
1213, 2002.
[107]N.Singer. Thehardpartofcomputerscience?gettingintoclass. In https://www.
nytimes.com/2019/01/24/technology/computer-science-courses-college.html ,Jan
2019.[108]D.C.Smith. Pygmalion:acreativeprogrammingenvironment. TechnicalReport
STAN-CS-75-499, Stanford University, 1975.
[109]M.SnejbjergJensen,O.Heggli,P.Mota,andP.Vuust.Alow-costMRIcompatible
keyboard. In International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
2017.
[110]C. J. Stoodley, E. M. Valera, and J. D. Schmahmann. Functional topography
of the cerebellum for motor and cognitive tasks: an fMRI study. Neuroimage,
59(2):1560–1570, 2012.
[111]G. Sugihara, T. Kaminaga, and M. Sugishita. Interindividual uniformity and
varietyofthe“writingcenter”:afunctionalMRIstudy. Neuroimage,32(4):1837–
1849, 2006.
[112]C. Titz and J. Karbach. Working memory and executive functions: effects of
training on academic achievement. Psychological Research, 78(6):852–868, 2014.
[113]S. J. Van Rooij, E. Geuze, M. Kennis, A. R. Rademaker, and M. Vink. Neuralcorrelates of inhibition and contextual cue processing related to treatment
response in ptsd. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(3):667, 2015.
[114]M.WeiserandJ.Shertz. Programmingproblemrepresentationinnoviceand
expert programmers. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 19(4):391–
398, 1983.
[115]WellcomeTrustCentreforNeuroimaging. Statisticalparametricmapping. In
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ , Aug. 2016.
[116] S.-n. Yang, H. Hwang, J. Ford, and S. Heinen. Supplementary eye field activity
reflects a decision rule governing smooth pursuit but not the decision. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 103(5):2458–2469, 2010.
[117]E. A. Youngs. Human errors in programming. International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies, 6(3):361–376, 1974.
[118]S.ZhangandR.L.Chiang-shan. Functionalconnectivitymappingofthehuman
precuneus by resting state fmri. Neuroimage, 59(4):3548–3562, 2012.
690