A Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software
Security Patch Management
Nesara Dissanayake
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
nesara.madugodasdissanayakege@adelaide.edu.auMansooreh Zahedi
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
mansooreh.zahedi@adelaide.edu.au
Asangi Jayatilaka
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
asangi.jayatilaka@adelaide.edu.auMuhammad Ali Babar
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
ali.babar@adelaide.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Several disastrous security attacks can be attributed to delays in
patching software vulnerabilities. While researchers and practi-
tioners have paid significant attention to automate vulnerabilities
identification and patch development activities of software secu-
rity patch management, there has been relatively little effort ded-
icated to gain an in-depth understanding of the socio-technical
aspects, e.g., coordination of interdependent activities of the patch-
ing process and patching decisions, that may cause delays in ap-
plying security patches. We report on a Grounded Theory study
of the role of coordination in security patch management. The re-
ported theory consists of four inter-related dimensions, i.e., causes,
breakdowns, constraints, and mechanisms. The theory explains the
causes that define the need for coordination among interdependent
software/hardware components and multiple stakeholders’ deci-
sions, the constraints that can negatively impact coordination, the
breakdowns in coordination, and the potential corrective measures.
This study provides potentially useful insights for researchers and
practitioners who can carefully consider the needs of and devise
suitable solutions for supporting the coordination of interdepen-
dencies involved in security patch management.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →System administration ;•
Security and privacy →Software security engineering ;Vulnera-
bility management ; Social aspects of security and privacy.
KEYWORDS
software security patch management, grounded theory, socio-technical
factors, coordination
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8562-6/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468595ACM Reference Format:
Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad
Ali Babar. 2021. A Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software
Security Patch Management. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Soft-
ware Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21), August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468595
1 INTRODUCTION
Timely development and application of security patches to the iden-
tified vulnerabilities are considered critically important to avoid
potentially successful security attacks [ 45]. Delays in patching se-
curity vulnerabilities can cause significant data losses, for example,
the Equifax case [ 21,35], or even human death [ 15,43]. Increased
awareness about the potentially catastrophic consequences of de-
laying patching is leading to increased efforts aimed at improving
technical and socio-technical aspects of software security patch
management, hereafter called security patch management, a pro-
cess that consists of identifying, acquiring, installing, and verifying
security patches [ 45]. These activities entail several socio-technical
aspects that underpin some of the critical decision points that make
security patch management a complex and challenging undertaking
[27,32,49]. Further, it needs the coordination of the efforts and
decisions of multiple stakeholders with conflicting interests and
several interdependencies. It has been reported that a majority of
the delays in the security patch management process emerge from
socio-technical aspects such as coordination [13, 32, 38, 49].
While it is widely understood that appropriate coordination sup-
port is needed for timely decisions and actions by the involved
stakeholders, there is not much empirically known about the coor-
dination aspects that may cause delays in applying patches. That
means researchers and practitioners may not find much guidance in
gaining a good understanding of the role of coordination in security
patch management to answer some critically important questions:
What is the role of coordination in security patch management?
How does the coordination aspect cause delays in security patch
management? What can be done for addressing the causes that may
delay security patch management? These questions motivated us
to carry out a grounded theory study of the role of coordination in
security patch management.arXiv:2106.03458v2  [cs.SE]  18 Jun 2021ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
In this paper, we present the first, to the best of our knowledge,
Grounded Theory study exploring the role of coordination in se-
curity patch management. It is based on observations of 51 patch
meetings over a period of 9 months, which involved 21 industry
practitioners from two organisations in the mission-critical health-
care domain. We explain how coordination impacts the software
security patch management process in four inter-related dimen-
sions: causes, constraints, breakdowns, and mechanisms. Grounded
in the evidence from industrial practices of the patch application
decisions, the theory aspires to enhance the state-of-the-art under-
standing of researchers and practitioners in several ways: (a) the
theory highlights the importance of gaining a deep understanding
of the interdependencies before applying security patches and how
improved support in coordination can help reduce the delays in
security patch management; (b) it structures the knowledge about
the unexplored phenomenon of security patching in the mission-
critical healthcare domain; (c) provides a theoretical model to shape
future Software Engineering (SE) research to address the practical
concerns in security patching; (d) practitioners can leverage the un-
derstanding to reduce patching delays, and (e) the theory can also
be useful to practitioners as guidance to enhance the confidence in
patching decisions.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Software Security Patch Management is “ a multifaceted process
of identifying, acquiring, installing, and verifying software security
patches for products and systems " [31,45,49]. Although there has
been extensive research [ 8,27] on improving automation support
in the security patch management process, we noticed a scarcity
of empirical studies investigating the socio-technical aspects of
security patch management. Existing empirical studies on socio-
technical aspects of security patch management have primarily
focused on studying system administrators [ 8,12,32,49], the patch
management process and related challenges [ 32,49], and patch
information retrieval behaviors and approaches of system adminis-
trators [28, 49].
We found several studies (e.g., [ 13,27,32,37,39]) reporting
coordination and collaboration challenges in the patch management
process. However, they lack a comprehensive investigation of what
causes the coordination needs and related challenges, its effects on
the security patch management process, and the impact on delays
of patch installation. Some studies [ 22,38,40,49] have described in
high-level the dependencies between multiple stakeholders, such
as vendors and organisations. Similarly, Nappa et al. [ 37] reported
that the coordination challenges concerning vendor dependencies
arise from a lack of synchronized patch releases from different
vendors because of shared vulnerabilities in the software code.
Their analysis was based on a large data set of deployed patches
in client-side vulnerabilities. Similarly, quantitative models and
frameworks presented by a few other studies [5, 6, 11] focused on
optimizing patch management by synchronizing the organisation’s
patch cycle with the vendor’s patch release cycle to reduce patching
costs and risks. As such, the reported dependencies with software
vendors raise important concerns about the need for an in-depth
understanding of the role and impact of such dependencies on
security patch management.However, coordination has been studied extensively across
various dimensions in the related domains such as software devel-
opment over the last decades [ 2–4,10,29,48]. The literature defines
coordination as the management of interdependencies [9,33,34] and
describes different types of coordination as explicit coordination
and implicit coordination. Similarly, Crowston [ 9] provided a cate-
gorization of the types of dependencies based on the context such
as task, knowledge, resource, and technical dependencies. Further-
more, the previous work [ 2] about the coordination challenges in
software development processes has demonstrated that ineffective
coordination of dependencies represents a major cause of project
failure, justifying the need for effective coordination to manage
various interdependencies. Correspondingly, a comprehensive un-
derstanding of the role of coordination in patch application presents
a critical research gap, which is fulfilled by this study.
3 RESEARCH METHOD
We used Grounded Theory (GT) [ 18,20] for data collection, analysis,
theory development, and reporting. GT enables the systematic
generation of theory from data, relating to social interactions and
behaviour in real-world settings [ 17,20]. The choice of GT as our
research method was based on two reasons:
(a)The aim of our research, to understand the socio-technical
aspects of security patch management in practice suited
well with GT as it allows the investigation of people and
interactions in a real-world phenomenon [17].
(b)GT is considered most relevant to research areas that have
not been deeply explored before [ 25], and research on the
socio-technical aspects of security patch management is
limited in the literature.
We followed the Glaserian version of GT [ 18] since it offers
more flexibility to uncover the underlying concerns from the emer-
gent data rather than limiting the research angle with a defined
research hypothesis upfront. Following the guidelines, we started
with an “area of interest" - Socio-technical concerns in Security
Patch Management. The guidelines by Stol et al. [ 47] were followed
for reporting the GT findings.
3.1 Data Collection
We observed 51 patch meetings between two organisations (Alpha
and Beta) in Australia, attended by 21 key stakeholders from 8
teams. These stakeholders represented diverse roles centered on
decision-making, planning, and executing security patching. The
longitudinal study was conducted from March 2020 - January 2021.
The meetings were held every fortnight lasting approximately an
hour and a half. Due to COVID-19, the meetings were held online
through Microsoft Teams. The patch meetings focused on reporting
security patch management status, tracking vulnerability remedia-
tion progress, discussing issues, planning patch cycles, and decision-
making. Alpha is an Australian state government health services
agency and Beta is an American multinational corporation that
provides security patch management service to Alpha. While
the most important and critical OS security patching was being
outsourced to Beta, Alpha’s in-house developed applications and
other third-party applications were patched by Alpha teams and the
respective third-party vendors. Table 1 presents the investigatedA Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
teams’ demographics. Abiding by the human ethics guidelines, the
details of the organisations and teams have been kept confidential.
We held discussions immediately after the meetings with one of
Alpha’s security team members to clarify any doubts that emerged
during the observations and gather additional information. We
also gathered data by analysing artefacts such as meeting minutes
and patch mailing thread to supplement our understanding of the
process, practices, and used terminology.
The first author attended all 51 meetings that were held over the
course of 9 months and conducted all 11 post-meeting discussions.
All the meetings and discussions in Table 2 were audio-recorded
with permission and shared with all researchers. We adopted the
protocol proposed by Spradley [ 46] to guide the data collection dur-
ing the meetings (see Appendix A). The first author briefed other
authors about the key aspects of the fortnightly meetings and the
post-meeting discussions regularly. The data collection and analysis
were performed in iterative and intertwined stages throughout. We
continued with the data collection until the data analysis confirmed
theoretical saturation . The last few observations (M46-M51) pro-
vided more examples and evidence for the emerged findings during
the analysis, but no new concepts, categories, or insights emerged.
All authors mutually agreed that this was a clear indication of the
theoretical saturation and any additional data collection would not
add value to the findings.
3.2 Data Analysis
We followed Glaser’s data analysis procedure starting from Open
coding through Selective coding toTheoretical coding [18,47,
50]. The data analysis was led by the first author supported by
other researchers who took the role of the validators at each stage
throughout the iterative and intertwined rounds of data collection
and analysis. All data including transcripts, observation and dis-
cussion notes, other artefacts (meeting minutes and patch mailing
thread notes), codes, and memos were saved in the NVivo data
analysis tool and shared with all co-authors. The second and third
authors cross-validated all the emergent codes, concepts, categories,
and core categories. Any conflicts in the coding and coding pro-
cedures were resolved in weekly detailed discussions between all
authors throughout the analysis phase involving several rounds of
revisions. Additionally, the emerged findings were further cross-
checked with one of the senior members of Alpha’s security team.
Open coding started with thoroughly reviewing the transcripts
and recording key points containing summarized phrases [ 16]. It
was further summarized into codes of three-five words each, and
any specific properties of the code were captured in brackets, as
shown in the example below.
Transcript: “The patching is delayed because this .NET security
vulnerability was reported in August after patching happened for
the month. But, we also have another problem as this is a different
version of .NET from what is standing across the fleet. This is .NET
core, not .NET version 4.801. "
Key Point: Need to identify and match Framework version de-
pendencies
Code: Software application inter-dependencies (version)Applying constant comparison on the codes that emerged within
each observation, between different observations, and post-meeting
discussions, we grouped them to a higher level of abstraction, i.e.,
concepts [18,20]. Similarly, continuously comparing concepts pro-
duced categories , a third-level of abstraction, and from categories
generated core categories [18] at the end of the first round of cod-
ing. The core category represents the main problem or concern
(core) in the studied phenomenon, which presents the research
question [ 17,26]. Correspondingly, three potential core categories
emerged - Legacy software systems, Role of Coordination, and Role
of Patch Meetings. The % split of codes between the three core cat-
egories was 18%, 51.3%, and 30.7% respectively. We selected “Role
of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management" as the core
category because it met all the criteria defined by Glaser [ 17] for
selecting a category as the core. For example, the selected core
category was central to other categories and frequently occurred
in the data; meaningfully related to both other categories easily
and took the longest to saturate. Our decision of focusing on the
“role of coordination" from the initial general focus on the “role
of the socio-technical aspects in security patch management" was
informed by Glaser’s Grounded Theory guidelines [17].
After establishing the core category, we continued Selective cod-
ing[17] limited to only those codes that were related to the selected
core category. For example, Figure 1 illustrates the emergence of the
category Technical dependencies that relate to the role of coordina-
tionin the second round of coding - Selective coding. We continued
to selectively code until no new insights or aspects emerged for
each category, which indicated theoretical saturation [18, 20].
As the final step of the analysis, we applied Theoretical coding
[17–19,47] to establish conceptual relationships between categories,
resulting in the development of a theory. We used memos (memo
sorting ) [17,18] to guide us to uncover the links between the cat-
egories when developing the theory. At this point, we consulted
the literature, particularly Glaser’s ‘theoretical coding families’ to
find if any existing theoretical structure fits our current findings to
visualize the theory. Glaser argues using a coding family to present
the theory would help increase the completeness and relevance
of the emerging theory [ 17,19]. As the findings (i.e., the causes,
constraints, breakdowns, and mechanisms) emerged from the data,
we found that the theoretical coding model, i.e., Dimension family
is the best fit to visualize the relationships between the categories.
The Dimension family is a theoretical structure that enables the
findings to be presented as dimensions or elements of a phenom-
enon [ 17,19], in this case, dimensions of the role of coordination
in software security patch management. Thus, the theory of the
role of coordination in security patch management, depicted in
Figure 2, is described using: (a) Causes: socio-technical dependen-
cies that define the need for coordination; (b) Constraints: factors
that hinder coordination; (c) Breakdowns: scenarios of patching
failures resulting from ineffective coordination of the causes and
constraints; and (d) Mechanisms: strategies devised for supporting
the coordination in security patch management.
4 FINDINGS
In this section, we describe the theory of the role of coordination
in security patch management using four inter-related dimensions:ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
Table 1: The investigated teams’ demographics
Organisation Team Domain Team
size∗∗Distribution∗+Roles
Alpha T1 Electronic Medical Records (EMR) 5 Co-located EMR Application Owner, Server Engineer, System Administra-
tor, Server Manager
T2 Digital Health - Windows 3 Co-located Server Engineer, System Administrator, Windows Application
Specialist
T3 Digital Health - Non-Windows 2 Co-located Unix Specialist, Server Engineer, System Administrator
T4 Security 1 Co-located Security Advisor
T5 Change Management 1 Co-located Change Manager
T6 Clinical and Pathology Services 1 Co-located Pathology Server Engineer
Beta T1 Server (Technical) 7 Distributed Server Engineer, Senior Server Engineer, Unix Engineer, Server
Manager, Client Delivery Manager
T2 Finance and Audit (Non-technical) 1 Distributed Accounts Manager
∗The team size refers to the number of team participants in the patch meeting.+Distributed refers to two locations within the state in Australia.
Code Concept Category
The case with additional patches required
after IE patches were that the IE
installation looked to be corrupt and we
couldn’ t update it to IE1 1 before the
updates happened.What I need to know is the operating
system version, if it is 2008, then we
know there’ s a problem. And if it is a later
version, then we have to find out why the
patches aren't getting installed.
We are still working through to install all
the patches to those 18 servers which had
issues. W e found that one of them was
missing the ESU preparation package...Operating System
(OS) version
dependencies
Software
application version
dependencies
Pre-requisites for
patch installationSoftware-related
dependenciesTechnical
dependenciesRaw data
Social
dependenciesCauses:
Socio-technical 
inter-dependenciesCoordination
Role Dimensions
Selective coding limited to codes relevant to the role of coor dination in security patch management Theoretical Coding
Figure 1: The emergence of category Socio-technical interdependencies from the underlying codes and concepts.
Table 2: Summary of the data collection
No. of
meetingsDurationNo. of
discussionsNo. of hours
Meetings∗∗Discussions∗+
51 9 months 11 30 hours 7 hours
∗The average time of a patch meeting=30 minutes.
+The average time of a post-patch meeting discussion=30-45 minutes.
Causes, Breakdowns, Mechanisms, andConstraints , providing evi-
dence with grounded quotes from the underlying data. For ease of
reference, we used unique identifiers to refer to participants, for
example, AT4, M10-dis refers to a participant from Alpha’s Security
team in the 10th post-meeting discussion, and BT1, M4 refers to a
participant from Beta’s Server team in the 4th meeting.4.1 Causes - Socio-Technical Dependencies
We identified several socio-technical interdependencies inherent
in the security patch management process that define the need
for coordination. We recorded discussions about several scenarios
exemplifying the potentially disastrous implications as a result of
failing to identify dependencies before applying a patch. Through
the data analysis process, we have placed the observed interdepen-
dencies in two categories: Technical andSocial dependencies.
4.1.1 Technical dependencies .The interdependencies between
the software and the associated hardware and firmware give rise to
technical dependencies, arising as a result of dependencies in soft-
ware code. For example, some security vulnerabilities are present
in multiple functions in the source code that have interdependen-
cies among them. Consequently, security patches developed to fix
them also include these function-level dependencies that must beA Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
The r ole of
coordination in
softwar e security
patch 
managementCauses
BreakdownsMechanisms ConstraintsSocio-technical
dependenciesTechnical
dependenciesSocial
dependenciesSoftware dependencies
Hardware & firmware
dependenciesInternal stakeholder
dependencies
External stakeholder 
dependencies
Sudden escalations to
patch schedulesDelays in or ganisation
approvals
Lack of dependency
awareness from localized
work distributionLegacy software
dependencies
Lack of automation
support
Increased patch loadEarly investigation of 
 inter -dependencies
Collaborative
decision-making
Continuous progress
measuring
Frequent
communication
Load balancing
Centralized risk
assessment
Dimension Category Concept Core
Category
Figure 2: The theory of the role of coordination in software security patch management.
carefully handled during patching.
In terms of software-related patch dependencies, several
factors such as operating system (OS) dependencies, software ap-
plication dependencies, and pre-requisites for patch installation
fostered the conditions for coordinating the dependencies. Patch
management in large software systems involves managing multi-
ple software components (or services) with different OS versions.
The existence of the interdependencies between OS versions and
other software applications built on top of a particular OS like web
browsers may create additional tasks for practitioners as all of them
need to be synchronized.
“We have about 15-16 versions of Windows 10. So, before patching
we need to see which version is running on which server? What is the
build number? Are we running the latest? It’s a lot!" - AT4, M14-dis
Additionally, some security patches contained interdependen-
cies with legacy OS. It presented a much more arduous task to
the studied practitioners since some critical emergency medical
services were running on Alpha’s legacy systems that were not
supported by large vendors, e.g., Microsoft. In such cases, the par-
ticipants often felt forced to delay patch installation as the available
solutions like decommissioning or upgrading legacy systems pre-
sented high risks of operation interruptions. Consequently, this
practice of delayed patching of security vulnerabilities in systems
would significantly increase the risk of exposure to attacks.Similarly, interdependencies between software applications, plat-
forms, and tools presented another major category of software-
related dependencies. This is because the build dependencies be-
tween the software application and patch sources require the ver-
sions to be in sync before attempting patch installation [ 14]. As the
size of an organisation grows, managing these dependencies ap-
peared difficult with a large number of diverse applications installed.
For example, Alpha’s software applications ranged from general
applications, e.g., Java, .NET to specific medical applications, e.g.,
Electronic Medical Record Software. As such, Beta teams spent
most of their time detecting the existing interdependencies such as
version incompatibilities between various software applications.
“There’s an old HP tools version and a new version, and the vul-
nerabilities are coming up on the scan as with the new version. But
the issue is because the old version is still there which we should have
got rid of earlier. " - BT1, M14
The circular dependency represented a more complex semantic
dependency in security patch management. An example scenario
was when software B is dependent on software A, and software
A uses software B to function (B ↔A). In such cases applying a
security patch to A led to service unavailability of B as a result of
rebooting A to make the security patch take effect. In particular,
effectively coordinating circular dependencies was crucial in the
healthcare domain as A and B could represent critical medical
services like emergency life support or surgery equipment.ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
“And there could be like A needs B to run, and vice versa but when
we accidentally took B offline that day, A didn’t work. That was when
we all got goosebumps. " - AT4, M10-dis
On the other hand, some security patches required pre-requisites
to be established before installation for the patch to take effect.
In most cases, the pre-requisites comprised registry changes and
preparation package installation. We identify that it is resulting
from the patches that do not contain source code modifications, as
explained by Li and Paxson [ 31]. To investigate the pre-requisites of
the security patches retrieved each month, Beta allocated a specific
timeframe before patch testing and discussed with Alpha during
the patch meetings how and when they would handle the iden-
tified pre-requisites. Coordinating the pre-requisites was often a
manual task as it involved decisions about suitable configurations
based on the organisation’s needs and the other associated software
dependencies. Failing to configure the pre-requisites led to errors
that would halt a patch installation. However, we found that the
teams became more receptive to detecting pre-requisites-related
dependencies with the continuous early investigation approach
employed.
“The patches listed here needed a preparation package installed
before the patching window and then the reboot would have applied
the patch. We’ll do that just before the current patching window and
then patching should proceed as normal without errors. " - BT1, M11
Besides the most common software-related dependencies, some
security patches also contained dependencies with the associated
hardware and firmware giving rise to Hardware and Firmware-
related dependencies . For example, in one instance, practitioners
were unable to patch the security vulnerabilities found in virtual
machine (VM) software as the VM-related firmware was not up to
date. So, they had to regularly keep track of the existing dependen-
cies and update the supporting hardware and firmware accordingly
before attempting patch installation.
“Some patches need a certain type of hardware to be at a certain
level. There was a 2008 security patch which we couldn’t install until
we updated the firmware or the utilities. " - AT4, M10-dis
4.1.2 Social dependencies .Social dependencies that stem from
interdependencies between stakeholders is another major category
of dependencies integral to security patch management. Security
patching in large organisations is challenging due to the increased
complexity stemming from a high number of stakeholders. There-
fore, effectively coordinating the dependencies between multiple
stakeholders is important for successful patch management. Our
analysis of the gathered data led to the emergence of two sub-
categories of social dependencies: Internal stakeholder dependencies
andExternal stakeholder dependencies as illustrated in Figure 3.
Internal stakeholder dependencies - The two organization’s
stakeholders worked together to achieve a common goal of se-
curing the state’s healthcare system by timely installation of se-
curity patches. Hence, the internal stakeholder dependencies, in
this context, relate to the dependencies stemming from the interac-
tions between stakeholders across Alpha and Beta. We identified
two layers of dependencies namely Team-level dependencies and
Organisation-level dependencies .The current context displays a multiteam system (MTS) structure
[36] as multiple interdependent teams within each organization
collaborated towards a collective goal. The interdependent team
interactions gave rise to team-level dependencies. Since each organi-
sational team had assigned responsibilities, coordination between
and within teams remained pivotal to achieving the goals. In most
cases, the inter-team tasks contained dependencies that required
management of the cross-team interconnections. For example, Al-
pha teams T1, T2, and T3, often depended on T5 to approve security
patch schedules before assigning them to Beta to be executed. Lack
of awareness of the roles and responsibilities complicated the coor-
dination of team dependencies causing delays of several weeks in
patching known vulnerabilities.
“We are still waiting for an email from [P1] approving the manual
patching process. (BT1)
Well, I’m not sure whether it should come from [P1] or some other
guy. I will confirm it with [P2] and get to back you. " - AT2, M8
Similar to the inter-team dependencies, organisation-level depen-
dencies also created several challenges for security patch manage-
ment. The large scale and heterogeneous nature of Alpha created
additional complexities to coordinating organisation-level depen-
dencies that often resulted in delays in patch testing and deploy-
ment. For example, every security patch required approval from
Alpha’s Change Management (T5) before they could be installed at
the customer’s sites (i.e., hospitals). Given the critical nature of the
task, it was important to effectively coordinate it and leave sufficient
time for the customers’ agreements. It was needed to reduce the
time of service interruptions and manage technical dependencies.
“This morning [Alpha’s] change manager said that the change
hasn’t been approved yet. So, we had to suddenly change plans just
minutes before the [scheduled] patch window. " - BT1, M10
External stakeholder dependencies - The involvement of ex-
ternal stakeholders such as customers, end-users, and vendors is
integral to security patch management. Effectively coordinating
the collaborative relationships and the dependencies with external
stakeholders is vital to a sound patch management process. In this
context, the external stakeholders consisted of customers (e.g., hos-
pitals) and vendors (e.g., Microsoft). The end-users dependencies
consisted of hospital patients and staff, hence, these were not di-
rectly linked to Alpha and Beta. However, ineffective coordination
of customer dependencies negatively impacted end-users. For ex-
ample, uninformed operation interruptions to medical equipment
resulted in inconveniences to patients and medical staff. In contrast
to internal stakeholder dependencies, managing external stake-
holder dependencies presented a much more difficult challenge to
practitioners. The main reason was the lack of a shared understand-
ing of the importance of security patching and the visibility of the
existing process interdependencies.
Vendor-related dependencies refer to the dependencies that are
created due to the need of installing security patches received from
vendors. Management of vendor dependencies became difficult with
the presence of shared vulnerabilities and associated technical de-
pendencies in software applications. This demanded coordination
of patch releases from the vendors of different software applica-
tions. Additionally, some of Alpha’s third-party applications were
patched by external vendors, for example, the medical applicationA Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
Alpha Beta
EMRSecurity
Windows
Non-
Windows
Change
ManagementPathologyTechnical 
(distributed teams)
Non-
TechnicalOrganisation-level inter -dependencies
Team-level inter -dependencies Team-level inter -dependenciesInternal stakeholder dependenciesExternal stakeholder dependencies
End-usersCustomers
Customer dependencies
Vendor dependencies
Vendors
Figure 3: The social dependencies present in the studied context.
providers, as per the agreement at the point of purchase. Thus, it
required synchronising each vendor’s patching cycles to avoid the
unavailability of the interdependent systems.
“Regarding the recent concern from Security (T4) on [S1 server]
patching is one month behind, can we confirm this with [third-party
vendor’s] requirements? Because this vendor’s patching cycle is always
one month behind, every month they release the patches for the last
month. " - BT1, M17
Furthermore, missing, faulty, or exempted security patches and
unknown errors during patch installation increased the need for
coordinating the vendor dependencies during patch testing, deploy-
ment, and post-deployment patch verification. Patch exemption
was when selected security patches were excluded from installation
due to legitimate reasons approved by Alpha’s Security team. We
observed several scenarios of patching delays due to a lack of coor-
dination of software dependencies with exempted security patches
that were managed by external vendors.
Managing customer-related dependencies with hospitals presented
a challenge to Alpha and Beta teams, particularly when negotiating
the patch schedules. Reaching a consensus on a patch installation
time was essential to minimize any potential impact of service dis-
ruptions from reboots. However, an interesting observation was
that in a majority of cases, practitioners spent most of the time
trying to communicate to customers on the need to patch systems,
as opposed to agreeing on the patch installation time. It was due
to the lack of understanding of the need to apply security patches
and the inability to accept the high risks of service downtime.
“A lot of customers don’t always understand the worth of security
patching, they just want to use the server, and keep asking; “why do
you want to reboot it every then and there, or why you got to update
it? It’s working and leave it alone!" - AT4, M4-dis
4.2 Constraints
This section presents the constraints that hindered the coordination.
When the constraints affected the socio-technical dependencies,they caused coordination breakdown. Hence, it is important to
devise suitable approaches and tools for identifying and managing
the potential impact of constraints.
4.2.1 Legacy software-related dependencies. Legacy systems pose a
security threat to organisational ICT infrastructures, particularly in
mission-critical domains like healthcare. This is because most of the
critical services that run on legacy systems remain unsupported by
vendors leaving them vulnerable to security attacks. Alpha had sev-
eral legacy systems like 2008 servers that were no longer receiving
security patches from Microsoft. Furthermore, the dependencies
with these legacy systems produced wider implications for secu-
rity patching. It resulted in the practitioners being unable to patch
until the dependent legacy systems were upgraded to the current
version or offered extended support from vendors. However, up-
grading legacy systems required a critical evaluation of the impact
on other important services. In some cases, Alpha had acquired
extended support for critical legacy systems through negotiations
with the vendors. However, it presented practitioners with addi-
tional challenges of having to perform manual configurations to
install security patches as the current configuration settings did
not work, and some installed patches getting rolled back.
“There are twenty six 2008 servers still waiting to be patched this
month. But there are some servers that we need to have a look at why
the patches aren’t applying. Even though we have installed all the
required preparation packages, they keep rolling back. " - BT1, M12
4.2.2 Lack of automation support. Lack of suitable tool support
presented a major constraint for the coordination of the depen-
dencies. One of the key constraints was the inability to oversee
technical dependencies across all systems inventory. Inability to
identify the existing software dependencies from the current tools
resulted in practitioners spending hours trying to find the current
software versions in the event of errors during a patch installa-
tion. Additionally, the lack of automation support to investigate the
patch pre-requisites as mentioned in Section 4.1.1, caused delaysESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
and sometimes errors in installing patches due to missing out on
some registry changes.
On the other hand, the limitations on the features of the avail-
able support tools presented constraints in detecting specific de-
pendencies such as legacy dependencies and their contextual cate-
gorization. This could be because most of the tools available to the
studied teams focused on function-level patching assuming that
vulnerable code resides within only one function [ 14,31]. For exam-
ple, Alpha’s decisions were largely based on the vulnerability scan
reports. However, the existing scanning tool was unable to filter the
unpatched vulnerabilities resulting from legacy dependencies and
exempted patches, which constrained accurate decision-making.
“These vulnerability numbers will go down by as much as half
since [scanning tool] captures 2008 servers’ vulnerabilities as well. I
don’t know whether we can do exceptions through the tool, like flag
things that are legacy, to make the numbers reflect what we see." -
BT1, M12
4.2.3 Increased patch load. As the organisation size grew, the num-
ber and diversity of systems also expanded that resulted in increased
complexity in the patching. Hence, the practitioners often faced
difficulties in keeping up with the patch release rate. Accumulated
patch load due to the previous patch exclusions added to the chal-
lenges as they had to patch previously excluded patches in the
following month. Correspondingly, an increased patch load led to
more socio-technical dependencies creating additional constraints
on coordination. Overall, it led to an increased risk of exposure to
attacks as installing security patches was often delayed.
“There’s just too much to check! We’re dealing with 1500 servers,
we don’t have time to look at each patch for every server like, “Yeah,
this one is right, this isn’t. Which servers have interdependencies that
can’t be patched at the same time? Which server has which version of
this software, that software... " - AT4, M14-dis
4.3 Breakdowns
In this subsection, we report the scenarios that exemplify the break-
downs resulting in the security patch management process from
ineffective coordination of the socio-technical dependencies and
the related constraints.
4.3.1 Sudden escalations to patch schedules. Security patch instal-
lation within the allocated patch window is critical in a mission-
critical domain like healthcare to avoid unexpected service dis-
ruptions. Alpha provided specific patch windows to Beta, usually
4-hours, to install the security patches on production servers (i.e.,
operating in hospitals) after agreeing with the customers. To ad-
here to the specified patch window while installing patches, Beta
teams were required to plan well ahead to establish each patch’s
pre-requisites, identifying interdependencies, testing the patches,
and obtaining management approval. As such, miscoordination
of these conditions would usually lead to unexpected escalations
to the planned patch schedules. Given the critical nature of the
healthcare operations, security patch installations going beyond
the scheduled patch window resulted in devastating consequences
such as life-threatening risk to critical patients from additional
service unavailability even for a couple of minutes.“We realized there’s a need to do a sudden change of configuration
for [ISP] servers at the time of patching, so our team had to esca-
late immediately to switch to manual patching because some servers
needed Windows approved patches to be rolled out. " - BT1, M12
4.3.2 Delays in the organisation approvals. All security patches
needed to be approved by Alpha’s change manager a month before
a patch installation to allow Beta teams to prepare in advance for
installing a patch. However, we observed some delays in approvals
from the Change Management team resulting in abrupt changes
to patch installation plans such as shorter patch windows. Such
unforeseen changes invoked changes to the dynamics of socio-
technical dependencies resulting in breakdowns in the process.
For example, having to install the emergency security patches in
shorter patch windows warranted re-testing of patches to confirm
that patch installation can fit into the shorter patch window, and
obtaining reapproval from customers to avoid unexpected service
interruptions.
“We were ready for the patch deployment. But this morning [Al-
pha’s] change manager said that the change hasn’t been approved
yet. So, if it isn’t approved prior to scheduled start time, we will have
to reschedule it. " - BT1, M10
4.3.3 Lack of dependency awareness from localized work distribu-
tion. Alpha and Beta teams had localized work distribution settings
within their team structures. Alpha teams were located in the same
office and Beta teams were distributed across different offices in
the same city. This structure led to the creation of a lack of depen-
dency awareness of the task assignments and progression between
teams. We observed this during status reporting in the meetings
as some members were unaware of the tasks progressing in the
teams. Their lack of understanding resulted in added challenges of
coordinating the inter-team dependencies that inhibited measuring
the progression of security patch management tasks.
“I believe [P1 from AT2] is working on this issue at the moment.
Do you know when he’s likely to get that done? - (BT1)
Not sure, but I would be hoping next week. I would contact him and
let you know. " - AT2, M13
4.4 Mechanisms
This subsection presents a collection of strategies that have emerged
from analyzing the data; the studied teams practiced these mecha-
nisms to manage the dependencies while mediating the constraints.
4.4.1 Early investigation of interdependencies. Alpha and Beta teams
used patch meetings to discuss the findings from the investigations
of the technical dependencies. Since the participants with diverse
technical backgrounds and expertise attended the meetings, this
configuration enabled knowledge sharing to collaboratively iden-
tify dependencies upfront. Failing to identify the dependencies
resulted in scenarios of installed patches not working as intended,
patches refusing to get installed resulting in rollbacks, and patches
going beyond the allocated patch window during installation. Early
identification of dependencies helped practitioners to coordinate
the task dependencies among teams, and make timely decisions to
address the usual problems such as raising support cases to vendors
seeking expert advice and finding workaround solutions.A Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
“From troubleshooting why the last two weeks’ patches hadn’t
worked properly, we can realize that each patch needed to be rebooted
at the beginning. Since we failed to do so, the current reboot may have
applied the last month’s patches. " - AT4, M14
4.4.2 Collaborative decision-making. Accurate and timely decision-
making is pivotal throughout the patching process. The studied
practitioners used patch meetings as a platform to collaboratively
decide about vulnerability risk assessment and prioritization, and
approval of the patch decisions and schedules. Collaborative decision-
making helped the teams to maintain dependency awareness about
the decisions and to plan the associated tasks with minimum impact
of dependencies. For example, the decisions about patch exemp-
tions involved a collective assessment of the requests. Thus, the
awareness of patch exemptions helped the teams to plan their other
patch schedules with limited dependencies to the exempted patches,
and keep track of the exempted patches in the month and organise
the to-do patch list in the following month including them.
“The last item on the agenda is about the [s1] servers that are
marked as excluded from patching. We need to decide if they are being
exempt from our patching list this month or not because we haven’t
got the official confirmation whether we’re doing the patching or if
the [third-party] vendor is doing it again?" - BT1, M13
Other examples of collaborative decision-making involved se-
lecting the optimum patch configurations based on organisational
needs, and managing legacy software dependencies. In most cases,
the decisions for legacy software dependencies revolved around
the need for decommissioning or rebuilding legacy systems, when
and how to do it, and how to patch them following the rebuilds. De-
cisions about the patch schedules for the approved patches helped
the teams to coordinate the planning upfront and identify the need
forout-of-band (OOB) patching . OOB patching refers to the need to
allocate an additional patch window when some security patches
require more installation time than the allocated patch window due
to compound dependencies involved.
4.4.3 Continuous measuring of progression. Alpha teams measured
the continual progress of vulnerability remediation through Beta’s
status reports in meetings and regular vulnerability scan reports.
When the scans indicated an increase in the number of vulnerabili-
ties present in the systems, the matters were discussed extensively
to remedy the situation. The continuous measurement of the pro-
gression enabled the identification of the outliers such as missing
patches resulting in the investigation of the causes and coordinat-
ing the associated stakeholder dependencies with the third-party
vendors.
“What is the status of internal [s1] server security vulnerabilities?
- (AT4)
We’re getting our regular scans to measure that. That one is progress-
ing quickly. We will share the report next week" - BT1, M9
4.4.4 Frequent communication. Frequent communication appeared
to be essential for effective coordination of dependencies. It helped
to erase boundaries between roles, teams, and organisations, and
increase cohesion and trust between stakeholders. Teams used var-
ious communication mediums such as bi-weekly patch meetings,
email, and Skype. Additionally, the studied practitioners held sepa-
rate meetings to discuss critical and urgent matters that emergedin between patch meetings or when patch meeting discussions
were dragged beyond the allocated time. Patch meetings were the
most preferred communication medium as the teams felt more
comfortable with direct communication. Communication during
patch meetings facilitated collaboration, knowledge sharing, and
information exchange about technical and socio-technical matters
affecting the patching process, for example, upcoming patch sched-
ules, changes to patching plans such as out-of-band patch schedules,
and vendors’ patch release information. Regular patch meetings
benefited the teams in numerous ways such as allowing visibility
into task progression and assignments, staying proactive to po-
tential issues about critical security vulnerabilities, and effectively
coordinating security patch management activities.
“[Security Advisor shares the vulnerability remediation progress
report on screen] We were averaging 75 high-risk vulnerabilities per
server back in 2016 when I joined. As you can see now, we’re down to
5 per server. Given the mix of environments we are dealing with, this
is amazing. You can see that the frequent patch meetings making a
big difference!" - AT4, M10
4.4.5 Load balancing. An interesting strategy employed by the
studied teams to coordinate patch schedules was load balancing. It
was used to balance the patch load in servers at any given patch
installation time. Balancing the server load helped reduce service
interruptions. Patching dozens of servers at the same time signif-
icantly increased the risk of system failure as all the servers go
offline at the same time during reboots. Load balancing, on the
other hand, helped to run the critical medical services concurrently
on another server while the desired server(s) is being rebooted.
However, the presence of technical dependencies created difficul-
ties in load balancing. In particular, for instances with one-to-one
dependencies such as (A →B), the practitioners had to rigorously
analyse the interdependencies before planning the load on servers
to avoid unexpected system downtime.
“Before we started with the load balancing, we patched 50 servers
one night, and just two the next night. So, I suggested we plan to load
balance. But there’s a lot to manage, especially when we have systems
like, system A is redundant to B, and oops! we accidentally took both
of them down at the same time to patch. " - AT4, M10-dis
4.4.6 Centralized vulnerability risk assessment. Regularly perform-
ing vulnerability risk assessment and prioritization was necessary
as it could potentially differ from that of the vendor’s assessment
based on the organisation’s environment. It aided practitioners to
plan well in advance to promptly respond to critical security vul-
nerabilities. To regularly monitor security vulnerabilities, the teams
had devised a centralized role in Alpha’s Security team (Security Ad-
visor) responsible for scanning and categorizing the vulnerabilities
based on teams’ ownership. Having a centralized structure helped
maintain consistency in vulnerability risk assessments across teams
as well as reduce delays in vulnerability assessment and prioritiza-
tion decisions. Additionally, frequent comparisons with the previ-
ous scans assisted with evaluating the vulnerability remediation
performance.
“[Security Advisor] gets the global rating of a vulnerability risk
and re-assess it to see if it’s critical to us and how it can be exploited.
For medium to low risks, we patch in the next cycle, but if it’s critical
or we’re under attack, we’ll patch within 48 hours. " - AT4, M10-disESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
5 DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss a comparison of our theory with the prior
related work, elaborate on the broader implications of our theory
for practitioners and researchers, and reflect upon the potential
threats to the validity of this study.
Comparing to Related Work: Following Glaser’s advice [ 20,
47], we compare our theory with the existing literature. The prior
related work on this topic [ 13,27,32,37,39] primarily focuses on
the coordination and collaboration challenges but does not provide
in-depth details of the causes or the potential strategies to address
the coordination challenges leading to delays in applying security
patches. A few studies [ 22,38,40] investigate the social dependen-
cies concerning the involvement of multiple internal and external
stakeholders. Another set of studies [ 5,6,11,37] exclusively focus
on vendor dependencies that might arise from shared vulnerabil-
ities in software code. In particular, their main focus remains on
optimizing patch management by obtaining an equilibrium of an
organisation’s patch cycle with a vendor’s patch-release cycle to
minimise cost. An important observation is the absence of theories
that focus on the socio-technical aspects concerning security patch
management in contrast to quantitative models and frameworks
[41]. This is an important point as the theories provide “basic con-
cepts and underlying mechanisms, which constitute an important
counterpart to the knowledge of passing trends” [23]. In contrast, our
theory derived from the gathered data differs from these existing
works in several ways as it:
•explains the role of coordination in security patch management as
incorporating a multi-dimensional nature across four inter-related
dimensions in contrast to focusing on one type such as vendor
dependencies reported in [5, 6, 11, 37],
•explains the socio-technical dependencies that create the need for
coordination going beyond reporting just the challenges with lack
of coordination [22, 38, 40],
•explains the constraints that hinder coordination and shows sce-
narios of breakdowns resulting from ineffective coordination,
•suggests strategies that can be used for effective coordination,
•offers a comprehensive overview of the impact of coordination in
security patching in the mission-critical domain like healthcare,
•presents a theoretical model for future research, and,
•provides guidance to practitioners to overcome patching delays,
and increase confidence in their decisions.
Implications for Practitioners: The reported theory can be
used to gain an in-depth understanding of the significance and the
impact of the role of coordination in security patch management.
Practitioners can use this understanding to realize their roles and
responsibilities in ensuring coordination effectiveness across differ-
ent dimensions of the role of coordination. Moreover, practitioners
can use the theory as a guide to identify the related dependencies
and how they might affect their security patching process. Further,
we have observed that adopting these coordination mechanisms
has resulted in a reduction of the unpatched security vulnerabili-
ties in Alpha systems. Hence, our findings may also be useful in
exploring the suggested mechanisms in their organisational setting.
Additionally, practitioners can benefit from the early detection ofconstraints and breakdowns to avoid failures.
Implications for Researchers: Given a Grounded Theory study
is considered to produce a “mid-ranged” theory based on the con-
texts studied [ 18], other researchers can carry out an extension
through future research including a more detailed analysis of the
present dimensions, new dimensions discovered, or different con-
texts. Context-specific research investigating how the role of co-
ordination is impacted by contextual factors can result in useful
models of coordination in patch management [ 7,42]. For example,
organisation-level dependencies may not directly apply to small
organisations where security patch management is usually handled
by one team. Future studies can also investigate the effectiveness
of the coordination mechanisms and the context in which they
should be employed. The impact of organisational policies is often
cited as one of the dominant socio-technical challenges in security
patch management [ 13,32,38,40,49,51]. Similarly, future studies
can explore how organisational culture affects the role of coordi-
nation. Another possibility is to employ the findings in large-scale
surveys to evaluate the theory and identify variations in different
organisation settings such as in DevOps processes.
While this study is based on data collected from software secu-
rity patch management, the findings can be directly beneficial to
the software development research. This is because patch applica-
tion is inherently dependent on patch development. An important
point to note from our theory is the need to consider the socio-
technical aspect intrinsic to patch management when developing
patches (e.g., future work similar to Li et al. [ 32]). We show that
early identification of the dependencies is the key to avoid patching
delays and failures, but lack of automation support presents a key
constraint as previously mentioned for timely identification of the
dependencies. Therefore, there is a need for research about how
Artificial Intelligence (AI) support can be employed in dependency
detection in patch development and management. The findings
also highlight the important need for further R&D for advanced
patch management tools. For example, scanning tools can be en-
hanced to customize the software dependencies such as excluding
exempted patches to provide real-time feedback that assists prac-
titioners with accurate decision-making. Furthermore, our theory
provides an in-depth understanding of how the role of coordination
impacts the mission-critical domain, particularly, healthcare. An
understanding of the causes of unexpected service interruptions
can help researchers to devise strategies to avoid such downtime.
While the research into dynamic software updating [ 24] (DSU) at-
tempting to address this issue is progressing, our results can be
useful information for future research that investigates the effec-
tiveness of the developed strategy in mission-critical contexts.
Threats to Validity: A Grounded Theory study does not affirm
generalization as the theory formulation is pertinent to the studied
context [ 17,20]. The context of this study is limited to the cases
studied in security patch management in the domain of healthcare.
Nevertheless, we believe that our theory can be recreated in other
contexts and modified.
In terms of data representativeness, our data collection is limited
to the observations of patch meetings, post-meeting discussions,A Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
and analysis of meeting minutes and patch mailing thread as de-
scribed in Section 3.1. We acknowledge that more data sources such
as interviews and surveys can be incorporated in future studies to
increase the scope of the analysis and verifiability of the theory
[44].
While employing Grounded Theory procedures permits the data
analysis to be grounded in collected data, there is a threat of sub-
jectivity of the data analysis referred to as the “uncodifiable step"
[1,30]. To alleviate this threat, we regularly held internal discus-
sions on the emergent findings throughout the study as described
in Section 3.2. In addition, the findings were further cross-checked
with a senior member of Alpha’s security team to ensure we have
accurately interpreted the theory from the observed practices.
The verifiability of a grounded theory can be deduced from
the robustness of the research method, and evidence of theory
formulation from its application [ 18]. To confirm verifiability, we
have described our application of the Glaserian version of GT in
detail (Section 3) and included quotations from the underlying data
in the findings (Section 4). These details provide evidence of how our
theory meets the GT evaluation criteria: the generated categories
fitthe underlying data (see Figure 1); the theory can work as it
explains the main concerns of the participants in patch meetings;
the theory has relevance to the domain of software security patch
management; and the theory is open to modification based on future
studies in different contexts [17, 47].
6 CONCLUSION
We present the Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software
Security Patch Management. The developed theory explains the
effects of coordination in the patch management process across four
inter-related dimensions namely causes, breakdowns, constraints,
andmechanisms . Our theory is based on a longitudinal Grounded
Theory study of 51 patch meeting observations involving 21 indus-
try practitioners in two organisations in the healthcare domain over
a duration of 9 months. We provide the grounded evidence that the
role of coordination represents a core concern, contrasting with a
perception among the SE community that automation and tooling
alone can be sufficient to achieve success in patching and highlight
the need to have a delicate balance between the socio-technical
concerns such as coordination and automation to reduce delays,
which is often unrecognised in the existing literature.
Overall, besides providing a holistic understanding of the role of
coordination in security patch management that is based on empiri-
cal evidence and grounded in practice, our study is the first attempt
to investigate in-depth the socio-technical aspects of security patch
management in the mission-critical healthcare domain. The theory
provides important insights for practitioners to avoid patching de-
lays and failures and enhance confidence in their decisions, and for
researchers to shape their work on patch development to address
the practical concerns in patch application. The findings can also
be used for developing the next generation of AI-enabled tools for
supporting the patch management process.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the practitioners and organisations that
collaborated with us for their valuable support. This study was
conducted under the University of Adelaide Human Research Ethics
Committee Application ID H-2020-035.
A OBSERVATION PROTOCOL
Table 3: Observation protocol
Topic Question
Participants What are the roles and other details of the partici-
pants?
•Number of attendees
•Role (manager, system administrator, etc.)
•Affiliation (Alpha or Beta)
•Team (Security, Windows, Server, etc.)
Is someone acting as a facilitator?
•Who?
•How is he/she facilitating the meeting?
Communication What is the communication channel?
How does the communication happen?
•Directed / indirect questions?
•Active participation in communication?
•Any roles that are most active in communica-
tion?
Activities What are the various discussions and activities?
•Topics discussed
•Challenges discussed
•Activities (demonstrations etc.)
Objects What resources/media are used?
•Presentation slides, excel sheets, tools, etc.
Collaboration How do the participants interact and corporate with
each other?
Events Are there any particular events or anything unantic-
ipated?
Time When does the meeting start?
What is the sequence of events?
When does the meeting end?
Goals What are the participants trying to accomplish?
Feelings How is the atmosphere?
Closing How is the meeting ended?
Is there a post-meeting planned?
Is there anything discussed about the next meeting?ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Nesara Dissanayake, Mansooreh Zahedi, Asangi Jayatilaka, and Muhammad Ali Babar
REFERENCES
[1]Sebastian Baltes and Stephan Diehl. 2018. Towards a Theory of Software Devel-
opment Expertise. In 26th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE’18) . ACM,
187–200. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236024.3236061
[2]Saskia Bick, Kai Spohrer, Rashina Hoda, Alexander Scheerer, and Armin Heinzl.
2017. Coordination Challenges in Large-Scale Software Development: A Case
Study of Planning Misalignment in Hybrid Settings. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 44, 10 (2017), 932–950. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2730870
[3]Marcelo Cataldo and James D. Herbsleb. 2012. Coordination Breakdowns and
Their Impact on Development Productivity and Software Failures. IEEE Transac-
tions on Software Engineering 39, 3 (2012), 343–360. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.
2012.32
[4]Marcelo Cataldo, Patrick A. Wagstrom, James D. Herbsleb, and Kathleen M.
Carley. 2006. Identification of Coordination Requirements: Implications for the
Design of Collaboration and Awareness Tools. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th
anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) . ACM,
353–362. https://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180929
[5]Huseyin Cavusoglu, Hasan Cavusoglu, and Jun Zhang. 2006. Economics of
Security Patch Management. In WEIS . Citeseer, 1–10.
[6]Hasan Cavusoglu, Huseyin Cavusoglu, and Jun Zhang. 2008. Security Patch
Management: Share the Burden or Share the Damage? Management Science 54, 4
(2008), 657–670. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1070.0794
[7]Zhi Cheng, Angelika Dimoka, and Paul A Pavlou. 2016. Context may be King, but
generalizability is the Emperor! Journal of Information Technology 31, 3 (2016),
257–264. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41265-016-0005-7
[8]Olivier Crameri, Nikola Knezevic, Dejan Kostic, Ricardo Bianchini, and Willy
Zwaenepoel. 2007. Staged Deployment in Mirage, an Integrated Software Upgrade
Testing and Distribution System. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 41, 6
(2007), 221–236. https://doi.org/10.1145/1323293.1294283
[9]Kevin Crowston. 2003. A taxonomy of organizational dependencies and coordi-
nation mechanisms. Organizing Business Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook
(2003), 85–108.
[10] Andrew H. Van de Ven, Andre L. Delbecq, and Richard Koenig Jr. 1976. Deter-
minants of Coordination Modes within Organizations. American Sociological
Review (1976), 322–338.
[11] Debabrata Dey, Atanu Lahiri, and Guoying Zhang. 2015. Optimal Policies for
Security Patch Management. INFORMS Journal on Computing 27, 3 (2015), 462–
477. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2014.0638
[12] Constanze Dietrich, Katharina Krombholz, Kevin Borgolte, and Tobias Fiebig.
2018. Investigating System Operators’ Perspective on Security Misconfigurations.
InProceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security (CCS) . ACM, 1272–1289. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243794
[13] Nesara Dissanayake, Asangi Jayatilaka, Mansooreh Zahedi, and M Ali Babar.
2020. Software Security Patch Management–A Systematic Literature Review of
Challenges, Approaches, Tools and Practices. arXiv:2012.00544
[14] Ruian Duan, Ashish Bijlani, Yang Ji, Omar Alrawi, Yiyuan Xiong, Moses Ike,
Brendan Saltaformaggio, and Wenke Lee. 2019. Automating Patching of Vulner-
able Open-Source Software Versions in Application Binaries. In NDSS . https:
//dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2019.23126
[15] Melissa Eddy and Nicole Perlroth. 2020. Cyber Attack Suspected
in German Woman’s Death . Retrieved February 5, 2021 from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/18/world/europe/cyber-attack-germany-
ransomeware-death.html?smid=tw-share
[16] Svetla Georgieva and George Allan. 2008. Best Practices in Project Management
Through a Grounded Theory Lens. Electronic Journal of Business Research Methods
6, 1 (2008).
[17] Barney G. Glaser. 1978. Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of
Grounded Theory . Sociology Press, Mill Valley, CA.
[18] Barney G. Glaser. 1992. Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis: Emergence vs Forcing .
Sociology Press, Mill Valley, CA.
[19] Barney G. Glaser. 2005. The Grounded Theory Perspective III: Theoretical Coding .
Sociology Press, Mill Valley, CA.
[20] Barney G. Glaser and Anselmo L. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory:
Strategies for Qualitative Research . Aldine Transaction, Chicago.
[21] Dan Goodin. 2017. Failure to patch two-month-old bug led to massive Equifax
breach . Retrieved February 25, 2021 from https://arstechnica.com/information-
technology/2017/09/massive-equifax-breach-caused-by-failure-to-patch-two-
month-old-bug/
[22] Tanja Hanauer, Wolfgang Hommel, Stefan Metzger, and Daniela Pöhn. 2018. A
Process Framework for Stakeholder-specific Visualization of Security Metrics. In
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security . 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3230833.3232855
[23] Jo E. Hannay, Dag IK Sjoberg, and Tore Dyba. 2007. A Systematic Review of
Theory Use in Software Engineering Experiments. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 33, 2 (2007), 87–107. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2007.12[24] Michael Hicks and Scott Nettles. 2005. Dynamic Software Updating. ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) 27, 6 (2005),
1049–1096. https://doi.org/10.1145/381694.378798
[25] Rashina Hoda, James Noble, and Stuart Marshall. 2011. The impact of inadequate
customer collaboration on self-organizing Agile teams. Information and Software
Technology 53, 5 (2011), 521–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2010.10.009
[26] Rashina Hoda, James Noble, and Stuart Marshall. 2012. Developing a grounded
theory to explain the practices of self-organizing Agile teams. Empirical Software
Engineering 17, 6 (2012), 609–639. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-011-9161-0
[27] Hai Huang, Salman Baset, Chunqiang Tang, Ashu Gupta, KN Madhu Sudhan,
Fazal Feroze, Rajesh Garg, and Sumithra Ravichandran. 2012. Patch Management
Automation for Enterprise Cloud. In IEEE Network Operations and Management
Symposium . IEEE, 691–705. https://doi.org/10.1109/NOMS.2012.6211988
[28] Adam Jenkins, Pieris Kalligeros, Kami Vaniea, and Maria K. Wolters. 2020. “Any-
one Else Seeing this Error?”: Community, System Administrators, and Patch
Information. In 2020 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) .
IEEE, 105–119. https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSP48549.2020.00015
[29] Robert E. Kraut and Lynn A. Streeter. 1995. Coordination in software development.
Commun. ACM 38, 3 (1995), 69–82.
[30] Ann Langley. 1999. Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of
Management review 24, 4 (1999), 691–710. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1999.
2553248
[31] Frank Li and Vern Paxson. 2017. A Large-Scale Empirical Study of Security
Patches. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security (CCS) . ACM, 2201–2215. https://doi.org/10.1145/3133956.
3134072
[32] Frank Li, Lisa Rogers, Arunesh Mathur, Nathan Malkin, and Marshini Chetty.
2019. Keepers of the Machines: Examining How System Administrators Manage
Software Updates. In Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS
2019) . USENIX Association, 273–288.
[33] Thomas W. Malone and Kevin Crowston. 1990. What is coordination theory
and how can it help design cooperative work systems?. In Proceedings of the
1990 ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) . ACM,
357–370. https://doi.org/10.1145/99332.99367
[34] Thomas W. Malone and Kevin Crowston. 1991. Toward an interdisciplinary
theory of coordination. Organizing Business Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook
(1991).
[35] Lee Mathews. 2017. Equifax Data Breach Impacts 143 Million Americans . Retrieved
February 25, 2021 from https://www.forbes.com/sites/leemathews/2017/09/07/
equifax-data-breach-impacts-143-million-americans/#1abcaed0356f
[36] John E. Mathieu, Michelle A. Marks, and Stephen J. Zaccaro. 2001. Multiteam
systems. Handbook of Industrial, Work and Organizational Psychology 2 (2001),
289–313.
[37] Antonio Nappa, Richard Johnson, Leyla Bilge, Juan Caballero, and Tudor Dumi-
tras. 2015. The Attack of the Clones: A Study of the Impact of Shared Code on
Vulnerability Patching. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) . IEEE,
692–708. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.48
[38] Felicia M. Nicastro. 2003. Security Patch Management. Inf. Secur. J. A Glob.
Perspect. 12, 5 (2003), 5–18. https://doi.org/10.1201/1086/43808.12.5.20031101/
78486.2
[39] Shaya Potter and Jason Nieh. 2005. Reducing Downtime Due to System Mainte-
nance and Upgrades. In Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Systems Administration
Conference . IEEE, 6–6.
[40] Michal Procházka, Daniel Kouril, Romain Wartel, Christos Kanellopoulos, and
Christos Triantafyllidis. 2011. A Race for Security: Identifying Vulnerabilities on
50 000 Hosts Faster than Attackers. In Proceedings of Science (PoS). International
Symposium on Grid and Clouds .
[41] Paul Ralph. 2019. Toward Methodological Guidelines for Process Theories and
Taxonomies in Software Engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
45, 7 (2019), 712–735. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2018.2796554
[42] Pilar Rodriguez, Cathy Urquhart, and Emilia Mendes. 2020. A Theory of Value
for Value-based Feature Selection in Software Engineering. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2020.2989666
[43] Accenture Security. 2020. 2020 Cyber Threatscape Report . Retrieved February
9, 2021 from https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/PDF-136/Accenture-2020-
Cyber-Threatscape-Full-Report.pdf
[44] Jefferson Silva, Igor Wiese, Daniel M. German, Christoph Treude, Marco Aurélio
Gerosa, and Igor Steinmacher. 2020. A Theory of the Engagement in Open
Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE’20) . ACM, 421–431. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409724
[45] Murugiah Souppaya and Karen Scarfone. 2013. Guide to Enterprise Patch
Management Technologies. NIST Special Publication 800 (2013), 40. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-40r3
[46] James P. Spradley. 1980. Participant Observation (1st ed.). Rinehart and Winston,
Austin, TX.A Grounded Theory of the Role of Coordination in Software Security Patch Management ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
[47] Klaas-Jan Stol, Paul Ralph, and Brian Fitzgerald. 2016. Grounded Theory in
Software Engineering Research: A Critical Review and Guidelines. In Proceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . ACM, 120–131.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884833
[48] Diane E. Strode, Sid L. Huff, Beverley Hope, and Sebastian Link. 2012. Coordina-
tion in co-located agile software development projects. Journal of Systems and
Software 85, 6 (2012), 1222–1238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.02.017
[49] Christian Tiefenau, Maximilian Häring, Katharina Krombholz, and Emanuel
von Zezschwitz. 2020. Security, Availability, and Multiple Information Sources:Exploring Update Behavior of System Administrators. In Sixteenth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2020) . USENIX Association, 239–258.
[50] Cathy Urquhart. 2013. Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A Practical
Guide . Sage.
[51] Bo Yang, Naga Ayachitula, Sai Zeng, and Rajeev Puri. 2011. SLA-driven Applica-
bility Analysis for Patch Management. In 12th IFIP/IEEE International Symposium
on Integrated Network Management (IM 2011) and Workshops . IEEE, 438–445.
https://doi.org/10.1109/INM.2011.5990544