Smart Contract Security: a Practitioners’ Perspective
Zhiyuan Wan:, Xin Xia;}, David Lo§, Jiachi Chen;, Xiapu Luo¶, Xiaohu Yang
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
;Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University
§School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
¶Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{wanzhiyuan,yangxh}@zju.edu.cn, {xin.xia,jiachi.chen}@monash.edu, davidlo@smu.edu.sg, csxluo@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract —Smart contracts have been plagued by security
incidents, which resulted in substantial ﬁnancial losses. Given
numerous research efforts in addressing the security issues ofsmart contracts, we wondered how software practitioners buildsecurity into smart contracts in practice. We performed a mixtureof qualitative and quantitative studies with 13 interviewees and156 survey respondents from 35 countries across six continentsto understand practitioners’ perceptions and practices on smartcontract security. Our study uncovers practitioners’ motivationsand deterrents of smart contract security, as well as how securityefforts and strategies ﬁt into the development lifecycle. We alsoﬁnd that blockchain platforms have a statistically signiﬁcantimpact on practitioners’ security perceptions and practices ofsmart contract development. Based on our ﬁndings, we highlightfuture research directions and provide recommendations forpractitioners.
Index Terms—Security, Empirical study, Smart contract, Prac-
titioner
I. I NTRODUCTION
Blockchain is a distributed ledger that provides an
open, decentralized, and fault-tolerant transaction mechanism.
Blockchain technology has attracted considerable attentionfrom both industry and academia since it is originally intro-duced for Bitcoin [40] to support the exchange of cryptocur-rency. Blockchain technology evolves to facilitate general-purpose computations with a wide range of decentralizedapplications. The Smart contract technology is one appealing
decentralized application that enables the computations on topof a blockchain.
A smart contract is a piece of executable code that runs on
a blockchain to enforce the terms of an agreement betweenuntrusted parties. Blockchain technology assures that a smartcontract is immutable and contract initiated transactions areautonomously and truthfully executed. There are multipleblockchain platforms that support smart contracts [67], e.g.,Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric, and Corda, with Ethereumbeing the most prominent platform [4].
During the last decade, smart contracts have been plagued
by security incidents, which led to losses reaching millions ofdollars [64]. In June 2016, an attacker exploited vulnerabilitiesin the DAO smart contract to empty out around 4 millionEthers (worth around 50 million dollars). In July 2017, over150 thousand Ethers (worth over 34 million dollars) had been
:Also with PengCheng Laboratory.}Corresponding author.stolen due to an exploit in widely-used Parity Wallet [47]. InNovember 2017, over 500 thousand Ethers (worth over 150million dollars) were frozen due to a vulnerability in the verysame wallet [48].
To address the security issues of smart contracts, researchers
have proposed a broad range of defense solutions, includinglanguage-based security (e.g., [20], [16], [11]), static anal-ysis (e.g., [38], [64], [63]), and runtime veriﬁcation (e.g.,[56]). Vyper [20] removes some of the language function-alities in Solidity to eliminate vulnerabilities and adds newfeatures to support security and readability. In terms of staticanalysis, Oyente [38] leverages symbolic execution to tra-verse feasible execution paths on control ﬂow graphs anddetect vulnerabilities in smart contracts; Securify [64] deﬁnescompliance and violation patterns based on known vulnera-bilities; SmartCheck [63] translates smart contract code intoan XML-based parse-tree and check the parse-tree againstspeciﬁc XPath patterns. With respect to runtime veriﬁcation,Sereum [56] uses taint analysis to monitor runtime data ﬂowsduring the execution of smart contracts for preventing re-entrancy attacks.
Despite numerous efforts in assuring the security of smart
contracts, little is known about how software practitionersbuild security into smart contracts in practice. Thus, wefollowed a mixed methods approach to investigate the practi-tioners’ perceptions and practices with respect to smart con-tract security. We started with semi-structured interviews with13 software practitioners with experience in smart contractdevelopment, who have an average of 6.5 years of softwareprofessional experience. Through the interviews, we qualita-tively investigated the security awareness and practices that ourinterviewees experienced in smart contract development. Wederived 6 competing priorities in smart contract development,a list of 11 security motivators
1and 9 security deterrents
for smart contract practitioners, 5 sources where practitionersacquire security knowledge, 11 security strategies and 11factors that affect the adoption of security tools. We furtherperformed an exploratory survey with 156 smart contractpractitioners from 35 countries across six continents to quan-titatively validate the security perceptions and practices thatare uncovered in our interviews. The survey respondents work
1Security motivators are the factors that motivate practitioners to address
security; on the contrary, security deterrents are the factors that deter practi-
tioners from devoting efforts to security [7].
14102021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00127
on multiple blockchain platforms, i.e., public blockchains (80),
consortium blockchains (49), and private blockchains (20), andhold various job roles, i.e., development (130), testing (3),and project management (16). We investigated the followingresearch questions:
RQ1. What are practitioners’ perceptions regarding smart
contract security?
85% and 69% of the survey respondents perceive the impor-
tance of security and privacy in smart contracts, respectively.The security motivators include practitioners’ awareness ofimportance, workplace environment, and perceived negativeconsequences of security issues. Meanwhile, the security de-terrents include competing priorities in smart contract develop-ment and no formal process to address smart contract security.
RQ2. How does security ﬁt into the development lifecycle
of smart contracts?
This research question investigates security efforts, security
strategies, and the adoption of security tools in smart contractdevelopment. On average, security efforts account for 29%of the overall efforts during the development process ofsmart contracts. To ensure smart contract security, practitionersdistribute efforts across different stages in the developmentlifecycle. They tend to spend signiﬁcantly more effort towardssecurity at the construction and testing stages than at otherstages. In terms of security strategies and tool adoption,72% of the respondents frequently leverage more than onesecurity strategy. 58% of the respondents frequently used thecode reuse strategy. 54% of the respondents frequently adoptsecurity tools, especially the security plugins in integrateddevelopment environments.
RQ3. Do blockchain platforms inﬂuence practitioners’
perceptions and practices on smart contract security?
Blockchain platforms signiﬁcantly impact security percep-
tions and practices of practitioners in smart contract devel-opment, including security motivators (e.g., the immutabilityof smart contracts), security deterrents (e.g., the pressure offeature delivery), the amount of security efforts across stagesin the development lifecycle (e.g., security efforts at theconstruction stage), and strategies to address smart contractsecurity (e.g., code review).
Based on the ﬁndings, we discuss the disconnect between
the high awareness of smart contract security of practitionersand the frequent occurrence of security problems in smart con-tracts. We also provide practical lessons about code reuse, toolimplications, and proactive defense to ensure smart contractsecurity. In addition, we highlight several research avenuesacross blockchain platforms.
This paper makes the following contributions:
We perform a mixture of qualitative and quantitative stud-ies to investigate the security perceptions and practices insmart contract development;
We provide practical implications for practitioners andoutlined future avenues of research.
We provide the interview guide, questionnaire, and surveyresponses publicly accessible for future investigation byothers
2.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II brieﬂy reviews related work. In Section III, we describethe methodology of our study in detail. In Section IV, wepresent the results of our study. We discuss the implicationsof our results in Section V and threats to the validity of ourﬁndings in Section VI. Section VII draws conclusions andoutlines avenues for future work.
II. R
ELA TED WORK
A. Security Practices in Software Development
Practitioners work within organizations, teams, communi-
ties, and cultures. Previous studies investigated the socialfactors that could impact various aspects of security practices,e.g., security tool adoption [72], [71], [68]. Organization andteam policies are a driving factor to tool adoption [10], thoughmany organizations do not encourage the adoption of securitytools. Large organizations make more use of security tools thansmall ones [72]. Existing tools fail to meet the expectations ofpractitioners by generating low-quality warning messages [10],interrupting work ﬂow [31], [10], [60], producing excessivefalse positives [31], [10], and integrating poorly with Inte-grated Development Environments (IDEs) [31]. In this work,we investigated the factors that impact security practices insmart contract development.
Security is expected to be included in developing high-
quality software systems, but is rarely listed as an explicitrequirement [51]. Practitioners prioritize functional require-ments over security and focus on tasks for which outcomesare easy to measure [72], [51], [6]. Pressures from budget anddeadlines can also lead to lowering the priority of securitypractices [74]. Some organizations attempt to use penetrationtesting to motivate practitioners, but the motivation is hardto sustain without continuous support [65]. In this work,we investigated how practitioners prioritize security in smartcontract development.
Building security in from the start requires a large amount
of knowledge. Weir et al. found that enthusiasm about securityand motivation to learn are more likely to drive the acquisitionof security knowledge for developers than task driven [70].Alternatively, security experts could act as a roving source ofsecurity knowledge, but face challenges to convince others ofthe importance of security and examine all generated codewith limited resources [61]. Practitioners leverage variousinformation sources to gain knowledge on code security, e.g.,documentation [39], [2], and Stack Overﬂow [3]. Acar etal. [3] conducted an empirical study to investigate how theuse of information sources impacts code security. They foundthat developers who use Stack Overﬂow are more likely toproduce functional code, but less likely to write secure code.This paper investigates the involvement of security experts insmart contract development and information sources of smartcontract security.
2http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4005112
1411Interview 
GuideInterview 
Transcript Semi-Structured 
Interviews
13 ParticipantsOpen Card Sorting 
on 133 Unique 
Codes
InterviewsPotential
Answers
and 
Statements
Pilot Survey
5 participants
Online Survey
156 RespondentsSurveyFindings
Pilot Survey
5 Participants
Fig. 1. Research methodology.
In the course of software design and construction, misuse
of application programming interfaces (APIs) can introduce
security vulnerabilities [19], [21], [24]. Developers incorrectlyuse an API because they do not conduct an additional checkbut trust the API to do the right thing [44]. Acar et al.compared the usability of ﬁve Python cryptographic APIs andsuggested that documentation with examples is more helpfulthan a simple API [2]. Nadi et al. [39] performed an empiricalstudy on how developers use Java cryptography APIs. Theyfound that developers struggle with Java cryptography APIsand prefer task-based solutions. In addition, developers havedifﬁculty in using security-related APIs, for instance, APIs inTransport Layer Security (TLS) and Security Sockets Layer(SSL) [22], [45]. This paper investigates whether the use ofsmart contract related APIs may introduce security risks.
B. Smart Contract Security
Security vulnerabilities spread across smart contracts of
various blockchain platforms, e.g., Ethereum [30], [38], [56],
Hyperledger Frabric [75] and EOS [52]. Security vulnerabili-ties result from multiple causes, e.g., reentrancy [56], delegate-call injection [53], and integer overﬂow and underﬂow [41].Different programming languages of smart contracts andblockchain architectures lead to different vulnerabilities [9]. Inthis work, we investigate practitioners’ awareness of securityvulnerabilities in their smart contracts.
Previous studies proposed a wide range of approaches and
tools for securing smart contracts, including recommendingbest practices in programming smart contracts, implementingspeciﬁc programming languages, static analysis, and runtimemonitoring. For instance, ConsenSys [13] provides extensivebest practices for Ethereum smart contract security, includingcode patterns to learn and pitfalls to avoid. Vyper [20] and
Bamboo [16] provide language-based support to eliminate
smart contract vulnerabilities. Static analysis tools leveragesymbolic execution [14], [8], [34], [38], [43], [50], abstractinterpretation [25], [32], [59], [64], [76], formal veriﬁca-tion [26], [5], [27], [29], [28], [49], fuzzing [37], [30], [69]and model checking [63] to identify smart contract vulnerabil-ities. DappGuard [15] and Sereum [56] monitor the runtimeexecution of a smart contract to prevent potential exploitationsof vulnerabilities. In this work, we investigate the adoption ofsecurity strategies and tools of smart contracts in practice andexplore the expectations of practitioners.III. M
ETHODOLOGY
Our research methodology followed a mixed methods ap-
proach [17], as depicted in Fig. 1. The approach followsa sequential explanatory strategy, involving two phases – aﬁrst qualitative phase of interviews, followed by a secondquantitative phase of an exploratory survey
3. The survey builds
on the results of the interviews. Speciﬁcally, we collecteddata from two sources: (1) We interviewed 13 software prac-titioners with experience in smart contract development andderived a list of statements and potential answers for surveyquestions from the results of interviews; (2) We surveyed 156respondents with experience in smart contract development.To preserve the anonymity of participants, we anonymizedall items that constitute of Personally Identiﬁable Information(PII) before analyzing the data, and further considered aliasesas PII throughout our study (e.g., refer to the interviewees asP1 - P13).
A. Interviews
The left part of Fig. 1 describes the process of interviews.
1) Protocol: The ﬁrst author conducted a series of face-to-
face interviews with 13 software practitioners with experience
in smart contract development. Each interview took 30-45 min-utes. The interviews were semi-structured and made use of aninterview guide
4. To develop the interview guide, we obtained
an initial set of open-ended questions through brainstormingwithin the authors of this paper, focusing on practitioners’perceptions and practices concerning smart contract security.
The interview comprised three parts. In the ﬁrst part, we
asked some demographic questions about the experience ofthe interviewees in smart contract development. The questionscovered various aspects of experience, including programming,design, testing, and project management.
In the second part, we asked open-ended questions about
the security awareness and practices of smart contract devel-opment. The purpose of this part was to allow the intervieweesto speak freely about their opinions and experience without theinterviewer biasing their responses.
In the third part, we asked the interviewees to discuss
the sources where they obtain security-related knowledge, aswell as strategies and tools that they have used for securityassurance of smart contracts in the practices.
3The interviews and survey were approved by the relevant institutional re-
view board (IRB). Participants were instructed that we wanted their opinions;
privacy and sensitive resources were not explicitly mentioned
4Interview guide online: http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4005112
1412At the end of each interview, we thanked the interviewee
and brieﬂy informed her of our next plans.
2) Participant Selection: We recruited full-time software
practitioners with experience in smart contract development
from blockchain companies (e.g., Hyperchain5), IT compa-
nies (e.g., Alibaba) and open-source smart contract projects.Interviewees were recruited by emailing our contact in eachcompany or project, who disseminated the news of our studyto their colleagues. V olunteers would inform us if they werewilling to participate in the study with no compensation. Withthis approach, 13 volunteers with varied experience in yearscontacted us – 7 interviewees from four companies and 6interviewees from three open-source projects. In the remainderof this paper, we denote these 13 interviewees as P1 toP13. These 13 interviewees have an average of 6.5 years ofprofessional experience in software development (min: 3, max:13, median: 6.5, sd: 2.7), and an average of 2.3 years in smartcontract development (min: 1, max: 5, median: 2, sd: 1.1).Table I summarizes the number of interviewees who perceivedthemselves as having “extensive” experience (in comparisonto “none” and “some” experience) in a particular role.
3) Data Analysis: We conducted a thematic analysis [18] to
process the recorded interviews by following the steps below:
Transcribing and Coding. After the last interview was
completed, we transcribed the recordings of the interviews,
and developed a thorough understanding by reviewing thetranscripts. The ﬁrst author read the transcripts and coded theinterviews using NVivo qualitative analysis software [1].
To ensure the quality of codes, the second author veriﬁed
initial codes created by the ﬁrst author and provided sugges-tions for improvement. After incorporating these suggestions,we generated a total of 427 cards that contain the codes - 30to 41 cards for each coded interview. After merging the codeswith the same words or meanings, we have a total of 133unique codes.
Open Card Sorting. Two of the authors then separately ana-
lyzed the codes and sorted the generated cards into potential
themes for thematic similarity (as illustrated in LaToza etal.’s study [35]). The themes that emerged during the sortingwere not chosen beforehand. We then use the Cohen’s Kappameasure [12] to examine the agreement between the twolabelers. The overall Kappa value between the two labelersis 0.76, which indicates substantial agreement between the la-belers. After completing the labeling process, the two labelersdiscussed their disagreements to reach a common decision.To reduce bias from the two authors sorting the cards to forminitial themes, they both reviewed and agreed on the ﬁnal set ofthemes. Eventually, we derived 6 competing priorities, a list of11 security motivators and 9 security deterrents, 5 sources ofsecurity knowledge, and 11 security strategies, and 11 factorsthat affect the adoption of security tools.
B. Survey
The right part of Fig. 1 describes the process of our online
survey.
5https://www.hyperchain.cn/enTABLE I
NUMBER OF INTERVIEWEES WITH “EXTENSIVE ”EXPERIENCE IN A
PARTICULAR ROLE .
Role Smart Contract non-Smart-Contract
Programming 10 12
Design 8 6
Management 3 4
Testing 3 3
1) Protocol: We conducted an IRB-approved anonymous
online survey with professional smart contract practitioners.
The survey aims to validate and quantify the observations fromour interviews. We followed Kitchenham and Pﬂeeger’s guide-lines for personal opinion surveys [33] and used an anonymoussurvey to increase response rates [66]. A respondent has theoption to specify that she prefers not to answer or does notunderstand the description of a particular question. We includethis option to reduce the possibility of respondents providingarbitrary answers.Recruitment of Respondents. To recruit respondents from
the population of smart contract practitioners, we spread thesurvey to a broad range of companies from various loca-tions worldwide. No identifying information was required orgathered from our respondents. To get a sufﬁcient number ofrespondents from diverse backgrounds, we followed a multi-pronged strategy to recruit respondents:
We contacted professionals from blockchain companiesand IT companies that launch blockchain projects aroundthe world and asked their help to disseminate our surveywithin their organizations. Speciﬁcally, we sent emailsto our contacts in Alibaba, Baidu, Hengtian, Hyperchain,IBM, Morgan Stanley, and other companies, encourag-ing them to disseminate our survey to some of theircolleagues who have experience in smart contract devel-opment. By following this strategy, we aimed to recruitrespondents working with smart contracts in the industryfrom diverse organizations.
We sent an email with a link to the survey to 1,986practitioners who contributed to 12 blockchain repos-itories that support smart contracts (e.g., ethereum/go-
ethereum, EOSIO/eos and hyperledger/fabric) and 580
smart contract repositories (e.g., ethereum/solidity and
EOSIO/eosio.contracts) hosted on GitHub and solicitedtheir participation. We aimed to recruit open-source prac-titioners who have smart contract experience in additionto professionals working in the industry.Out of these emails, eight emails received automaticreplies notifying us of the absence of the receiver; twoemails indicated the receivers left the original organiza-tions; four receivers replied that they only have experi-ence in blockchain but not smart contract development.
2) Survey Design: The survey includes different types of
questions, e.g., multiple-choice and free-text answer questions.The potential answers and statements of multiple-choice ques-tions were derived from the results of our interviews. For thesequestions, we include an “I don’t know” option in case somestatements are not applicable to the experience of respondents,
1413or respondents had a poor understanding of the statements.
The survey consists of four sections, grouping questions
by topic to minimize the cognitive load on participants and
allow them to consider the topic more deeply [36]. Speciﬁcally,the following four sections have been captured in the survey(the complete questionnaire is available online as supplementalmaterial
6):
Demographics. We collected demographic information about
the respondents to allow us to (1) ﬁlter respondents whomay not understand our survey (i.e., respondents without anyexperience in smart contracts), (2) breakdown the results bygroups (e.g., public, consortium, and private blockchains).Speciﬁcally, we asked two questions:
Do you have experience with smart contracts?
What best describes the primary blockchain platform
that you currently work on?
In terms the second question, we provided four options forprimary blockchain platforms, including (1) public blockchain,
(2) consortium blockchain, (3) private blockchain, and (4)
other.
Based on the selections of respondents, we could exclude
invalid responses and divide the survey respondents into threegroups. To focus the respondents’ attention on a particularblockchain platform in the survey, they were explicitly askedto answer each following question with respect to their expe-rience with the primary blockchain platform they speciﬁed.
We received a total of 203 responses, and further excluded
46 responses made by respondents who claimed that they donot have experience in smart contract development. We alsoexcluded one response made by a respondent who describedher job role as sales. In the end, we had a set of 156 validresponses. The 156 respondents reside in 35 countries acrosssix continents as shown in Fig. 2. The top two countries inwhich the respondents reside are China (61) and the UnitedStates (16). The respondents have an average of 6.3 yearsof professional experience (min: 0.5, max: 40, median: 4,sd: 6.9), with an average of 2 years of experience in smartcontract development (min: 0.1, max: 6, median: 2, sd: 1.4).Our survey respondents are distributed across different demo-graphic groups (job roles and primary blockchain platforms)as shown in Fig. 3. Seven respondents who selected Other
as their primary blockchain platforms and explained thatthey simultaneously work on more than one blockchain. Weexcluded the responses of the seven respondents from anycomparisons between groups of different blockchains.
Perceptions on Smart Contract Security. This section in-
vestigates practitioners’ perceptions of smart contract security,
speciﬁcally, the importance of security, awareness of securityproblems, as well as the motivators and deterrents to smartcontract security.
Security Practices in Smart Contract Development. This
section focused on security practices in smart contracts, in-
cluding practitioners’ efforts towards security, their strategiesfor achieving security, and tools for securing smart contracts.
6Questionnaire Online: http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.40051120102030405060
Fig. 2. Countries in which survey respondents reside. The darker the color is,
the more respondents reside in that country. The legend indicates the numberof respondents.
Fig. 3. Survey respondents demographics. The number indicates the countof each demographic group.
More details about the questions and format are available
in Section IV, along with the corresponding results.
We piloted the preliminary survey with a small set of smart
contract practitioners who were different from our intervie-
wees and survey takers. We obtained feedback on (1) whetherthe length of the survey was appropriate, and (2) the clarity andunderstandability of the terms. We made minor modiﬁcationsto the preliminary survey based on the received feedback andproduced a ﬁnal version. Note that the collected responsesfrom the pilot survey are excluded from the presented resultsin this paper.
To support respondents from China, we translated our
survey to Chinese before publishing the survey. We chose tomake our survey available both in English on Google Forms,and in Chinese on a popular survey website in China
7. The
reason is that English is an international lingua franca, andChinese is the most spoken language. We expected that a largenumber of our survey recipients are ﬂuent in one of these twolanguages. We carefully translated our survey to make surethere exists no ambiguity between English and Chinese termsin our survey. Also, we polished the translation by improvingclarity and understandability according to the feedback fromour pilot survey.
3) Data Analysis: We analyzed the survey results based on
the question types. For multiple-choice questions, we reportedthe percentage each option is selected. In terms of open-endedquestions, we followed an inductive approach in which twoauthors separately performed open card sorting and regularlydiscussed emerging themes until an agreement was reached.
Factor Analysis. To identify meaningful clusters of closely
related information, we used factor analysis to analyze the
Likert-scale ratings of the statements with respect to thesecurity motivators and security deterrents in smart contract
7https://www.wjx.cn
1414% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesSupporting many featuresCosting less gasEasy to useProtecting privacySecuring against malicious attacksAvoiding bugs
100 50 0 50 100149148150150151152
Not at All Slightly Moderately Very Extremely
Fig. 4. Importance of Different Requirements.
development. Speciﬁcally, we used principal axis factor anal-
ysis in the psych R library [54] to group related information
with a cut-off point of |0.4|for factor loading. We used the
fa.parallel function in the psych R library to select
the optimal number of factors for factor analysis. Thus, wereduced a large set of variables into a smaller set (factors)while retaining the majority of original information [62].
Comparison. We classiﬁed our respondents into different
groups based on their primary blockchain platforms (i.e., pub-
lic, consortium, and private blockchains), and compared thesurvey results of different groups of respondents. For instance,we used the Wilcoxon rank-sum test for Likert-scale answersto perform the comparison. All statistical tests assumed a p-value  0.05as a signiﬁcant level. Bonferroni correction was
applied to adjust p-values in multiple comparisons.
IV . R
ESULTS
We explain the results of three research questions that
investigate smart contract security from the perspective ofpractitioners.
A. RQ1: Perceptions of Smart Contract Security
In RQ1, we explored practitioners’ priorities in smart con-
tract development, what motivates them and deters them to
address smart contract security, and their experience of secu-rity problems. To understand practitioners’ priorities in smartcontract development, we presented our respondents with sixstatements that describe the requirements of smart contracts.Respondents ranked the importance of each requirement ona 5-point Likert scale (not at all, slightly, moderately, very,
extremely). To explore what drives practitioners to addresssmart contract security, we presented our respondents with alist of 11 statements that describe potential security motivatorsand 9 statements that explain potential security deterrents.Respondents indicated their level of agreement with each state-ment on a 5-point Likert scale (strongly disagree, disagree,
neutral, agree ,strongly agree). In addition, we asked the
respondents to report whether their smart contracts have everexperienced a security problem as well as the sources wherethey gain security knowledge.
Importance of Security. Fig. 4 shows respondents’ ratings
of the importance of various requirements in their smart
contracts. In addition to avoiding bugs, 85% and 69% of therespondents considered security and privacy very orextremely
important, respectively. The ratings were higher than therequirement of costing less gas in smart contracts.TABLE II
FACTOR ANALYSIS OF MOTIV A TORS TO SMART CONTRACT SECURITY .
Variables (Motivators as presented in the survey)Factor
loading
Awareness of Importance
[M7] I see software security as my responsibility. 0.76
[M6] Software security is a shared responsibility by all those
involved in the development lifecycle.0.71
[M8] I care about my users’ experience in security andprivacy.0.68
[M1] Software security is in my company’s culture. 0.51
Workplace Environment
[M3] My company is audited for smart contract security byan external entity.0.73
[M2] My company mandates security practices in smartcontract development.0.61
Perceived Negative Consequences
[M4] My company would lose customers in case of a securitybreach.0.78
[M5] Security breaches would hurt my company’s reputation. 0.66[M9] Customers would lose money in case of a securitybreach.0.56
Motivators not belonging to any factor
[M10] The deployed smart contracts are immutable.[M11] It is challenging to detect and trace attacks on smartcontracts deployed to blockchains.
Security Motivators. We asked the respondents “I care about
smart contract security because ... ” and presented the 11
potential motivators for smart contract security. As shown in
Fig. 5, the top two security motivators are respondents’ internalmotivations
8, i.e., to protect their users and the reputation of
their companies. Meanwhile, external motivations9are report-
edly less motivating, i.e., the immutability of smart contractsand external auditing.
We used factor analysis to cluster the 11 motivators into
three factors as shown in Table II. Two motivators did notconform to any particular factor. We named the factors asawareness of importance, workplace environment and per-
ceived negative consequences. Out of the three factors, work-
place environment is the only external motivation.
Security Deterrents. Respondents generally opposed state-
ments that imply deferring or ignoring security, as suggestedby the longer red bars in comparison with blue bars (Fig. 6).The top two deterrents of smart contract security are a lack ofawareness of security attacks, followed by a formal process.
Our factor analysis combined 8 out of the 9 deterrents into
two factors; 1 deterrent did not correspond to any particularfactor (Table III). The ﬁrst factor competing priorities and
no process describes how a lack of security can arise from
systemic causes within an organization or a team. The otherfactor irrelevance of security characterizes the personal-level
awareness of security risks that can deter practitioners fromaddressing smart contract security.
Experiencing Security Problems. 40% of our respondents
reported that they had experienced at least one out of three
potential security problems, i.e., vulnerabilities in unshipped
8Internal motivation: people stand behind a behavior out of their interests
and values [58].
9External motivation: people do a behavior for reasons external to the
self [58].
1415% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesThe deployed smart contracts are immutable. [M10]My company is audited for smart contract security by an external entity. [M3]It is challenging to detect and trace attacks on smart contracts deployed to blockchains. [M11]My company mandates security practices in smart contract development. [M2]Software security is in my company's culture. [M1]Customers would lose money in case of a security breach. [M9]My company would lose customers in case of a security breach. [M4]I see software security as my responsibility. [M7]Software security is a shared responsibility by all those involved in the development lifecycle. [M6]Security breaches would hurt my company's reputation. [M5]I care about my users' experience in security and privacy. [M8]
100 50 0 50 100150138148142147148146150147148149
Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly Agree
Fig. 5. Motivators of smart contract security.
% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesSmart contract security is not my responsibility. [D2]It is easy to mitigate the negative impact of a security breach. [D8]It is unlikely that our smart contract will be attacked. [D7]In my team, it is more important to deliver features on time than to address smart contract security. [D4]My team does not have the budget to address smart contract security. [D5]Smart contract security is a burden on top of my main responsibilities. [D3]Available security tools for smart contracts are not useful. [D9]My company does not have a formal process for smart contract security. [D6]The smart contracts I develop are not prone to security attacks. [D1]
100 5 005 0 1 00150145144151146148138144138
Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly Agree
Fig. 6. Deterrents of smart contract security.
TABLE III
FACTOR ANALYSIS OF DETERRENTS TO SMART CONTRACT SECURITY .
Variables (Deterrents as presented in the survey)Factor
loading
Competing Priorities and No Process
[D5] My team does not have the budget to address smart
contract security.0.86
[D6] My company does not have a formal process for smartcontract security.0.79
[D4] In my team, it is more important to deliver features ontime than to address smart contract security.0.74
[D2] Smart contract security is not my responsibility. 0.52
[D3] Smart contract security is a burden on top of my mainresponsibilities.0.43
Irrelevance of Security
[D7] It is unlikely that our smart contract will be attacked. 0.64[D1] The smart contracts I develop are not prone to securityattacks.0.58
[D8] It is easy to mitigate the negative impact of a securitybreach.0.56
Deterrents not belonging to any factor
[D9] Available security tools for smart contracts are notuseful.
code, vulnerabilities in shipped code, and security breaches.
Identiﬁcation of vulnerable code before smart contracts wereshipped was the most frequently reported (22%) securityproblem in our survey. 19% of the respondents indicated thatvulnerabilities were discovered in shipped smart contracts.10% reported that their smart contracts experienced a securitybreach. We note that these numbers are not mutually exclusive;10% of the respondents reported multiple security problems.
Sources of Security Knowledge. Ofﬁcial forums of
blockchain platforms (60%), research papers (53%), question
and answer websites (47%) are the top three most popularsources for respondents to acquire security knowledge aboutsmart contracts. We note that these numbers are not mutually% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesRequirementMaintenanceDeploymentDesignConstructionTesting
100 50 0 50 100146144144146145146
Not at All Slightly Moderately Very Extremely
Fig. 7. Security efforts across stages in development lifecycle.
exclusive; 74% of our respondents use more than one source
to gain knowledge of smart contract security.
B. RQ2: Security Practices in Smart Contract Development
The survey had several questions exploring the efforts and
strategies that development teams employ to ensure smart
contract security. 44% of our respondents received supportfrom professional security experts.
Efforts towards Security. Respondents reported the percent-
age of efforts directed towards security out of the overall
efforts in the development lifecycle of smart contracts. Theyalso reported to what extent security was considered for eachstage in the development lifecycle (i.e., requirement, design,construction, testing, deployment, and maintenance).
Our respondents indicated that, on average, security efforts
account for 29% (min: 0%, max: 100%, median: 20%, sd:26%) of the overall efforts in smart contract development. 14respondents indicated that their teams do not spend any efforton security.
We used the Wilcoxon rank sum test to determine if the
distribution of security efforts statistically signiﬁcantly differs
1416% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesFuzzing [S7]External Auditing [S9]Formal Verification [S5]Vulnerability Scan [S6]Threat Assessment [S1]Runtime Monitoring [S10]Security Testing [S8]Static Analysis [S4]Code Reuse [S11]Code Style Checking [S2]Code Review [S3]
100 50 0 50 100141141143143142141144145141148148
Very Rarely Rarely Sometimes Often Very Often
Fig. 8. Strategies for handling smart contract security.
across different stages in the process. As shown in Fig. 7,
security effort at the testing stage was statistically signiﬁcantlyhigher than that at the requirement (p-value = 0.01) andmaintenance stages (p-value = 0.04). Security effort at theconstruction stage was statistically signiﬁcantly higher thanthat at the requirement stage (p-value = 0.05). Although ourinterviewees (P4 and P6) mentioned that “we try to get it(security) right from the beginning”, security effort at therequirement stage was ranked at the bottom across differentstages in the development lifecycle.
Strategies to Address Smart Contract Security. We pro-
vided a list of 11 statements that describe potential security
strategies, and asked the respondents to rate each statementfrom the list on a 5-point Likert scale (very rarely, rarely,
sometimes, often, very often).
Our respondents combine various strategies to address smart
contract security in practice. 72% of our respondents fre-quently leverage more than one security strategy in smartcontract development. As shown in Fig. 8, code review isthe most frequently used security strategy – 72% of ourrespondents indicated that they often orvery often rely on
code review to address smart contract security. 61% and 58%of the respondents often orvery often do code style checking
and reuse code from reliable sources, respectively. Only 28%of the respondents often orvery often integrate fuzzing into
the development lifecycle.
A total of 24 respondents provided free-form text comments
regarding other security strategies they use in practice. Out ofthe 24 respondents, 11 drilled down the aforementioned strate-gies; the other 13 respondents identiﬁed additional strategies(followed by their corresponding frequency) as follows:
Security by Design (5): “Security concerns should bebuilt into the framework and exposed via documented,developer-friendly APIs so that good security is easy andbad security is hard.”
Programming Languages (3): “... use the most stableversion of Solidity avoiding the latest one.”
Dependency Management (2): “Dependency managementto ensure we’re using recent versions.”
Learning from Past Experiences (2) “... failure code ofothers in the past.”
Seeking Support from Experts (1): “ ... ensured by cryp-
tography designing together with experts.”% of Valid Responses
Number of Valid ResponsesMultiple LanguagesRun FastExtensibleCost Little MoneyLow False PositivesLow False NegativesEasy To UseHighly AutomatedUnderstandable ReportsBroadly Cover IssuesActively Maintained
100 50 0 50 100146147146147147146147147147146148
Strongly Disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly Agree
Fig. 9. Factors that affect adoption of security tools.
Tools to Address Smart Contract Security. We further
investigated the adoption of security tools for smart contracts.
54% of our respondents indicated that they frequently adoptsecurity tools in smart contract development. Security plug-ins in Integrated Development Environments (IDE) are themost popular security tool for smart contracts – 45% of ourrespondents indicated that they often orvery often rely on
security plugins in IDEs to address smart contract security.We further investigated how frequently the security tools forsmart contracts have been adopted in practice. 19%, 12%,14% and 12% of the respondents reported that they often or
very often use Mythril [14], Oyente [38], SmartCheck [63] and
Slither [23], respectively.
In addition, we investigated what factors affect the adoption
of security tools in smart contract development. We provideda list of 11 statements that describe potential factors and askedthe respondents to rate each statement from the list on a 5-point Likert scale (strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree ,
strongly agree). As shown in Fig. 9, active maintenance isthe most important factor in the adoption of security tools(85% agree orstrongly agree). 86% of the respondents agree
orstrongly agree that coverage of security issues affects the
adoption of security tools.
C. RQ3: Effect of Blockchain Platforms on Security Percep-
tions and Practices
In RQ3, We explore whether blockchain platforms inﬂuence
security motivators and deterrents to smart contract security,as well as security efforts across different stages and strategiestowards smart contract security.
We summarize the results of comparisons in Table IV. The
Statement column shows the statements presented to respon-
dents in the survey. These statements describe the motivators,deterrents, stages in the development lifecycle, and securitystrategies. The following column indicates the labels we usedto identify statements throughout the paper.
The Effect Size column indicates the difference between
Public Blockchain and Consortium Blockchain in the ﬁrst
subcolumn, Public Blockchain and Private Blockchain in the
second subcolumn, and Consortium Blockchain and Private
Blockchain in the third subcolumn. We use Cliff’s delta to
measure the magnitude of the differences because Cliff’sdelta is reported to be more robust and reliable than Cohen’sdelta [57]. Cliff’s delta represents the degree of overlap
1417TABLE IV
IMPACT OF BLOCKCHAIN PLA TFORMS ON SMART CONTRACT SECURITY .ORANGE CELLS INDICA TE WHERE THE FORMER GROUP IS MORE NEGA TIVE
ABOUT THE STA TEMENT THAN THE LA TTER GROUP ;BLUE CELLS INDICA TE WHERE THE FORMER GROUP IS MORE POSITIVE .GREEN CELLS
REPRESENT STA TISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES .THE NUMBER IN “()” INDICA TES THE SIZE OF EACH GROUP .
Effect Size P-value
Public (80) Public (80) Consortium (49) Public (80) Public (80) Consortium (49)
vs. vs. vs. vs. vs. vs.
Statement Consortium (49) Private (20) Private (20) Consortium (49) Private (20) Private (20)
Motivators:
Software security is in my company’s culture. [M1] 0.16 0.09 -0.09 1.000 1.000 1.000
My company mandates security practices in smart contract development. [M2] 0.16 -0.02 -0.20 1.000 1.000 1.000
My company is audited for smart contract security by an external entity. [M3] 0.20 0.14 -0.06 0.740 1.000 1.000
My company would lose customers in case of a security breach. [M4] 0.18 0.09 -0.11 0.778 1.000 1.000
Security breaches would hurt my company’s reputation. [M5] 0.07 0.10 0.02 1.000 1.000 1.000
Software security is a shared responsibility by all those involved in the development lifecycle. [M6] -0.09 -0.05 0.05 1.000 1.000 1.000
I see software security as my responsibility. [M7] 0.18 0.23 0.03 0.739 0.890 1.000
I care about my users’ experience in security and privacy. [M8] 0.16 0.19 0.01 0.972 1.000 1.000
Customers would lose money in case of a security breach. [M9] 0.02 -0.01 -0.04 1.000 1.000 1.000
The deployed smart contracts are immutable. [M10] 0.39 0.14 -0.24 0.002 1.000 1.000
It is challenging to detect and trace attacks on smart contracts deployed to blockchains. [M11] -0.13 -0.10 0.01 1.000 1.000 1.000
Deterrents:
The smart contracts I develop are not prone to security attacks. [D1] -0.19 -0.09 0.12 0.674 1.000 1.000
Smart contract security is not my responsibility. [D2] -0.36 -0.28 0.08 0.003 0.345 1.000
Smart contract security is a burden on top of my main responsibilities. [D3] 0.06 -0.22 -0.28 1.000 1.000 0.608
In my team, it is more important to deliver features on time than to address smart contract security. [D4] -0.43 -0.54 -0.12 0.000 0.001 1.000
My team does not have the budget to address smart contract security. [D5] -0.23 -0.35 -0.21 0.268 0.130 1.000
My company does not have a formal process for smart contract security. [D6] -0.17 -0.33 -0.23 0.999 0.244 1.000
It is unlikely that our smart contract will be attacked. [D7] 0.03 -0.12 -0.16 1.000 1.000 1.000
It is easy to mitigate the negative impact of a security breach. [D8] -0.06 -0.24 -0.21 1.000 0.922 1.000
Available security tools for smart contracts are not useful. [D9] -0.02 -0.34 -0.37 1.000 0.280 0.223
Security Efforts at Stages:
Requirement [E1] 0.23 0.01 -0.22 0.174 1.000 0.945
Design [E2] 0.27 -0.06 -0.34 0.059 1.000 0.186
Construction [E3] 0.28 0.00 -0.25 0.042 1.000 0.675
Testing [E4] 0.21 0.22 0.09 0.255 0.806 1.000
Deployment [E5] 0.21 -0.08 -0.30 0.251 1.000 0.394
Maintenance [E6] 0.27 0.08 -0.15 0.057 1.000 1.000
Security Strategies:
Threat Assessment [S1] 0.06 0.34 0.32 1.000 0.265 0.435
Code Style Checking [S2] 0.14 0.17 0.03 1.000 1.000 1.000
Code Review [S3] 0.40 0.38 0.09 0.001 0.079 1.000
Static Analysis [S4] 0.04 0.26 0.28 1.000 0.886 0.867
Formal V eriﬁcation [S5] -0.03 0.13 0.19 1.000 1.000 1.000
Vulnerability Scan [S6] -0.02 0.17 0.26 1.000 1.000 1.000
Fuzzing [S7] -0.14 0.10 0.24 1.000 1.000 1.000
Security Testing [S8] 0.11 0.24 0.18 1.000 1.000 1.000
External Auditing [S9] 0.17 0.19 0.04 1.000 1.000 1.000
Runtime Monitoring [S10] 0.06 0.13 0.10 1.000 1.000 1.000
Code Reuse [S11] 0.28 0.22 -0.04 0.079 1.000 1.000
between two sample distributions, ranging from 1to  1. The
extreme value 1occurs when the intersection between both
groups is an empty set. When the compared groups tend to
overlap, Cliff’s Delta approaches zero. The magnitudes can beassessed with the thresholds as speciﬁed in [57]: if |δ | 0.147,
the effect size is negligible; if 0.147 ¤|δ | 0.33, the effect
size is small; if 0.330 ¤|δ |  0.474, the effect size is
medium; and otherwise the effect size is large. Effect sizes areadditionally colored on a gradient from blue to orange basedon the magnitudes of difference: blue color means the formergroup is more positive about the statement, and orange colormeans the latter group is more positive about the statement.
The P-value column indicates whether the differences for
each statement are statistically signiﬁcant between Public
Blockchain and Consortium Blockchain in the ﬁrst subcolumn,
Public Blockchain and Private Blockchain in the second sub-
column, and Consortium Blockchain and Private Blockchain
in the third subcolumn. Statistically signiﬁcant differences ata 95% conﬁdence level (Bonferroni corrected p-value  0.05)
are highlighted in green.
Based on the observed statistically signiﬁcant differences
and effect sizes, we can say with some certainty that:
Security Motivators: The blockchain platforms signiﬁ-
cantly impact the security motivator in terms of the im-mutability of smart contracts. The immutability of smartcontracts drives practitioners of public blockchains moreintensively than practitioners of consortium blockchains.In addition, the practitioners of public blockchains tendto be more motivated to address smart contract securitythan those of consortium and private blockchains.
Security Deterrents: The blockchain platforms signif-
icantly affect the deterrents to security with respect tocompeting priorities in smart contract development. Prac-titioners of public blockchains tend to be more willingto prioritize security tasks over feature delivery and takethe responsibility of addressing smart contract security,in comparison with those of consortium and privateblockchains.
Security Efforts across Stages: The blockchain plat-
forms statistically signiﬁcantly impact the security effortsat the construction stage in the development lifecycle.Practitioners of public blockchains spend more effortstowards security throughout the six stages in the devel-opment lifecycle, especially at the construction stage, incomparison with practitioners of consortium blockchains.In addition, practitioners of consortium blockchains tendto put less emphasis on security at the requirement,construction, deployment, and maintenance stages, incomparison with practitioners of private blockchains.
Security Strategies: The blockchain platforms signiﬁ-
cantly affect the code review strategy that practitionersuse to address smart contract security. Practitioners ofpublic blockchains tend to perform code review morefrequently than practitioners of consortium and privateblockchains. Aside from code review, we observed no sig-niﬁcant difference in the frequency of use of other secu-
1418rity strategies between public and consortium blockchain
practitioners. Private blockchain practitioners tend to usesecurity strategies less frequently than public and consor-tium blockchain practitioners.
V. D
ISCUSSION
We reﬂect on our ﬁndings of research questions, delving
into security awareness and risks of smart contracts, as wellas code reuse and tool implications in smart contracts. Wealso highlight the avenues of future research across blockchainplatforms.
A. Security Awareness and Risks of Smart Contracts
The vast majority of our respondents acknowledge the
importance of smart contract security (RQ1). They prioritize
security over the reduction of execution cost (e.g., gas con-sumption) in smart contract development. Our respondentsspend 29% of overall efforts on average in conducting security-related tasks. Previous studies found that developers generallyexhibit a “security is not my responsibility” attitude [73]. Onthe contrary, 85% of our respondents see smart contract secu-rity as their responsibility. Smart contract practitioners tend
to have a higher awareness of security than practitionersin other software areas.
Despite the high awareness of security among smart con-
tract practitioners, 40% of our survey respondents indicatedthat their smart contracts suffered from security problems,including security breaches (RQ1). The percentage is higherthan that of software in general (33%) as reported in a recentsurvey [7]. The frequent occurrence of security problems insmart contracts may stem from the optimism bias [55] ([D1])and lack of a formal security process ([D6]) as suggested inRQ1. In addition, smart contracts on public blockchains arevisible and accessible to all users, even malicious attackers.The inherent features of smart contracts make them moreprone to security attacks than traditional software. Futurework may focus on standardizing and operationalizing the
process of building security in smart contracts.
B. Code Reuse and Tool Implications in Smart Contracts
58% of the respondents frequently reuse code from reliable
sources in smart contract development (RQ2). For instance,
OpenZeppelin proposes the SafeMath libraries [46] to help
developers of Ethereum smart contracts perform proper val-idation on numeric inputs and prevent integer overﬂow andunderﬂow vulnerabilities. Only two respondents in our sur-vey mentioned that they use dependency management as asecurity strategy. Previous studies found that improper useof libraries, including security-related APIs, can introducesecurity vulnerabilities [19], [21], [24], [39]. Future studiescould put more effort into providing documentations of
smart contract libraries with helpful examples and tools
to facilitate library updates for smart contract development.
To facilitate code reuse, Ethereum Virtual Machine provides
an opcode, DELEGATECALL [34], for dynamically loading
the bytecode of a callee contract into the caller contract atruntime. A DoS attack against the Parity wallet leveraged thevulnerability due to improper use of DELEGATECALL. Thus,
code reuse in smart contracts can impose a higher risk than itscounterpart in traditional software, highlighting the importanceofsecurity auditing on broadly used smart contracts and
libraries.
Active maintenance ranks on top of the factors that affect the
adoption of security tools for smart contracts (RQ2). Amongthe four tools we investigated, the most frequently used tool,Mythril [14], has released 102 versions since its ﬁrst release
on October 4, 2017 – an average of 3 releases per month. Theactive maintenance would enable security tools to uncover thelatest emerging security issues. As suggested in our survey,the practitioners tend to rely on security plugins in IDEs andprefer tools that cover a broad range of security issues. Thus,the future work could focus on automatically incorporating
emerging security issues into security tools and integrating
various security tools into the IDEs. In addition, the strategy
of chasing behind the attackers is not adequate to addresssmart contract security. Practitioners could proactively de-
fense smart contracts against security attacks via externalauditing and fuzzing.
C. Studies across Blockchain Platforms
The results of RQ3 indicates that blockchain platforms
impact practitioners’ perceptions and practices on smart con-
tract security. Nonetheless, previous studies usually focus onone blockchain platform. It could be interesting to inves-tigate the difference in security issues across different
blockchains, and whether and how existing tools can be
used across different blockchains. In addition, practitionersof public blockchains tend to be more motivated to addresssmart contract security than those of consortium and privateblockchains. The potential reason could be the accessibilityof public blockchains to any users, even malicious attackers.Future research could investigate whether the practitioners
of consortium and private blockchains make an economicdecision of security strategies based on risk assessment.
VI. T
HREA TS TO VALIDITY
Internal Validity. In our study, the interviewees were
selected by a contact at each company or open-source projectwho identiﬁed the practitioners to be interviewed. The pro-cedure partially alleviates the threat of selection bias sincethe interviewer has no contact with interviewees before theinterviews. The threat of selection bias would always bepresent when the interviewees were not fully randomly sam-pled. However, given that our interviews include practitionerswith various job roles and from different companies and open-source projects, the threat has limited effect.
As for the survey, it is possible that some of our respondents
had a poor understanding of the statements for rating. Theirresponses may introduce noise to the data that we collected. Toreduce the impact of this issue, we included an “I don’t know”option in the survey and ignored responses marked as such. Wealso dropped responses that were submitted by people whose
1419job roles are none of these: software development, testing,
and project management. Two of the authors translated oursurvey to Chinese to ensure that respondents from China couldunderstand our survey well. To reduce the bias of presentingthe survey bilingually, we carefully translated our survey toensure there is no ambiguity between English and Chineseterms. We polished the translation by improving clarity andunderstandability according to the feedback from our pilotsurvey.Construct Validity. In our interviews, the evaluation appre-
hension was ameliorated by the anonymity of the interviewees,as well as the guaranty that all the information obtainedduring the interviews would be used only by the researchers.The interviewer might have inﬂuenced the interviewees byasking speciﬁc questions. To mitigate this risk, we used open-ended questions to elicit as much information as possiblefrom practitioners. The interviewees may have had a differentunderstanding of the questions than what we had intended. Tominimize this aspect, we encouraged the interviewees to askquestions at all times.
In our survey, the results are based on respondents’
self-reported responses, which may be subject to bias andnot exactly represent reality. We followed recommendationsto reduce social-desirability bias by ensuring respondents’anonymity [42]. The questionnaire in our survey is based oninterview results instead of validated scales. Although we usefactor analysis to analyze the results, it may be insufﬁcient tovalidate the scales.Conclusion Validity. The interviews were conducted at differ-
ent locations and each interview was done in one work session.Thus, answers were not inﬂuenced by internal discussions. Toensure that the interview instrument is of high quality to obtainreliable measures, we conducted several pilots to improve thequestions and layout of the interview guide prior to conductingthe interviews.
In addition, we did our best to randomly select survey
respondents from both companies and open-source projects.Our survey respondents come from 35 countries across sixcontinents who are work in various job roles with a wide rangeof experience.External Validity. To improve the generalizability of our
ﬁndings regarding smart contract development, we interviewed13 interviewees from blockchain companies and open-sourceblockchain projects. We further surveyed 156 respondentsfrom 35 countries across six continents who are work-ing for various companies or contributing to open-sourceblockchain/smart contract projects that are hosted on GitHub,in various job roles.
VII. C
ONCLUSION
This work proposed a mixed qualitative and quantitative
approach to explore practitioners’ perceptions and practiceson smart contract security. We recognized the disconnectbetween the security awareness of smart contract practitionersand the occurrence of security problems in smart contracts.We also provided practical lessons about code reuse, toolimplications, and proactive defense to ensure smart contractsecurity. Besides, we observed several differences betweensmart contract security and regular security: (1) Smart contractpractitioners tend to have a higher security awareness thanregular practitioners; (2) Smart contracts are more prone tosecurity attacks than regular software; (3) More frequent codereuse in smart contract development imposes higher securityrisk than regular software development. Future studies couldput more effort into investigating the differences in variousaspects of smart contracts on top of different blockchain plat-forms, and generalize existing tools across different blockchainplatforms.
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was partially supported by the National Key
R&D Program of China (No. 2020YFB1005400), AustralianResearch Council’s Discovery Early Career Researcher Award(DECRA) Funding Scheme (DE200100021), ARC Discov-ery Grant (DP200100020), National Science Foundation ofChina (No. U20A20173), Hong Kong RGC Project (No.152193/19E), and the National Research Foundation, Singa-pore under its Industry Alignment Fund - Prepositioning (IAF-PP) Funding Initiative. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusionsor recommendations expressed in this material are those of theauthor(s) and do not reﬂect the views of National ResearchFoundation, Singapore.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Nvivo qualitative data analysis software, 2021.
[2] Y . Acar, M. Backes, S. Fahl, S. Garﬁnkel, D. Kim, M. L. Mazurek,
and C. Stransky. Comparing the usability of cryptographic apis. InProceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P’17), pages 154–171. IEEE, 2017.
[3] Y . Acar, M. Backes, S. Fahl, D. Kim, M. L. Mazurek, and C. Stransky.
Y ou get where you’re looking for: The impact of information sourceson code security. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (S&P ’16), pages 289–305. IEEE, 2016.
[4] M. Alharby and A. V an Moorsel. Blockchain-based smart contracts: A
systematic mapping study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06372, 2017.
[5] S. Amani, M. B ´egel, M. Bortin, and M. Staples. Towards verifying
ethereum smart contract bytecode in isabelle/hol. In Proceedings of the
7th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certiﬁed Programs andProofs, pages 66–77, 2018.
[6] H. Assal and S. Chiasson. Security in the software development
lifecycle. In Proceedings of the 14th Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security (SOUPS ’18), pages 281–296, 2018.
[7] H. Assal and S. Chiasson. ’think secure from the beginning’ a survey
with software developers. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–13, 2019.
[8] J. Chang, B. Gao, H. Xiao, J. Sun, Y . Cai, and Z. Yang. scompile: Critical
path identiﬁcation and analysis for smart contracts. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on F ormal Engineering Methods, pages286–304. Springer, 2019.
[9] H. Chen, M. Pendleton, L. Njilla, and S. Xu. A survey on ethereum
systems security: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and defenses. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), 53(3):1–43, 2020.
[10] M. Christakis and C. Bird. What developers want and need from pro-
gram analysis: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’16) ,
pages 332–343, 2016.
[11] M. Coblenz. Obsidian: a safer blockchain programming language.
InProceedings of the IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on
Software Engineering Companion (ICSE-Companion ’17), pages 97–99.IEEE, 2017.
[12] J. Cohen. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational
and psychological measurement, 20(1):37–46, 1960.
1420[13] ConsenSys. Ethereum smart contract security best practices. https:
//consensys.github.io/smart-contract-best-practices, 2018. Online; ac-
cessed February 2021.
[14] ConsenSys. Mythril. https://github.com/ConsenSys/mythril, 2020. On-
line; accessed February 2021.
[15] T. Cook, A. Latham, and J. H. Lee. Dappguard: Active monitoring and
defense for solidity smart contracts. https://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.857/2017/project/23.pdf, 2020. Online; accessed February 2021.
[16] Cornell Blockchain. Bamboo: a language for morphing smart contracts.
https://github.com/CornellBlockchain/bamboo, 2020. Online; accessedFebruary 2021.
[17] J. W. Creswell and J. D. Creswell. Research design: Qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Sage publications, 2017.
[18] D. S. Cruzes and T. Dyba. Recommended steps for thematic synthesis
in software engineering. In Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, pages 275–284.IEEE, 2011.
[19] M. Egele, D. Brumley, Y . Fratantonio, and C. Kruegel. An empirical
study of cryptographic misuse in android applications. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer and communications security(CCS ’13), pages 73–84, 2013.
[20] Ethereum Foundation. Vyper documentation. https://vyper.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/?badge=latest, 2020. Online; accessed February 2021.
[21] S. Fahl, M. Harbach, T. Muders, L. Baumg ¨artner, B. Freisleben, and
M. Smith. Why eve and mallory love android: An analysis of androidssl (in) security. In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
and communications security (CCS ’12), pages 50–61, 2012.
[22] S. Fahl, M. Harbach, H. Perl, M. Koetter, and M. Smith. Rethinking ssl
development in an appiﬁed world. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC
conference on Computer and communications security (CCS ’13), pages49–60, 2013.
[23] J. Feist, G. Grieco, and A. Groce. Slither: a static analysis framework
for smart contracts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 2nd International
Workshop on Emerging Trends in Software Engineering for Blockchain,pages 8–15. IEEE, 2019.
[24] M. Georgiev, S. Iyengar, S. Jana, R. Anubhai, D. Boneh, and
V . Shmatikov. The most dangerous code in the world: validatingssl certiﬁcates in non-browser software. In Proceedings of the ACM
conference on Computer and communications security (CCS ’12), pages38–49, 2012.
[25] N. Grech, M. Kong, A. Jurisevic, L. Brent, B. Scholz, and Y . Smarag-
dakis. Madmax: Surviving out-of-gas conditions in ethereum smartcontracts. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages,
2(OOPSLA):1–27, 2018.
[26] I. Grishchenko, M. Maffei, and C. Schneidewind. Foundations and tools
for the static analysis of ethereum smart contracts. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer Aided V eriﬁcation, pages 51–78.Springer, 2018.
[27] I. Grishchenko, M. Maffei, and C. Schneidewind. A semantic framework
for the security analysis of ethereum smart contracts. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Principles of Security and Trust, pages243–269. Springer, 2018.
[28] E. Hildenbrandt, M. Saxena, N. Rodrigues, X. Zhu, P . Daian, D. Guth,
B. Moore, D. Park, Y . Zhang, A. Stefanescu, et al. Kevm: A completeformal semantics of the ethereum virtual machine. In Proceedings of the
IEEE 31st Computer Security F oundations Symposium, pages 204–217.IEEE, 2018.
[29] Y . Hirai. Deﬁning the ethereum virtual machine for interactive theorem
provers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Financial
Cryptography and Data Security, pages 520–535. Springer, 2017.
[30] B. Jiang, Y . Liu, and W. Chan. Contractfuzzer: Fuzzing smart contracts
for vulnerability detection. In Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’18) ,
pages 259–269. IEEE, 2018.
[31] B. Johnson, Y . Song, E. Murphy-Hill, and R. Bowdidge. Why don’t
software developers use static analysis tools to ﬁnd bugs? In Proceedings
of the 35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’13), pages 672–681. IEEE, 2013.
[32] S. Kalra, S. Goel, M. Dhawan, and S. Sharma. Zeus: Analyzing safety of
smart contracts. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed Systems
Security Symposium (NDSS ’18) , 2018.
[33] B. A. Kitchenham and S. L. Pﬂeeger. Personal opinion surveys. In Guide
to advanced empirical software engineering, pages 63–92. Springer,2008.[34] J. Krupp and C. Rossow. teether: Gnawing at ethereum to automatically
exploit smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security ’18), pages 1317–1333, 2018.
[35] T. D. LaToza, G. V enolia, and R. DeLine. Maintaining mental models: A
study of developer work habits. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’06), pages 492–501, NewY ork, NY , USA, 2006. ACM.
[36] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser. Research Methods in Human-
Computer Interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[37] C. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Cao, Z. Chen, B. Chen, and B. Roscoe. Reguard:
ﬁnding reentrancy bugs in smart contracts. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference on Software Engineering:Companion (ICSE-Companion ’18), pages 65–68. IEEE, 2018.
[38] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P . Saxena, and A. Hobor. Making smart
contracts smarter. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’16), pages 254–269,2016.
[39] S. Nadi, S. Kr ¨uger, M. Mezini, and E. Bodden. Jumping through hoops:
Why do java developers struggle with cryptography apis? In Proceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’16), pages 935–946, 2016.
[40] S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Bitcoin
White Paper, 2008.
[41] National Vulnerability Database. Cve-2018-10299. https://nvd.nist.gov/
vuln/detail/CVE-2018-10299, 2018. Online; accessed February 2021.
[42] A. J. Nederhof. Methods of coping with social desirability bias: A
review. European journal of social psychology, 15(3):263–280, 1985.
[43] I. Nikoli ´c, A. Kolluri, I. Sergey, P . Saxena, and A. Hobor. Finding the
greedy, prodigal, and suicidal contracts at scale. In Proceedings of the
34th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, pages 653–663, 2018.
[44] D. S. Oliveira, T. Lin, M. S. Rahman, R. Akeﬁrad, D. Ellis, E. Perez,
R. Bobhate, L. A. DeLong, J. Cappos, and Y . Brun. Api blindspots:Why experienced developers write vulnerable code. In Proceedings of
the 14th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS ’18), pages315–328, 2018.
[45] M. Oltrogge, Y . Acar, S. Dechand, M. Smith, and S. Fahl. To pin or
not to pin—helping app developers bullet proof their tls connections. InProceedings of the 24th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security’15), pages 239–254, 2015.
[46] OpenZeppelin. Safemath. https : / / github . com / OpenZeppelin /
openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/math/SafeMath.sol, 2018.Online; accessed February 2021.
[47] Parity Technologies. The multi-sig hack: A postmortem. https://www.
parity.io/the-multi-sig-hack-a-postmortem/, 2008. Online; accessedFebruary 2021.
[48] Parity Technologies. Security alert: Parity wallet (multi-sig wallets).
https://www.parity.io/security-alert-2/, 2008. Online; accessed February2021.
[49] D. Park, Y . Zhang, M. Saxena, P . Daian, and G. Ros ¸u. A formal
veriﬁcation tool for ethereum vm bytecode. In Proceedings of the 26th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference andSymposium on the F oundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE’18), pages 912–915, 2018.
[50] A. Permenev, D. Dimitrov, P . Tsankov, D. Drachsler-Cohen, and
M. V echev. V erx: Safety veriﬁcation of smart contracts. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P ’20), pages 18–20, 2020.
[51] A. Poller, L. Kocksch, S. T ¨urpe, F. A. Epp, and K. Kinder-Kurlanda. Can
security become a routine? a study of organizational change in an agilesoftware development group. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW’17), pages 2489–2503, 2017.
[52] L. Quan, L. Wu, and H. Wang. Evulhunter: Detecting fake transfer
vulnerabilities for eosio’s smart contracts at webassembly-level. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.10362, 2019.
[53] Qureshi, Haseeb. A hacker stole $ 31m of ether–how it happened,
and what it means for ethereum. https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/a-hacker-stole-31m-of-ether-how-it-happened-and-what-it-means-for-ethereum-9e5dc29e33ce/, 2017. Online; accessed February 2021.
[54] W. Revelle. psych: Procedures for personality and psychological
research, 2017.
[55] H.-S. Rhee, Y . U. Ryu, and C.-T. Kim. Unrealistic optimism on
information security management. Computers & Security, 31(2):221–
232, 2012.
1421[56] M. Rodler, W. Li, G. O. Karame, and L. Davi. Sereum: Protecting
existing smart contracts against re-entrancy attacks. In Proceedings of
the Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium (NDSS ’19),
2019.
[57] J. Romano, J. D. Kromrey, J. Coraggio, and J. Skowronek. Appropriate
statistics for ordinal level data: Should we really be using t-test andcohen’sd for evaluating group differences on the nsse and other surveys.InProceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Florida Association of
Institutional Research, pages 1–33, 2006.
[58] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci. Self-determination theory and the facilitation
of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American
psychologist, 55(1):68, 2000.
[59] M. Suiche. Porosity: A decompiler for blockchain-based smart contracts
bytecode. DEF CON, 25:11, 2017.
[60] T. W. Thomas, H. Lipford, B. Chu, J. Smith, and E. Murphy-Hill. What
questions remain? an examination of how developers understand aninteractive static analysis tool. In Proceedings of the 12th Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS ’16), 2016.
[61] T. W. Thomas, M. Tabassum, B. Chu, and H. Lipford. Security during
application development: An application security expert perspective.InProceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 1–12, 2018.
[62] B. Thompson. Exploratory and conﬁrmatory factor analysis: Under-
standing concepts and applications. Applied Psychological Measure-
ment, 31(3):245–248, 2007.
[63] S. Tikhomirov, E. V oskresenskaya, I. Ivanitskiy, R. Takhaviev,
E. Marchenko, and Y . Alexandrov. Smartcheck: Static analysis ofethereum smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Emerging Trends in Software Engineering for Blockchain,pages 9–16, 2018.
[64] P . Tsankov, A. Dan, D. Drachsler-Cohen, A. Gervais, F. Buenzli, and
M. V echev. Securify: Practical security analysis of smart contracts.InProceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS ’18), pages 67–82, 2018.
[65] S. T ¨urpe, L. Kocksch, and A. Poller. Penetration tests a turning point
in security practices? organizational challenges and implications in asoftware development team. In Proceedings of the 12th Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS ’16), 2016.
[66] P . K. Tyagi. The effects of appeals, anonymity, and feedback on mail
survey response patterns from salespeople. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 17(3):235–241, Jun 1989.[67] Z. Wan, X. Xia, and A. E. Hassan. What do programmers discuss about
blockchain? a case study on the use of balanced lda and the referencearchitecture of a domain to capture online discussions about blockchainplatforms across the stack exchange communities. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, 2019.
[68] Z. Wan, X. Xia, A. E. Hassan, D. Lo, J. Yin, and X. Yang. Perceptions,
expectations, and challenges in defect prediction. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 46(11):1241–1266, 2020.
[69] J. Wang, B. Chen, L. Wei, and Y . Liu. Superion: Grammar-aware
greybox fuzzing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’19) , pages 724–735. IEEE,
2019.
[70] C. Weir, A. Rashid, and J. Noble. How to improve the security skills
of mobile app developers? comparing and contrasting expert views. InProceedings of the 12th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security(SOUPS ’16), 2016.
[71] J. Witschey, O. Zielinska, A. Welk, E. Murphy-Hill, C. Mayhorn, and
T. Zimmermann. Quantifying developers’ adoption of security tools.InProceedings of the 10th Joint Meeting on F oundations of Software
Engineering (FSE ’15), pages 260–271, 2015.
[72] S. Xiao, J. Witschey, and E. Murphy-Hill. Social inﬂuences on secure
development tool adoption: why security tools spread. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Workand Social Computing (CSCW ’14), pages 1095–1106, 2014.
[73] S. Xiao, J. Witschey, and E. Murphy-Hill. Social inﬂuences on secure
development tool adoption: why security tools spread. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing, pages 1095–1106, 2014.
[74] J. Xie, H. R. Lipford, and B. Chu. Why do programmers make security
errors? In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages
and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC ’11), pages 161–164. IEEE,
2011.
[75] K. Yamashita, Y . Nomura, E. Zhou, B. Pi, and S. Jun. Potential risks
of hyperledger fabric smart contracts. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Workshop on Blockchain Oriented Software Engineering(IWBOSE ’19), pages 1–10. IEEE, 2019.
[76] Y . Zhou, D. Kumar, S. Bakshi, J. Mason, A. Miller, and M. Bailey.
Erays: reverse engineering ethereum’s opaque smart contracts. InProceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security’18), pages 1371–1385, 2018.
1422