A RandomizedControlled Trial onthe Effects ofEmbedded
Computer Language Switching
P.Merlin Uesbeck
pmerlindrews@gmail.com
Universityof Nevada, LasVegas
LasVegas, Nevada, USACole S.Peterson
cole.scott.peterson@huskers.unl.edu
Universityof Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, Nebraska, USA
BonitaSharif
bsharif@unl.edu
Universityof Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, Nebraska, USAAndreas Stefik
andreas.stefik@unlv.edu
Universityof Nevada, LasVegas
LasVegas, Nevada, USA
ABSTRACT
Polyglotprogramming,theuseofmultipleprogramminglanguages
during the development process, is common practice in modern
softwaredevelopment.Thisstudyinvestigatesthispracticethrough
a randomized controlled trial conducted under the context of data-
base programming. Participants in the study were given coding
taskswritteninJavaandoneofthreeSQL-likeembeddedlanguages.
OnewasplainSQLinstrings,onewasinJavaonly,andthethird
was a hybrid embedded language that was closer to the host lan-
guage.Werecorded109validdatapoints.Resultsshowedsignificant
differencesinhowdevelopersofdifferentexperiencelevelscode
using polyglot techniques. Notably, less experienced programmers
wrote correct programs faster in the hybrid condition (frequent,
but less severe, switches), while more experienced developers that
already knew both languagesperformed better intraditionalSQL
(lessfrequent,butmorecomplete,switches).Theresultsindicate
thattheproductivityimpactofpolyglotprogrammingiscomplex
andexperience level dependent.
CCS CONCEPTS
·Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI ;·
Software andits engineering →Domainspecificlanguages .
KEYWORDS
polyglot programming, programming languages, computer lan-
guage switching, productivity, database programming, experience,
randomizedcontrolledtrial
ACMReference Format:
P.MerlinUesbeck,ColeS.Peterson,BonitaSharif,andAndreasStefik.2020.
A Randomized Controlled Trial on the Effects of Embedded Computer Lan-
guageSwitching.In Proceedingsofthe28thACMJointEuropeanSoftware
Permissionto make digitalor hard copies of allorpart ofthis work for personalor
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthefirstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthanthe
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8ś13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Copyright heldby the owner/author(s). Publicationrightslicensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7043-1/20/11...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409701Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engi-
neering(ESEC/FSE’20),November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent,USA. ACM,New
York, NY, USA, 11pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409701
1 INTRODUCTION
Polyglot programming is commonplace in the software develop-
mentindustry. Tomassettiand Torchianofound thatninety-seven
percent of open source projects used two or more computer lan-
guages[28].Further,theaveragenumberofcomputerlanguages
in open source projects is about five [ 13,28] and developers claim
in surveys that they łknowž ten different computer languages [ 15].
Shresthaetal.observedthatevenexperiencedprofessionaldevel-
opershavesignificantchallengesinlearningnewlanguages[ 16].
Withprogrammingindifferentlanguagescomestheneedtoswitch
betweenthem,whichweobservehappensatthreelevels:1)project
level, 2) file level, and 3) embedded level. In the linguistics liter-
ature and in reference to natural language, these ideas have sim-
ilar, but not exact, parallels. For example, embedded switching
has parallels to intra-sentential code switching [ 10,12,35], a rapid
switchbetweennaturallanguagesinconversation.Filelevelswitch-
ingmightbeconsideredaparallelto inter-sententialcodeswitch-
ing[10,12,35],whichistheprocessofswitchinglanguagesbetween
utterances. Project level switches are a possible parallel to natural
languageswitching[ 3].Theanalogiesarenotexact,butitisimpor-
tant to recognize that the linguistics literature has shown evidence
thatthereisacosttoswitchingbetweennaturallanguages[ 17,18],
which might provide evidence for the underlying causes observed
by Shrestha et al. [ 16]. Given that program comprehension and
natural language comprehension may use the same areas of the
brain[21,23],thatthecostofhiringsoftwaredevelopersis$103,560
per year [ 5], and given polyglot programming is so commonplace,
itisimportantto betterunderstandthis practice.
In thispaper, wepresent a double-blindrandomized controlled
trialfocusing onone aspectof polyglot programming,i.e.,embed-
dedswitchinginadatabasecontext.Thisisalarge-scalereplication
ofastudypresentedatPLATEAU2018[ 30].Weillustrateacommon
example using SQL to query databases from within general pur-
poseprogramminglanguages,asshowninthefollowingSQLquery
forqueryinginJavausingtheJDBC(JavaDatabaseConnectivity,
algorithm 1) API1.
1http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/jdbc/index.html
410
ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA P. Merlin Uesbeck, ColeS.Peterson,Bonita Sharif,andAndreas Stefik
1stmt = conn.createStatement();
2ResultSet rs = stmt.executeQuery("SELECT id, first,
֒→last, age FROM People");
Algorithm1: ExampleofasimpleJDBC query
Thegoalwastodeterminewhetherpolyglotprogrammingwould
impactdevelopersatdifferentexperiencelevels,hypothesizingthat
younger developers with less experience might have more diffi-
cultywiththepractice. Tomodeldifferent waysinwhichlanguage
switching in an embedded context could occur, three different ver-
sionsofqueryingAPIswerecreatedandthesewereevaluatedwith
freshman, sophomores, juniors, and seniors at the University of
Nevada,LasVegas,inadditiontoprofessionalprogrammers.The
results showed that the style of polyglot significantly impacts peo-
pleofdifferentexperiencesindifferentwaysandthatthestyleof
polyglot isalsoimpactedbyexperience.
Specifically, those that already knew both SQL and Java were
abletouseapolyglotapproacheffectively,butthatthiswasclearly
a skill learned through experience. Interestingly, we also found
that by altering an embedded language to be closer to the host,
ourhybridcondition,even thoseasinexperiencedasfreshmenin
collegeweremuchmorelikelytobeabletocompletetasks.This
impliesthatpolyglotprogrammingisacomplicatedtopicthatneeds
more study and that semantic mismatch in polyglot may impact
users.
We report this paper under an adapted CONSORT format [ 9]
used for reporting randomized controlled trials, which defines the
structure of this paper. As such, our section headers match this
externallyvettedapproachtoreportingonourmethodology.The
purpose is to engage the community in standardizing or making a
minimumbarforreportinginexperimentstherebymakingiteasier
to replicate andcompare experiments.
2 RELATED WORK
The benefits and drawbacks of polyglot programming on a human-
factorslevelareunder-exploredinthescientificliterature.Themain
argument in favor of polyglot programming is about ł[...] choosing
the right tool for the job" [2], a view that seems to drive the field
ofdomainspecificlanguageresearchinregardtoproductivityor
maintenance[ 33].Claimshavebeenmadethattheuseofamore
appropriate language for a task leads to better productivity and
easier maintenanceby reducing the lines of code of a project [ 8].
In contrast, learning more languages may create a strain on the
developers or reduce the pool of developers able to maintain a
project [8]. In other work, researchers talk about several problems
in multi-language programming and guidelines for future research
efforts[14,20].
This latter view, that additional languages causes strain, was
recently explored by Shrestha et al. as part of a study examining
professionaldevelopersandtheirquestionsonstackoverflow,inad-
dition to interviews [ 16]. Findings from that study showed that the
mismatch between programming languages may be a barrier even
for professionals and that this difference varies across language
pairs (e.g., Java to Kotlin vs. other pairs). We use a very different
methodologyhere,arandomizedcontrolledtrialonalargervariety
ofexperiencelevelsasopposedtoamixed-methodstudyononlyprofessionals, but our results are complementary. Notably, data
gatheredinourstudyheresuggeststhatthesechallengesareim-
pactedbyexperiencelevelandthedetailsoftheparticularpolyglot
approach.
Programmer productivity is studied in a variety of aspects of
programming. Studies range from programming language features
suchassyntax[ 24]andtypesystems[ 11],toAPIdesign[ 25]orthe
effectoferrors[ 4],tostudiesinvestigatingcognitiveprocesses[ 6,
23]. These studies on APIs, syntax, or others provided guidance to
thiswork,andwhilesomehavefocusedontheeffectofpolyglot
programmingoncodequality[ 28,34],thereislittleintheliterature
that contains actual measurements of human behavior.
3 EXPERIMENTOVERVIEW
This sectionintroduces the study hypothesesand provides a brief
overviewofhowwe designedthe study.
3.1 ObjectiveandHypotheses
The experiment described in this paper compares how differing
kindsofcomputerlanguageswitchingimpactthedevelopmenttime
ofsoftwarebyutilizingthreeAPIs.Anobject-orientedAPIrequires
nolanguageswitchesandexclusivelyusesJava(monoglot),whilea
string-based API requires language switches from Java to SQL and
backwhenaqueryisbeingwritten(polyglot).Ahybrid approach
isstillpolyglot,whilerecognizingthatdifferentscholarscanand
do think of the word in different ways, but we carefully controlled
the word choices and syntax to be closer to the host language of
Java.ThedifferentAPIdesignswillbediscussedinmoredetailin
section4.4. To keep the tasks simple for participants, this study
focusesontheimplementationofrelativelystraightforwardqueries.
The null-hypotheses are as follows:
H01:Thereisnorelationshipbetweenpolyglotstyleandproduc-
tivity.
H02:Programmersdonotnoticethattheyswitchbetweencomputer
languages.
H03:There is no difference between the productivity of native and
non-nativeEnglishspeakersin regard to productivity.
Thealternativehypothesescanbederivedfromthenull-hypo-
theses. The first hypothesis is asking whether there is a cost to
switching between two computer languages. In this experiment it
waschosentotestthiscostbycheckingfortimedifferencesbetween
groups.Answerstothishypothesismightgivemoreinsightintothe
connectionbetweenhowhumansunderstandnaturallanguagetext
and code assuggested in existingresearch [ 19,21,23] by showing
a similar switching cost as found when switching between natural
languages[ 17,18].Notethatproductivityismeasuredintermsof
time taken to complete the task.
Thesecondhypothesiswasanalyzedqualitativelybasedonan
exit survey in the experiment. The exit survey contains a question
asking whether participants noticed that they switched between
languages and whether they felt that this switching impacted their
progress.Forexample,whilepreviousworklookedatprofessionals,
fortheyoungerendofourexperiencespectrum,wewantedtoknow
411A RandomizedControlledTrial onthe Effects of EmbeddedComputer LanguageSwitching ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA
whether students even realized they were doing polyglot program-
ming, and if so, whether their perceptions of their performance
matchedwithour observations.
The aim of hypothesis three was to investigate the impact of
natural languages on programming productivity. We recorded par-
ticipants’ primary language to be able to compare the performance
ofprimaryEnglishspeakersandotherparticipants.Thisisagain
motivated by wanting to test the intersection of natural languages
andcoding [ 6].
3.2 Design Process
We pilot tested our experiment in several ways. First, our research
lab loosely follows a łdoubling rulež when creating experiments.
This approach, which is useful when an effect size is not known
and thus a power test cannot be determined to estimate effect size
in advance, is to take small scale pilots and then approximately
double the sample size on each iteration of the pilot while making
evidence based adjustments to the methodology. In this case, we
ran five preliminary pilot studies, each evaluating a larger number
of participants. The results of each pilot study were analyzed to
detect problems with the methodology. Specific focus of these it-
erations lay on general task design and on the design of the API.
The firstthree iterations had only the string-basedandthe object-
oriented group. After these initial iterations were completed, a
hybrid between the groups was created for pilots 4 and 5. This
extensive piloting process, with iteration at each step, provided us
an evidence-based way for us to critique our experiment over time,
getfeedbackfromourresearchteamandotherstakeholders,and
improve our reporting before submitting and reporting our results
for publication. During the experiment iterations, we also received
feedback on the tasks used in the experiment to make sure they
were valid andrealistic tasksone mightfind insoftware projects.
3.3 Reporting Structure
Thelayoutofthiswrite-upwasinspiredbytheCONSORT(Consol-
idatedStandardsofReportingTrials)standardasitisusedinthe
medical sciences [ 1], which defines what should be included in the
publication of a research study to allow for łcomplete and trans-
parentreporting".Useofthestandardhelpstoimprovecomplete
reporting of randomized controlled trials [ 29]. Hence, the rest of
thispaperisstructuredasfollows:First,wewillcoverthedesignof
theexperimentin section 4.Thatsection willinclude information
aboutthedesignofthetrialinsubsection 4.1,theparticipantsin
subsection 4.2, the study setting in subsection 4.3, the intervention
in subsection 4.4, the outcome variables in subsection 4.5, the sam-
plesizeinsubsection 4.6,therandomizationin 4.7,andtheblinding
in subsection 4.8. Results will be shown and discussed in subsec-
tion5, followed by qualitative results in section 6and a discussion
insection 7.WepointoutthatCONSORTreportsstudiessomewhat
differently than issometimes observed inour field and we cannot
match it exactly (e.g., computer science venues typically lack state-
of-the-artproceduresliketrialregistration),butthiswasasimple
way toensure our reportingwas as rigorousand transparent as it
could be.4 METHODS
4.1 Trial Design
Theexperimentisarepeatedmeasuresdesigninwhichparticipants
were randomly assigned to one ofthree experimental groups.Par-
ticipantswereaskedtosolve6programmingtasksineachgroup.
Therandomizationwasbasedontheparticipants’yearincollege,
oralternativelytheir statusas a professionaldeveloper. The experi-
menttestedtheeffectofusinganobjectorientedAPIagainstthe
establisheduse ofSQL strings andahybridapproach.
4.2 Participants
Werecruitedpeopleovertheageof18yearswhohadatleastsome
programmingexperience.Theprogrammingexperiencewasself-
reported by the participants in a survey included in the study and
were recruited in computer science classes at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas. We also recruited professional programmers
on Twitter and Reddit. A factor used to distinguish participants
was level of education measure for programming experience for
universitystudents [ 22] and significantdifferencesbetween levels
have been found in respect to time to solution [ 31]. We want to
notethatthecurriculumtaughtatUNLViswellknowntousand
the average student only gains database knowledge in junior or
senior year in the program. We also recorded other measures of ex-
periencealongsidelevels.Theparticipantswereinformedaboutthe
studyduring classtime bya researcherreadingthe advertisement
pamphlet while every student was given a copy. Then, students
were able to go to the URL posted on the pamphlet and start the
experimentwhenevertheyhadtime.Studentswereofferedextra
credit for participation in the experiment and the amount of extra
credit was based on what the professor was willing to give the
students and ranged between 0-3% of total class points. Alterna-
tivelytoparticipatinginthestudy,studentswereabletoachieve
thesameamount ofextra creditby submittinganessayonacom-
puter science topic, as is required under ethics guidelines at our
university.
4.3 StudySetting
Thestudywasconductedusinganonlineplatformthatinformed
the participants about their rights and recorded their consent to
participate.Then,theparticipantswereaskedtofilloutasurveyto
classifythemintooneoftheexperiencegroupsbycollegestatus
(undergraduate year, graduate, post-graduate, non-degree seeking,
orprofessional).Thesurveyalsorecordedadditionalinformation
about the participant for analysis purposes, such as their total
programming experience and primary natural language, as well
as if they have any disabilities. When the survey was completed,
participantsweretheninformedaboutthedetailsofthestudyby
being shownthe experimental protocol.
Whentheparticipants weredonereadingthe protocol, they had
5 minutes to read a code sample and move on to a coding task.
Participants were able to refer back to the code sampleduring the
coding phase of the task. The coding screen was a text box loaded
with code, to give the participant some scaffolding for the solution
andatestingframeworkforevaluatingtheiranswer.Thecoding
screen also showed a timer with the remaining task time on it,
412ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA P. Merlin Uesbeck, ColeS.Peterson,Bonita Sharif,andAndreas Stefik
as all tasks were limited to 45 minutes per task. Generally, time
requirementsarebothpracticalandrequiredundersensibleethical
guidelines,butalsoimplywhatisobviouslytrueforallexperiments:
they are only asnapshotofbehavior.
When the participants felt that they had solved the task suffi-
ciently,theycouldclickthełCheckTask"button.Then,thecode
they had written was sent to a server. On the server, the code was
compiled in combination with the other classes needed and run
against a number of test-cases. The test-cases determined if the
task was solved successfully. If the code was sufficient, the output
windowon thepageprintedthatthetestwassuccessfulandthen
the website showed an overlay, telling the participants that they
canmoveontothenexttaskwiththeclickofabutton.Ifthetest
was not successful, then the output of the test-case displayed in
theoutput window.Participantswere able tokeep going withthe
sametask until theyeithersuccessfully solved it oruntil theyrun
out of time for the specific task. Once all of the tasks had ended,
participantswereaskedtogivesomefeedbackontheexperiment
andthey were thankedfor theirparticipation.
To test the difference between traditional SQL-like, string-based
query building and the new design of query building using objects,
aswellasthehybridapproach,asmalltablelibrarywasbuiltusing
theJavaprogramminglanguage.Thetablecontainsdataincolumns
andthequerieswritteninthisexperimentareallrunusingtable
objects, so that this table class takes over the role of the actual
database. The table class design is part of the design idea for a new
datamanagementlibrary. Tokeepgroupsassimilar aspossiblein
thisexperiment,theSQL-likequerieswereparsedandtransformed
to a similar kind of query object as the object-oriented API and
hybridAPI usedbehindthe scenes.
4.4 Intervention
Three differentgroupsweredesigned torepresent differentlevels
of language switching. The design of the experiment was addition-
allymotivatedbythedesiretotestdifferentmethodsforwriting
databasequeries.
1public Table query(Table table) throws Exception {
2 Query query = newQuery();
3 query.Prepare("SELECT Field1, Field2 "
4 +"FROM table WHERE Field1 < 234 AND Field2 > 42
֒→"
5 +"ORDER BY Field3 DESC");
6 Table result = table.Search(query);
7 return result;
8}
Algorithm2: Exampleofthe String-basedDesign
The first design (see example in algorithm 2) using the string
approach requires a user of the API to know the syntax of the
desired SQL query they want to write and does not feature any
amount of type checking support for the query. All error checking
forthisapproachisdonebythedatabaseandtheprogrammermust
relyonthefeedbackofthedatabase’serrorreporting(fordetails
on SQL errors see [ 27]). Further, the SQL dialect in use on the side
of the server must be considered and matched completely. This
approach also enables the use of modularization in which the SQLqueriesarestoredinexternalfilesinsteadofwithinthecompiled
sourcecode,whichallowsreuse withoutrecompilation.
1public Table query(Table table) throws Exception {
2Query query = newQuery();
3query.AddField("Field1")
4 .AddField("Field2");
5query.Filter(q.Where("Field1").LessThan(234).And("
֒→Field2").GreaterThan(42));
6query.SortHighToLow("Field3");
7Table result = table.Search(query);
8}
Algorithm3: Exampleof the Object-OrientedDesign
The second design (see example in listing 3) requires a program-
mer to use a number of method calls to produce a query. This
approachlosestheflexibilitythatcomeswithusingstringsbyre-
movingthepossibilitytoloadthestringsfromafileorothersource.
However, the evaluation of the statement is madein the program-
minglanguageitselfandtypecheckingandrun-timeerrorchecking
canbeleveragedtoruleoutcertainsyntaxerrors.Anotherdiffer-
enceinthisapproachisthatprogrammersdonothavetoswitch
betweenprogramminglanguagestowriteaquery.Itiscurrently
unknownintheliteraturewhetherthisswitchinghasaproductivity
costand,if so,for whom andunderwhat conditions.
1public Table query(Table table) throws Exception {
2 Query query = newQuery();
3 query.AddFields("Field1, Field2");
4 query.Filter("Field1 < 234 AND Field2 > 42");
5 query.SortHighToLow("Field3");
6 Table result = charts.Search(query);
7 return result;
8}
Algorithm4: Exampleof the Hybrid Design
Thethirddesignisahybridbetweenthetwoapproachesinwhich
the query building process is separated into different method calls,
butcombinesstepssuchasaddingmultiplefieldsbyallowingthe
programmer to write a comma-separated list similar to what they
would do ina SQL query instring form. This approach avoids the
useofobjectstobuildafilterstatementandSQLsyntax.Thiscustom
syntax is thus somewhere in between a switch from SQL to Java
because the syntax is closer to the host language. We can imagine
manydifferentkindsofhybridconditionsbeinginterestingtostudy
empirically, but derived ours by looking at pilot data and trying
to keep the language as close to the host as we could, while also
removingthe objectmapping requiredinthe monoglot condition.
Inotherwords,weseepolyglotasaspectrumoflanguagedesign
decisions.Ononeside,ifSQLisembeddedrawintoJava,thereis
nodirectconnectionbetweenthe languagesÐtheyweredesigned
separately and are embedded. On the other side of the spectrum
isamonoglotapproach,whereuserscreateobjectsinsideofJava
and manipulate them to do SQL-like operations. Finally, the hybrid
condition was designed to be embedded and is cognizant of its
application.Anyofthesedesigndecisions,andothers,mightimpact
productivity andour studyis one of the first to evaluatethis issue
formally.
413A RandomizedControlledTrial onthe Effects of EmbeddedComputer LanguageSwitching ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA
1package library;
2importlibrary.*;
3public class Task1 {
4/** Please write this method to return a Table object
֒→containing all columns for all entries with
5 * an id smaller than 32 and sorted from high salary to low
֒→salary
6 * Table information:
7 * - prof -
8 * id (int) | firstname (String) | lastname (String) | salary
֒→(int)
9 * Use the technique shown to you in the samples given
10 */
11 publicTable query(Table prof) throwsException {
12 // Your Code here
13 return null ;
14 }
15}
Algorithm5: Task 1scaffolding.
The difference in intervention in this experiment is based on
which kind of code sample the participants were exposed to. Each
group got one compilable code sample demonstrating a number of
differentqueries inthe library.Eachsample includes code equiv-
alent to four different SELECTstatements in SQL, one UPDATE
statementandone INSERTstatementinSQL.Thefirstselectstate-
mentwasaselectionofallcolumnswithorderingofentriesfrom
hightolow,thesecondwasasimpleselectofanumberofcolumns
withawherecondition,thethirdincludedajoin,andthelastselect
statementwasasimpleselectionofmultiplecolumnswithawhere
conditionandasortingstatement.The UPDATE andINSERTstate-
mentsweresimpleversionsoftheirrespectivetypes.Thedifference
betweenthesamplesisthateachsampleshowsthecoderequired
to use the specific approach that was being tested in the respective
group.
1 public Table query(Table prof) throws Exception {
2 Query q = newQuery();
3 q.Prepare("SELECT * FROM professors" +
4 " WHERE id < 32 ORDER BY salary DESC");
5 Table r = prof.Search(q);
6 return r;
7 }
Algorithm6: Task 1Solutionfor group SQL.
1 public Table query(Table prof) throws Exception {
2 Query q = newQuery();
3 q.SortHighToLow("salary");
4 q.Filter(q.Where("id").LessThan(32));
5 Table r = prof.Search(q);
6 return r;
7 }
Algorithm7: Task 1Solutionfor the object-orientedgroup.
Anexampleofwhatthetaskslookedliketotheparticipantscan
beseeninalgorithm 5,whichshowsthefirsttaskofbothgroups.
The instructions are in the comment at the top and the code to
solve the task has to be filled in where the command says łYour
codehere".Allothertaskshadthesameemptymethodstructure1 public Table query(Table prof) throws Exception {
2 Query q = newQuery();
3 q.SortHighToLow("salary");
4 q.Filter("id < 32");
5 Table r = prof.Search(q);
6 return r;
7 }
Algorithm8: Task 1Solutionfor the hybridgroup.
withaninstructionalcommentatthetop.Thecommentsalways
described the structure of the table object. Possible solutions to the
first task as shown in listing 5can be seen inalgorithm 6,7,and8.
Allthecodeusedfortasksandtoperformtheexperimentcanbe
foundthe replication package artifact [ 32].
4.5 Outcomes
Thefirstdependentvariableofthisexperiment,timetoacorrect
solution, was measured by taking a time stamp when the partic-
ipant started a task and a time stamp when the correct solution
was submitted. Alternatively, if the participant did not finish the
task, the time stamp of the moment the time ran out was taken as
the endpoint of the measurement. The difference between the two
time stamps was then used as the time to correct solution measure.
Theexperimentplatforminusefortheexperimentautomatically
measuredthetasktimesandsavedthemtoadatabasetogetherwith
timestamped snapshots of thecodeeachparticipantproduced.As
arandom factor, the platformalso recorded theparticipants’ expe-
rience in using SQL and if they had taken a database management
systems class, which was then combined into a binary measure
representing whether a participant had database experience or not.
Finally, a question about switching computer languages was added
to the end of the experiment to help gain insight about if partici-
pantsrealizedthattheywereworkingintwodifferentlanguages.
The exact wording of the question was: Did you feel like you had
to switch betweenlanguages during the experiment and how do you
think did this affectyour progress while solvingthe tasks?" .
4.6 SampleSize
The experiment was conducted in five different versions before
the current one, having 2, 4, 12, 9, and 11 participants respectively.
While we loosely follow a doubling rule, we did not double the
number of participants in pilot 4 and 5 because we changed the
taskssignificantlyandwantedmorefeedbackbeforegoingtoscale.
The results from previous versions of the experiment cannot be
compared to the current version as changes affecting the results
havebeenmade.Thereare5levelsofeducationtotargetforthis
experiment: freshman, sophomores, juniors, seniors, and profes-
sionals.
4.7 Randomization
The process of assigning participants to three groups was done on
theonlineplatformandfollowedthecovariateadaptiverandomiza-
tionapproach[ 26].Afterenteringtheircollegeyearorprofessional
statusintothe surveyatthe beginningof the experiment, the par-
ticipants were assigned to a experience category based on that
414ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA P. Merlin Uesbeck, ColeS.Peterson,Bonita Sharif,andAndreas Stefik
information.Theplatformkepttrackwhichgroupswerealready
assignedtoineachcategoryuntileachgroupwasassignedonce,
then allgroups were free to be assigned again until each has been
filled again. This mechanism was in place to keep the distribution
to the groupsas even as possible.
4.8 Blinding
Theexperimentwasdoubleblind,astheassignmentofparticipants
to their group was automatic. The researchers could not determine
whowasassignedtoeachgroup,nordidparticipantsknowwhat
group they were assigned to or even that there were groups. Since
the experiment was conducted online, there was no direct inter-
actionwiththeparticipantsandthereforetheproctorshadfewer
avenuesto accidentallyorintentionally biasthem.
Theparticipantswerenotinformedaboutwhichgrouptheywere
assigned to or what the hypothesis of the study might be. They
wereonlyawareoftheinformationrightinfrontofthemduring
theexperiment.Informationaboutthecontentoftheexperiment
attime of recruitmentwaslimitedtothe fact thatthe participants
are being recruited to participate in a programming experiment,
butnoinformationaboutthetopicwasprovided.Broadly,wedo
this to preventissueslike the goodsubjecteffectorrivalry.
5 QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
This section presents the results ofthe experiment. The script to
analyze the data can be found in the accompanying replication
packetartifact [ 32].
5.1 Recruitment
Werecruited149participantsforthisstudy.Ofthe149participants,
40 had to be excluded from analysis for not having finished all 6
tasksorclearlynotfollowingtherulesoftheexperiment(suchas
waitingouttheexperimentuntiltheendwithouttakingactions),
leaving 109 participants. 12 of the participants were classified as
freshmen, 23 as sophomores, 36 as juniors, and 29 as seniors. Addi-
tionally, 9 were professionals. Of the 109 participants, 36 identified
asfemale.Onaverage,theparticipantswere24yearsold(M=23.74,
SD=5.28).Oftheparticipantsintheexperiment,38wereinthehy-
bridgroup,35wereinthepolyglotgroup,and36wereintheobject
group. Of the 109 participants, 14 had previous database experi-
ence. Eight of those experienced participants were professionals, 5
were seniors, and the last was a junior. Twenty-seven participants
(32.92%)indicatedthat English wasnot theirfirstlanguage.
5.2 Baseline Data
Anoverviewoftheparticipants’averagetimepergroupandper
task can be found in Table 1. On average, it took participants 30
minutes (M = 1769.50s, SD = 931.50) to solve task 1, 26 minutes
to solvetask2(M= 1571.20s,SD =1005.40), 32minutesfortask3
(M = 1894.91s, SD = 932.56), 19 minutes for task 4 (M = 1122.88s,
SD = 1083.42), 16 minutes for task 5 (M = 951.77s, SD = 1079.98),
and 21 minutes for task 6 (M = 1244.41s, SD = 1035.28). Meaning
thattask3wasthelongest,whiletask5wastheshortesttaskon
average. When comparing the groups, the average time per task
wasthehighestfor theobject-oriented group(M =1656.83s, SD=0100020002700
hybrid string−based object
TaskTime [s]
Figure 1:Boxplotofresults between the groups
0100020002700
hybrid string−based object
TaskTime [s]
Group Freshman Sophomore Junior Senior Professional
Figure 2: Boxplot of results between the groups based on
their levelofeducation
1043.20).Theaveragetasktimewasthesecondhighestinthestring-
basedgroup(M=1357.54s,SD =1057.53),whilethehybridgroup
had the shortest average task time (M = 1269.74s, SD = 1043.20).
Figure1shows the average task times between the three groups.
Figure2showsthedifferenceintasktimesbrokendownbylevel
ofeducation.
Notallparticipantsfinishedtheexperiment.Oninspection,of
the109participants,60.55%encounteredatasktheycouldn’tfin-
ish completely. Of the 654 task instances worked on by the 109
participants (6 tasks and therefore 6 data points per participant),
35.62% weren’tcompleted intime,makingthe averageamountof
tasks remaining uncompleted for each participant about 2 (M =
2.14,SD=2.44).Whenbrokendowntowhichgroupsmissedthe
mosttasks,theobject-orientedgroupfailedtocompletethemost
tasks with 44.91% of all task instances remaining uncompleted, the
string-based group missed 33.33% of tasks, and the hybrid group
missed28.95%oftasks.Abreakdownofthepercentagesoffailed
tasksper group bylevel of education can be seen inFigure 3.
5.3 Analysis
To analyze the results, a mixed designs repeated measures ANOVA
wasrunusingtheRprogramminglanguagewithrespecttotime
to solution, using task as a within-subjects variable and group and
level of education as between-subjects variable. Sphericity was
tested using Mauchly’s test for sphericity, which shows that the
415A RandomizedControlledTrial onthe Effects of EmbeddedComputer LanguageSwitching ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA
Table 1:Times pertask inseconds
Object-Oriented String-based Hybrid Total
TaskN mean SD N mean SD N mean SD mean SD
Task 1 36 2016.11 881.60 35 1633.60 898.97 38 1661.05 982.94 1769.50 931.50
Task 2 36 1763.22 988.24 35 1268.11 1040.29 38 1651.87 955.42 1571.20 1005.40
Task 3 36 2080.78 833.97 35 1718.71 965.51 38 1881.11 980.18 1894.91 932.56
Task 4 36 1394.58 1134.82 35 1073.06 1146.47 38 911.36 938.12 1122.88 1083.42
Task 5 36 1228.86 1203.05 35 1073.60 1135.52 38 577.05 785.88 951.77 1079.98
Task 6 36 1457.44 1072.06 35 1360.17 1031.53 38 935.97 953.41 1244.41 1035.28
0255075100
hybrid string−based object
GroupPercentage failed
Y ear Freshman Sophomore Junior Senior Professional
Figure3:Barchartofresultsbetweenthegroupsshowingthe
percentageoffailed tasksby levelofeducation
assumption of sphericity was violated for the variable task, the
interaction between group and task, level of education and task,
and the three-way interaction between group, task, and level of
education. We usedthestandardGreenhouse-Geisser corrections
when appropriate.
Therearesignificanteffectsat p<0.05forthewithin-subjects
variable task, F(5,470)=28.83,p<0.001(η2p=0.064), as well
as for the between-subjects variable group, F(2,94)=3.69,p=
0.029(η2p=0.039). There was also a significant effect for year
F(4,94)=8.05,p<0.001(η2p=0.175). The interaction effect of
groupandtaskwassignificant, F(10,470)=2.66,p=0.008(η2p=
0.013).
A t-test between participants that reported their primary lan-
guage to be English and the participants who reported another
language shows a significant effect t(274.58)=3.98,p<0.001.
PrimaryEnglish speakershadaloweraveragetime duringtheex-
periment (M = 1331.62, SD = 1054.31) than non-primary English
speakers (M = 1711.75, 1054.89). The effect size of the t-test was
r=0.223,orr2=0.0545.Avisualrepresentationofthedifferences
canbeseeninFigure 4.Testingthenaturallanguagedifferencesfor
onlyprofessionalprogrammersshowedanon-significantresults
t(21.83)=1.70,p=0.104,r=0.341.
Thedifferencesbetweengroupsweretestedusingat-testwith
Bonferroni correction. The t-test shows a significant difference be-
tweentheaveragetimesofthehybridandobject-orientedgroups(p
= 0.0037) and the average times of the polyglot and object-oriented
groups (p = 0.0106). The difference between the hybrid and string-
basedgroupswasnot significant (p =1.0000).0100020002700
No Y es
English as Primary LanguageTime [s]
Figure4:Boxplotoftimetocompletionresultsbetweenpri-
mary Englishspeakers and non-primary Englishspeakers
Totestthenumberofunfinishedtasksinmore detail,wecon-
ductedathree-waylog-linearanalysisoneducation,group,with
maxtime indicatingwhethera tasktime hit aceiling.Alog-linear
analysisisatestformorethantwocategoricalvariablesinwhich
at first, a saturated log-linear model is created that fits the data.
Thenthemodelisreducedthroughbackwardelimination,mean-
ing that highest order interactions between variables are elimi-
natedfirst.Aftereacheliminationofaninteraction,thechi-squared
statisticisrecomputed totestwhether the model still fitsthe data.
Or in other words, both models are compared, and if there is a
significant difference between the models, the model cannot be
reduced in this way without resulting in a model that does not
accurately fit the data [ 7]. In this case likelihood ratio of the result-
ing model was χ2(0)=0,p=1, as the highest order interaction
between level of education, group, and maxtime was significant,
χ2(12)=51.08,p<0.001. This means the model could not be
reduced from the saturated model. While reporting a model with 0
degrees of freedomand p = 1 might look wrong, it is in the nature
of amodel fittingthe data łperfectlyžasthe termisdefinedin the
citedliterature.
To further analyze this finding, a number of chi-square tests
were performed on different combinations of two groups each
and all levels of education. For freshmen, a significant associa-
tion between the string based and the hybrid group was found
regarding whether or not participants could finish the task in time
χ2(1)=9.64,p=0.002, an effect that was also found for sopho-
moresχ2(1)=15.46,p<0.001, juniors χ2(1)=5.34,p<0.02,
and seniors χ2(1)=7.08,p<0.008. The odds ratios showed that
416ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA P. Merlin Uesbeck, ColeS.Peterson,Bonita Sharif,andAndreas Stefik
freshmenandsophomoreswere more likelyto failtocomplete a
task in the string based group compared to the hybrid group (5.327
times higher odds and 6.131 times higher odds respectively), while
juniors and seniors were less likely to fail to complete a task in the
string based group than in the hybrid group (odds ratios 0.436 and
0.196respectively).Oddsratiosbelow1indicateaninverseeffect
to odds ratios above 1, i.e. lower odds. Professionals overall only
failedtocompletetwotasksintheobjectgroup,makingthissort
ofcomparative analysisinfeasible.
Comparisonsbetweenthehybridandobjectorientedgroupshow
significanteffectsforfreshmen χ2(1)=18.48,p<0.001andsopho-
moresχ2(1)=8.61,p=0.003withaninfinitely high odds ratio for
thefreshmenduetothefactthatnofreshmanfinishedobjectori-
entedtasksandanoddsratioof3.46forthesophomorecomparison,
indicatingthattheyweremorelikelytofailobjectorientedtasks
compared to hybrid tasks. Chi-square tests for juniors and seniors
forthesamecomparisonwerenotsignificant.Finally,lookingatthe
comparison between the string based and object group, significant
effects were found for freshmen χ2(1)=5.25,p=0.022, juniors
χ2(1)=14.03,p<0.001,andseniors χ2(1)=8.08,p=0.004.The
odds ratios show that freshmen were once again łinfinitely,ž not
literallybut asdefined bythe numbersabove, more likely to fail a
taskintheobjectorientedgroup,whilejuniorshad3.91higherodds
tonotcompleteataskintheobjectorientedgroupcomparedtothe
string-based group, and seniors’ odd ratio was 5.59. A chi-squared
test between a binary measure of database experience and succeed-
ing in a task was significant χ2(1)=43.18,p<0.001 with 18.21
higher odds to complete a task successfully when a participant had
previous experience.
A log-linear analysis of the relationship between database expe-
rience,group,andnotmaxtime(theinverseofmaxtimeforeasier
to understand results) resulted in a model with likelihood ratio
χ2(4)=6.65,p=0.16. The interaction between group and not-
maxtime was significant, χ2(4)=18.96,p<0.001, as was the
interaction between database experience and notmaxtime, χ2(3)=
63.15,p<0.001.Thisleavesuswithamodelwiththethreemain
effects: database experience, group, and notmaxtime, as well as
thetwo-way interactioneffects between database experienceand
notmaxtime andgroup andnotmaxtime.
Furtheranalysisoftherelationshipbetweendatabaseexperience
andnotmaxtimewasconductedbyrunningseparatechi-squared
tests of one group at a time in combination with the database
experience measure. A significant effect was found in the object
groupχ2(1)=17.16,p<0.001, with 9.12 times higher odds that
aparticipantmightcompleteataskiftheyhadpreviousdatabase
experience.Inthepolyglotgroup,therewasalsoasignificanteffect
withχ2(1)=13.55,p<0.001. In this case, no participants with
previous database experience failed any task (out of 24 data points
in that group), making the odds ratio infinite. Finally, in the hybrid
group the effect is also significant with χ2(1)=14.07,p<0.001
and once again no participant with previous experience failed any
ofthe tasks(n =30).
6 QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Attheendoftheexperiment,theparticipantsansweredthequestion
łDid you feel like you had to switch between languages during theexperimentandhowdoyouthinkdidthisaffectyourprogresswhile
solvingthetasks?"Thissectionwillpresentsomeselectedanswers
tothisquestion.Weexploredanswerstothisquestionthematically
asawaytocheckourassumptionsaboutourexperiment,butwe
didnotformallycodetheseanswers.Assuch,whilewethinkthese
responsesareinteresting,theyshouldbeinterpretedaspreliminary.
6.1 Object-OrientedGroup
Theexpectationfortheresponsesinthisgroupwasthattheywould
not notice a switch, as they exclusively wrote Java code with a
fewusesofstringstonamefieldsofthetable.Acommontypeof
response to this question was that participants were not experi-
encinga switch,mostlyfrom moreexperiencedparticipants.This
isgenerallythepictureonegetsfromtheresponses.Additionally,
some of the participants report on the experience of having had
toswitchbetweenlanguagestoworkontheexperiment,asthey
aremostlyfamiliarwithanotherlanguage,inthoseresponsestheir
maincomputerlanguage(CL1)tendstobeC++.Understandably,
someparticipantswereconfusedbythequestionastherewasno
switchinginthis group.
6.2 String-Based Group
Thisgroupwasexpectedtoexperienceaswitchbetweenlanguages,
astheywouldhavetoswitchbetweenJavaandSQLtocompletethe
tasks.Only3oftheparticipantsreportedonexperiencingtheswitch
as intended as said by a professional: łyes, java to SQL and back.
Minimal." The other two participants that noticed the switch were
another professional and a senior. Only one of them remarked that
theremighthavebeenanimpactontheirproductivityregarding
theequalityoperatorinbothlanguagesbeingdifferent.Allthree
were familiar withSQL andJava.
Of the 36 participants in this group that left comments, 24 indi-
cated that they did not switch languages. Some of their remarks
focus on the overall switchbetween theirCL1 (typicallyC++) and
Java, instead of the switch within the tasks, similar to the findings
in the object-oriented group. One junior answered the question:
łNo,IdidnotfeellikeIneededtoswitchlanguagesduringtheexper-
iment.Ithinkthisincreasedmyvelocitywhilesolvingthetasks."
Participants not noticing the differences between the languages is
remarkable, however, since the syntax and semantics of SQL are
verydifferentfromJavaandC++.Itmightsuggestthatparticipants
take the languages they are not familiar and imagine they are one
combinedlanguage.
6.3 HybridGroup
The hybridgroupwasalsoexpectedtonoticea languageswitch,
atleastwhenitcomestowritingconditions,asthesyntaxofthe
conditionsinSQLandbooleanstatementsinJavaisdifferent.Once
again, the majority of participants did not notice the switch. How-
ever,ahandfullofparticipantsdidnoticesuchasthisstatementby
ajunior:łIfeltlikeithadabitofSQLandJava."Onceagain,partici-
pantsweremorelikelytodiscusstheswitchfromtheirCL1toJava
and most did not think there was a performance impact, regardless
of the fact that there was. Succinctly, beliefs of the participants did
not matchreality.
417A RandomizedControlledTrial onthe Effects of EmbeddedComputer LanguageSwitching ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA
7 DISCUSSION
7.1 Limitations
Whilemuchcarewastakenincreatingthestudyinawaytoadhere
to high standardsof reporting[ 1],this experiment has limitations.
First, the design of generalizable tasks is always a significant chal-
lengein anyexperiment. The typical trade-off isthat easy tocom-
pleteandshorttasksaretractableinastudy,whereasreal-world
(or some definition of the term) tasks łmightž be longer, harder, or
haveotherproperties.In ourcase,wethreadedtheneedlebyfirst
choosing tasks that were clearly relevant in the real world (e.g.,
inserting,deletingrows,joins),whilepilottestingtoensurepartici-
pantscouldactuallycompletetheminareasonabletimeframe.This
natural limitation is one reason why it is important to cross-tab
acrossexperimentalmethodologiesinmultiplestudies.Forexam-
ple, in reviewing the work of Shrestha et al. [ 16], our observations
largely match despite very different methodologies. Despite this,
nomatterwhattasksweultimatelychoose,variationsinthedesign
ofthetaskscanchangetheresultsand,assuch,itisimportantthat
our broader community replicate such findings in new and unique
ways to know when they apply and when they do not. Finally, our
tasks used APIs created in a specific way, which may not apply
everywhere. For example, in our tasks, we pass code to the API via
strings,buttheimpactofalternativestrategiesshouldbeevaluated
andcompared.
Second, the use of an automatic web platform to conduct the
experiment simplified recruiting and removed certain kinds of ex-
perimentalbias(e.g.,automaticgroupassignment).However,while
our system took extensive logs, online users may not be in full
compliance with the rules and have no direct oversight. Partici-
pants’ environment is therefore only controlled by the participants
themselves, making distractions and cheating possible. This is one
reason why we carefully analyzed logs after the fact and removed
participantsthatclearlywerenotincompliance,butitisimportant
to consider that direct observation can mitigate these issues, while
alsoprovidingits ownprosandcons.
The experiment had a relatively small sample at each experi-
encelevel.Despiteclearstatisticalfindings,wewanttopointout
that while the results show clear trends that seem worth further
investigation,moreworkisneededtoknowwhenandwherethese
findings generalize. Further, neither students nor professionals are
homogeneousgroups.Allpeoplehavedifferentbackgroundsand
experiences. To really understand the impact of polyglot, signifi-
cantlymoretests, underdifferentconditions,withdifferentkinds
ofpeople,willbenecessarytounderstandthebigpicture.Forex-
ample, very young students are now learning computer science in
K-12 education and polyglot may impact them or their teachers.
Further,professionalsatdifferentpointsintheir careers,oratdif-
ferent companies, might have unique experiences that impactour
results undervariousconditions.
7.2 Interpretation
7.2.1 Relationship between Language Switching and Productivity.
The results of the ANOVA show that there was a significant differ-
ence between the productivity of the different groups at p=0.029,
which reflect different amount of code switching. Therefore we
can reject H01 that there is no relationship between switching andproductivity.Whenlookingatthedifferencesbetweengroupsin
Figure1and at the post-hoc t-test, we can see that there are no
significant differences between the hybrid and the string-based
groupswhilethereisasignificantdifferencebetweeneachofthose
twogroupsandtheobject-orientedgroup.Boththestring-based
group and the hybrid group have lower average task times than
the object-oriented group, indicating that switching to a second
languagewhilesolvingprogrammingtasksmighthaveapositive
impact on programming productivity. The common assumption
beingthatchoosingtherightlanguageforaspecificuse-casemight
helpexpressthe instructionsto thecomputermore appropriately,
whichinturnmakesthetaskeasier[ 2,8].Itisimportanttonotethat
theoveralleffectsizeisrelativelysmallwith3.9%ofthevariance
accountedfor.
Whiletheobject-orientedgroupappearstobetheslowestgroup
intheexperiment, theothertwogroupsareclosertogetherinsolu-
tiontime.Figure 2allowsforamoredetailedlookatthedifferences
betweenthetwogroupsintermsoflevelofeducationasarepresen-
tation of participant experience. The graph shows that participants
in the string-based group that were freshmen or sophomores took
longeron averageto solvethetasksthanparticipantswhichwere
juniors, seniors, or professionals. The medians for freshmen and
sophomoresbeingatthemaximumtimefortasksindicatesthatthe
subjectsof thoselevels of education mighthave struggled to com-
pletethetasksintime.AlookatFigure 3showsaclearerpicture
of proportions of missed tasks per level of education and reveals
thatbothfreshmenandsophomoresclearlyfailedmoretasksinthe
string-basedgroupthantheirmoreexperiencedcounterparts.On
the other hand, looking at the hybrid group’s percentage of missed
tasksrevealsthatparticipantsinthatgroupdidnotmissasmany
tasks. A fact that is also reflected in the lower average times for
those two levels of education in the hybrid group compared to the
string-based group (see Figure 2). This results in this group hav-
ingalowermeansolutiontime(M=1269.74s,SD=1043.20)than
thestring-basedgroup(M=1357.54s,SD=1057.53)eventhough
more experienced participants (junior, senior, and professional)
completed tasks faster in the string-based group than in the hybrid
group.
This observation is confirmedinthe loglinearanalysis and chi-
squared tests of task failures, which shows that there is an inter-
action between level of education, group, and the occurrence of
maximumtimetaskevents.Thereareclearsignificanteffectsfor
all college levels between the string-based and the hybrid group
with odds ratios indicating that freshmen and sophomores were
5 and 6 times more likely to fail a task in the string-based group,
respectively.Juniorsandseniors,ontheotherhand,werelesslikely
tofailinthestring-basedthaninthehybridgroup,whichmakes
sense that these students were likely exposed to both languages
at this point intime. This isinterestingbecause keepinmindthat
those in our hybrid group could not have taken a course that in-
cluded the programming languageÐitwas one we generated only
fortheexperiment.Assuch,languagedesignersthatsomelanguage
designs might negatively impact younger programmers without
providingreal benefitsto olderones, as we foundhere.
Two main explanations appear viable from these experimen-
talresults.Forone,codeswitchinginthestring-basedgroupwas
designed to be a more complete, less frequent, switch between
418ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA P. Merlin Uesbeck, ColeS.Peterson,Bonita Sharif,andAndreas Stefik
languages within the context of the experiment. Meaning that par-
ticipantsswitchedfromJavatoSQLtowriteacompleteSQLstring
andthenswitchedbacktoJava.Codeswitchinginthehybridgroup,
on the other hand, was a switch to a smaller section of SQL-like
code that didn’t fully require the understanding of a new language.
Thisquickerswitchmightbeeasiertohandleforinexperiencedpro-
grammers,whileamoreexperiencedprogrammermightexperience
amoreintenseinterruptionintheirprogrammingconcentrationon
one language. Inexperienced programmers might be more flexible
to changes between languages because they think less about the
constraintsofthelanguagethey arecurrentlyusing andmightbe
thinking about both languages being part of a whole than more
experienceddevelopersasindicatedbysomeofthecommentsmade
inthe exit survey.
The other explanation could be that more experienced program-
mersmightbemorefamiliarwithSQLthanthelessexperienced
freshmenandsophomoresandthereforefeelmorefamiliarwiththe
straight integrationof SQL into a Java instruction. Since freshmen
and sophomores likely had no exposure to this practice and SQL
before, confirmed by the fact that all participants that indicated
experience with databases were juniors, seniors, and professionals,
they had a harder time understanding the syntax and could not
adaptasquicklyasmoreexperienceddevelopers.Acaveattothis
explanationisthefactthatofthe109participants,only14indicated
theyhadanyexperiencerelatedtodatabasesandmostofthosewere
professional developers, making the analysis of the relationship
between database experience and success in solving tasks difficult,
as itbecame more ofaproxyfor experienceddevelopers.
Overall,theresultsregardingthedifferencesbetweenthegroups
seemclear:Themonoglotobject-orientedgroupwastheslowest
and had the most failed tasks across the board. Both the hybrid
and the string-based groups are on par regarding their average
timeandacloserlookshowsthatthehybridgroupwaseasierthan
thestring-basedgroupforlessexperienceddeveloperswhilethe
string-based group was easier for more experienced developers
that already had training in this approach coming in to the experi-
ment. The evidence suggests that inexperienced developers either
do better at switching rapidly because they have a less rigid under-
standingofthelanguagetheyareusingorthatmoreexperienced
developershadmorefamiliaritywithSQLandstring-baseddata-
base programming because they had already practiced it before
enteringthe experiment.
7.2.2 ParticipantExperienceofComputerLanguageSwitching. From
theanswersintheexitsurvey,themajorityoftheparticipantsin
thegroupsswitchingbetweenlanguagesdidnotnoticethatthey
were switching. Only 3 participants from the string-based group
directly acknowledged the switching, while 66.66% denied that any
switchingwastakingplace.Ontopofthat,mostoftheparticipants
ofthehybridgroupalsodidnotremarkthattheynoticedswitching.
In both of these groups, participants that noticed switching also
tendedtoincorrectlyminimizetheeffecttheyimaginedithadon
theirperformance.
Overall,H02,thehypothesisthatprogrammersdonotconsciously
notice that they switch between computer languages, cannot be
outrightrejectedwithcurrentevidence.Itappearsthatmostpar-
ticipants do not notice the switch or don’t feel like their switchingactuallyaffectstheirproductivity.Especiallywhenkeepinginmind
that the group switching the least, the object-oriented group, took
the longest to complete the tasks, it becomes reasonable to assume
thattheeffectofcomputerlanguageswitchingmightbelimitedon
the embeddedlanguageswitchinglevel.
7.2.3 ProductivityDifferenceBasedonNativeLanguage. Withre-
spect to the measures used in this study, we have to reject H03,
but we have doubts about the validity of the measures as good
representations of language skill. Participants that stated their pri-
marylanguageis differentfromEnglish solvedtasks significantly
slower than participants that stated that their primary language
is English. However, testing only experienced programmers, there
was no significant difference. The survey did not track language
history in sufficient detail and while we report this finding here
for completeness, we are doubtful it provides a sufficient look at
hownaturallanguageimpactspolyglot.Anattempttousetheprofi-
ciencyscoresgivenbytheparticipantstoanalyzethedifferencesin
performance failed because the scores were inconsistent with their
performance. In fact, some primary English speakers rated their
ownproficiencyas8(outof10).Abetterassessmentoflanguage
skill and language history of participants is necessary to make real
conclusions from these data. In the future, other study techniques,
perhaps like the TOEFL test2, might give more or better insight.
This caveat stated, given only the data we gathered here, we did
observethattherewasreducedproductivityforparticipantsthat
werenotprimaryEnglishspeakers,butthatthiseffectdisappears
withexperience.
8 CONCLUSIONSAND FUTUREWORK
This paper describes an experiment on the impact of computer
language switching on software development productivity moti-
vatedbyfindingsinlinguisticresearch,suggestingthatthereisa
time cost to switching between natural languages and the ubiquity
ofcomputerlanguageswitchinginsoftwaredevelopment.Three
groupswere tested, amonoglot group,a polyglot group withSQL
and Java, and a hybrid group. Results showed that the impact of
polyglotprogrammingisnotsimple.Weobservedsignificantim-
pactsbasedonexperiencelevel,andthedesignsofthelanguages.
We also observed that the mismatch between languages, as ob-
served in our hybrid group, impacted people differently depending
onexperiencelevel.Webelievefuturestudiesshouldinvestigate
differentkindsofpolyglotapproaches,inadditiontoformalizing
how much mismatch there is between such polyglot approaches.
Further,languagedesignersthemselvesshouldconsiderthatlan-
guageembeddingcanhavelargeimpactsondifferentkindsofusers,
especially lessexperienced developers, and thatreducing this mis-
match may have positive impacts without sacrificing ease of use
for professionals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ThisworkissupportedinpartbytheUnitedStatesNationalScience
Foundation under grant numbers DRL 16-44491, CCF 18-55756 and
CNS18-55753.
2https://www.ets.org/toefl
419A RandomizedControlledTrial onthe Effects of EmbeddedComputer LanguageSwitching ESEC/FSE ’20, November8ś13,2020,VirtualEvent, USA
REFERENCES
[1][n.d.]. Consort - Welcome to the CONSORT Website. http://www.consort-
statement.org/
[2][n.d.]. Polyglot Programming. http://nealford.com/memeagora/2006/12/05/
Polyglot_Programming.html . Accessed:2018-04-25.
[3]Jubin Abutalebi and David W Green. 2008. Control mechanisms in bilingual
languageproduction:Neuralevidencefromlanguageswitchingstudies. Language
and cognitiveprocesses 23,4 (2008), 557ś582.
[4]Brett A Becker. 2016. A new metric to quantify repeated compiler errors for
noviceprogrammers.In Proceedingsofthe2016ACMConferenceonInnovation
and Technology inComputer ScienceEducation . ACM,296ś301.
[5]BLS.[n.d.]. SoftwareDevelopers-Summary. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-
and-information-technology/software-developers.htm . Accessed:2018-04-20.
[6]Teresa Busjahn, Roman Bednarik, Andrew Begel, Martha Crosby, James H Pater-
son, Carsten Schulte, Bonita Sharif, and Sascha Tamm. 2015. Eye movements in
code reading: Relaxing the linear order. In Program Comprehension (ICPC), 2015
IEEE 23rdInternationalConference on . IEEE,255ś265.
[7]AndyField,JeremyMiles,andZoëField.2012. DiscoveringstatisticsusingR . Sage
publications.
[8]Hans-Christian Fjeldberg. 2008. Polyglot programming. a business perspective .
Master’s thesis. NorwegianUniversityof Science and Technology.
[9]The CONSORT Group. [n.d.]. CONSORT: Transparent Reporting of Trials.
http://www.consort-statement.org/. Accessed:2017-10-13.
[10]RobertoRHerediaandJeanetteAltarriba.2001. Bilinguallanguagemixing:Why
dobilingualscode-switch? CurrentDirectionsinPsychologicalScience 10,5(2001),
164ś168.
[11]Michael Hoppe and Stefan Hanenberg. 2013. Do developers benefit from generic
types?: an empirical comparison of generic and raw types in java. In Proceedings
ofthe2013ACMSIGPLANInternationalConferenceonObjectOrientedProgram-
ming Systems Languages & Applications, OOPSLA 2013, part of SPLASH 2013,
Indianapolis, IN, USA, October 26-31, 2013 . ACM,457ś474.
[12]Ping Li. 1996. Spoken word recognition of code-switched words by Chineseś
English bilinguals. Journal ofmemoryand language 35,6 (1996), 757ś774.
[13]Philip Mayer and Alexander Bauer. 2015. An empirical analysis of the utilization
of multiple programming languages in open source projects. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering . ACM,4.
[14]Philip Mayer, Michael Kirsch, and Minh Anh Le. 2017. On multi-language
software development, cross-language links and accompanying tools: a sur-
vey of professional software developers. J. Softw. Eng. Res. Dev. 5 (2017), 1.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40411-017-0035-z
[15]LeoA.MeyerovichandArielS.Rabkin.2013. EmpiricalAnalysisofProgramming
LanguageAdoption. SIGPLANNot. 48,10 (Oct.2013),1ś18. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2544173.2509515
[16]Titus Barik Nischal Shrestha, Colton Botta and Chris Parnin. 2020. Here We Go
Again:WhyIsItDifficultforDeveloperstoLearnAnotherProgrammingLan-
guage?.In Proceedingsofthe42ndInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(ICSE2020) . ACM,NewYork, NY, USA. https://doi.org/3377811.3380352
[17]Daniel J Olson.2016. The gradient effectof contexton language switchingand
lexical access in bilingual production. Applied Psycholinguistics 37, 3 (2016),
725ś756.
[18]Daniel J Olson. 2017. Bilingual language switching costs in auditory comprehen-
sion.Language, Cognitionand Neuroscience 32,4 (2017), 494ś513.
[19]Chantel S Prat, Tara M Madhyastha, Malayka J Mottarella, and Chu-Hsuan Kuo.
2020. Relating natural language aptitude to individual differences in learning
programminglanguages. Scientific reports 10,1 (2020), 1ś10.[20]N. Shrestha and C. Parnin. 2019. Instrument Designs for Validating Cross-
Language Behavioral Differences.In 2019 IEEE SymposiumonVisual Languages
and Human-Centric Computing(VL/HCC) . 205ś209.
[21]Janet Siegmund, Christian Kästner, Sven Apel, Chris Parnin, Anja Bethmann,
Thomas Leich, Gunter Saake, and André Brechmann. 2014. Understanding
understanding source code with functional magnetic resonance imaging. In
Proceedingsofthe36thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering .ACM,
378ś389.
[22]JanetSiegmund,ChristianKästner,JörgLiebig,SvenApel,andStefanHanenberg.
2014. Measuring and modeling programming experience. Empirical Software
Engineering 19,5 (2014), 1299ś1334.
[23]Janet Siegmund, Norman Peitek, Chris Parnin, SvenApel, Johannes Hofmeister,
Christian Kästner,Andrew Begel, Anja Bethmann, and André Brechmann. 2017.
Measuring neural efficiency of program comprehension. In Proceedings of the
201711thJointMeetingonFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering .ACM,140ś150.
[24]Andreas Stefik and Susanna Siebert. 2013. An Empirical Investigation into
Programming Language Syntax. Trans. Comput. Educ. 13, 4, Article 19 (Nov.
2013),40pages.
[25]JeffreyStylosandBradAMyers.2008. Theimplicationsofmethodplacementon
APIlearnability.In Proceedingsofthe16thACMSIGSOFTInternationalSymposium
onFoundationsofsoftwareengineering . ACM,105ś112.
[26]KP Suresh. 2011. An overview of randomization techniques: an unbiased assess-
ment of outcome in clinical research. Journal of human reproductive sciences 4, 1
(2011), 8.
[27]Toni Taipalus, Mikko Siponen, and Tero Vartiainen. 2018. Errors and compli-
cationsinSQLqueryformulation. ACMTransactionsonComputingEducation
(TOCE)18,3 (2018), 15.
[28]Federico Tomassetti and Marco Torchiano. 2014. An empirical assessment of
polyglot-ism in GitHub. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
Evaluationand AssessmentinSoftwareEngineering . ACM,17.
[29]Lucy Turner, Larissa Shamseer, Douglas G Altman, Kenneth F Schulz, and David
Moher. 2012. Does use of the CONSORT Statement impact the completeness
of reporting of randomised controlled trials published in medical journals? A
Cochrane reviewa. Systematic reviews 1,1 (2012), 60.
[30]PhillipMerlinUesbeckandAndreasStefik.2019. ARandomizedControlledTrial
on the Impact of Polyglot Programming in a Database Context. In 9th Workshop
onEvaluationandUsabilityofProgrammingLanguagesandTools(PLATEAU2018)
(OpenAccess Series in Informatics (OASIcs)) , Titus Barik, Joshua Sunshine, and
SarahChasins(Eds.),Vol.67.SchlossDagstuhlśLeibniz-ZentrumfuerInformatik,
Dagstuhl,Germany, 1:1ś1:8. https://doi.org/10.4230/OASIcs.PLATEAU.2018.1
[31]Phillip Merlin Uesbeck, Andreas Stefik, Stefan Hanenberg, Jan Pedersen, and
PatrickDaleiden.2016. AnempiricalstudyontheimpactofC++lambdasand
programmerexperience.In Proceedingsofthe38thInternationalConferenceon
SoftwareEngineering . ACM,760ś771.
[32]P. Merlin Uesbeck, Andreas Stefik, Bonita Sharif, and Cole Peterson. 2020. A
RandomizedControlledTrialontheEffectsofEmbeddedComputerLanguage
Switching Replication Packet. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3911750
[33]Arie Van Deursen, Paul Klint, and Joost Visser. 2000. Domain-specific languages:
Anannotated bibliography. ACMSigplan Notices 35,6 (2000), 26ś36.
[34]AntonioVetro,FedericoTomassetti,MarcoTorchiano,andMaurizioMorisio.2012.
Language interaction and quality issues: an exploratory study. In Proceedings of
the ACM-IEEE international symposium on Empirical software engineering and
measurement . ACM,319ś322.
[35]W Quin Yow, Jessica Sh Tan, and Suzanne Flynn. 2017. Code-switching as a
markeroflinguisticcompetenceinbilingualchildren. Bilingualism:Language
and Cognition (2017), 1ś16.
420