Robotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service
Robotics Domain
Sergio García
University of Gothenburg |Chalmers,
Gothenburg, Sweden
sergio.garcia@gu.seDaniel Strüber
Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
d.strueber@cs.ru.nlDavide Brugali
University of Bergamo,
Bergamo, Italy
davide.brugali@unibg.it
Thorsten Berger
University of Gothenburg |Chalmers,
Gothenburg, Sweden
thorsten.berger@gu.sePatrizio Pelliccione
University of Gothenburg |Chalmers,
Gothenburg, Sweden
and University of L’Aquila,
L’Aquila, Italy
patrizio.pelliccione@gu.se
ABSTRACT
Robots that support humans by performing useful tasks (a.k.a., ser-
vice robots) are booming worldwide. In contrast to industrial robots,
the development of service robots comes with severe software en-
gineering challenges, since they require high levels of robustness
and autonomy to operate in highly heterogeneous environments.
As a domain with critical safety implications, service robotics faces
a need for sound software development practices. In this paper, we
present the first large-scale empirical study to assess the state of the
art and practice of robotics software engineering. We conducted 18
semi-structured interviews with industrial practitioners working
in 15 companies from 9 different countries and a survey with 156
respondents from 26 countries from the robotics domain. Our re-
sults provide a comprehensive picture of (i) the practices applied by
robotics industrial and academic practitioners, including processes,
paradigms, languages, tools, frameworks, and reuse practices, (ii)
the distinguishing characteristics of robotics software engineering,
and (iii) recurrent challenges usually faced, together with adopted
solutions. The paper concludes by discussing observations, derived
hypotheses, and proposed actions for researchers and practitioners.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computer systems organization →Robotics ;•Software
and its engineering ;
KEYWORDS
robotics software engineering, interviews, online survey
ACM Reference Format:
Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio
Pelliccione. 2020. Robotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7043-1/20/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409743Service Robotics Domain. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint European Soft-
ware Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’20), November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409743
1 INTRODUCTION
Service robots are a rising robotics domain with broad applications
in many fields, such as logistics, healthcare, telepresence, main-
tenance, domestic tasks, education, and entertainment. A service
robot is “ a type of robot that performs useful tasks for humans or
equipment excluding industrial automation applications ” [29]. Ser-
vice robots are increasingly becoming part of our lives [ 46], being
the service robotics market estimated to reach a value of $ 102.5
billion by 2025 [ 33]. Compared to industrial robotics, the service
robotics domain is more challenging, since these robots usually op-
erate in unconstrained environments, often populated by humans,
requiring high degrees of robustness and autonomy.
Despite software playing an ever-increasing role in robotics, the
current software engineering (SE) practices are perceived as insuf-
ficient, often leading to error-prone and hardly maintainable and
evolvable software. Robotic systems are an advanced type of cyber-
physical system (CPS), made up of an intricate blend of hardware,
software, and environmental components. SE, despite its beneficial
role in other CPS domains (e.g., automotive, aeronautics), has tra-
ditionally been considered an auxiliary concern of robotic system
construction [ 13]. A possible reason is that robots in factory au-
tomation have built-in proprietary controllers for repetitive tasks,
therefore, allowing a simple programming style. The heavy lifting is
in the domains of mechanics, electronics, and automatic control [ 14].
In contrast, to achieve autonomy when interacting in highly het-
erogeneous environments, service robots are equipped with a large
variety of functionalities for perception, control, planning, learning,
and multimodal interaction with the human operator.
The integration, customization, and evolution of these function-
alities give rise to a large amount of complexity, the management
of which is a challenging task. SE systematic practices could play a
crucial role in the management of such complexity, yet, according
to a recent study [ 7], the community of SE and robotics is still not
consolidated. In fact, deficiencies in the control systems of service
robots stemming from a bad management of their inherent com-
plexity are especially expensive if found after the system is put inarXiv:2006.10608v6  [cs.SE]  8 Sep 2020ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
operation. For instance, in 2016, the Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency lost 286 million dollars due to an error in the control sys-
tem of its flagship astronomical satellite. The system commanded a
thruster jet to fire in the wrong direction, resulting in ten critical
parts breaking off the satellite body [3].
Our long-term goal is to establish effective SE practices for a
substantial lifting of the state-of-practice for engineering service
robotics and provide guidance for practitioners. We also aim to help
the research community to scope future research that meets indus-
trial needs. According to Bozhinoski et al., one of the challenges
“is to promote a shift towards well-defined engineering approaches
able to stimulate component supply-chains and significantly impact
the robotics marketplace " [7]. However, systematic studies about the
specific software development practices and tools applied in ser-
vice robotics as well as the challenges faced by practitioners in this
domain are currently lacking. Academics and practitioners would
benefit from such a study, as it would allow us to quantify and check
existing subjective beliefs and anecdotal evidence [ 50], and may
contribute to the formation of a body of knowledge on SE in robotics.
Practitioners would further benefit from such a study as companies
need to make decisions about huge investments. Having a snapshot
of the current state-of-practice may help them in making informed
decisions. To these ends, this paper assesses the current SE practices
applied to the domain of service robotics, as well as its distinguish-
ing characteristics and faced challenges. Our research questions are:
RQ1. What practices are applied in SE for service robots? We study
used SE principles, including processes and quality assurance tech-
niques; also, we investigate technical spaces in use, including frame-
works, middleware, software languages, and tools. Finally, we study
reuse practices, including the frequency and motivations for reusing
existing solutions or, instead, for favoring self-developed solutions.
RQ2. How is robotics SE perceived to be different from SE in other do-
mains? We identify the special characteristics that make robotics SE
stand out from SE in other domains. We are interested in the effect
of the robots’ features, their hardware, their requirements on auton-
omy, and the heterogeneity of contexts where they are deployed.
RQ3. What challenges do practitioners face related to SE for ser-
vice robots? We elicit the most common SE challenges faced by
practitioners in service robotics, as well as the solutions applied.
To collect data, we conducted 18 semi-structured interviews
with industrial robotics experts working for 15 companies from 9
different countries. We accompany this study with an online sur-
vey, targeting industrial and academic practitioners in the robotics
domain, from which we collect 156 responses. Academic practition-
ers are those who work for an academic institution (we recruited
most of our respondents from significant GitHub repositories with
robotics-specific code). Among the survey respondents, we identi-
fied practitioners working for 58 companies from 20 different coun-
tries and 16 academic institutions from 10 different countries. To
the best of our knowledge, our study is the first with this ambition.
In our study, we discovered that roboticists are predominantly fo-
cused on implementation and real-world testing, often favored over
simulation. We learned that robotic control systems are typically
developed as component-based systems, implemented by develop-
ers who may come from different backgrounds (e.g., mechanical,
electrical, or software engineers). We also elicited the main charac-
teristics of robotics SE, where the cyber-physical nature of robotsand the variety of disciplines required to develop a complete robotic
system were highlighted. These characteristics increase the com-
plexity of robots’ control software, calling for systematic practices
as modeling and the usage of software architectures to improve
the development process [ 18]. Our respondents ranked challenges
related to robustness and validation as most pressing, and typically
address them by applying thorough testing processes. Based on
our observations, we also identify research themes that deserve
further investigation. We provide conjectures for why these themes
are currently under-investigated and recommendations for both
researchers and practitioners. In summary, we contribute:
•The findings from our interview data, including qualitative in-
formation about applied practices, distinguishing characteristics,
and faced challenges and solutions in service robotics.
•The results from our online survey, which supports a quantita-
tive assessment of the trends regarding SE practices in robotics.
•A replication package [ 25] containing (1) the questionnaire and
the anonymized responses from our online survey (2) our inter-
view guide and used open-ended questions, (3) the codebook
from the qualitative data analysis, (4) and our quantitative data
analysis scripts.
•Discussion of observations, derived hypotheses, and proposed
actions for researchers and practitioners.
2 RELATED WORK
Current achievements in defining standardized solutions, reference
architectures, and model-driven approaches for the development of
reusable robotic systems are documented in various survey papers
briefly summarized in the following.
Brugali et al. [ 10] present five challenges that characterize robot-
ics, namely (1) the identification of stable requirements of robotic
systems, (2) the definition of abstract models to cope with hardware
and software heterogeneity, (3) the seamless transition from proto-
type testing and debugging to real system implementation, (4) the
deployment of robotic applications in real-world environments,
and (5) the design and integration of software control systems de-
pending on highly heterogeneous technologies. Brugali et al. [ 8,
9,11] have reviewed existing approaches that exploit component-
based SE (CBSE) and Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) in robot-
ics. Notable examples of component models and associated MDE
toolchains specifically defined for developing robotic applications
are OROCOS [16], SmartSoft [42], BRICS [15], and LAAS-BIP [5].
MDE has also been applied recently in service robotics as a core
technology to compose systems out of exchangeable components
and move towards well-engineered system development processes
as opposed to current craftsmanship practices [ 46]. Steck et al. [ 47]
propose a system that exploits design- and run-time models to build
robotic systems and support them in their decision-making process.
Closely related to MDE are Domain-Specific Languages (DSLs),
which have also been highlighted for their benefits, including the
improvement of composability and system integration [ 46]. The
research community has already worked in the last years on the
use of DSLs for the development of robotic systems [ 15,43,44,47].
Nordmann et al. [ 36] present a survey of more than 130 papers on
DSLs in robotics. The papers are classified according to robotic
functional subdomains, such as Kinematics and Motion Control.Robotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service Robotics Domain ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Elkady et al. [ 23] present a literature survey and attribute-based
bibliography of the state-of-the-art in robotic middleware frame-
works. For example, the Middleware for Mobile Robot Applications
(MIRO) [ 51] provides a robotic hardware abstraction layer that
simplifies the development of robot control applications.
Ahmad et al. [ 1] conducted a systematic mapping study on soft-
ware architectures for robotic systems, which reveals that the con-
ventional concepts of architectural frameworks and architectural
notations are well integrated into robotics. However, they also iden-
tified a lack of focus on architecture-specific evaluation for validat-
ing requirements for robotic software. In addition, Kortenkamp et
al. [32] present various approaches to architecting robotic systems
with an emphasis on programming tools and environments.
Ingrand et al. [ 28] provide a survey that introduces a global
perspective of autonomous robots’ deliberation—i.e., endowing
robotic systems with adaptable and robust functionalities.
Estefó et al. [ 24] interviewed and surveyed Robot Operating
System (ROS) [ 41] developers. They report on the issues related to
resources reuse within this ecosystem.
Bozhinoski et al. [ 7] provide a systematic mapping study on the
state of the art in safety for mobile robotic systems. Focusing on
an SE perspective, they classify safety solutions from 58 primary
studies concerning trends, characteristics, and industrial adoption.
They found that existing solutions are largely not ready to be used
in uncontrollable and unknown, often shared with humans envi-
ronments. The only source of information of this study consists of
published papers that have been selected as primary studies. This
motivates us to perform a study to better investigate these aspects
and by involving industrial and academic practitioners in robotics.
Synergies with SE have been investigated also for other domains
that share common characteristics with robotics. Amershi et al. [ 4]
conducted a study observing software teams at Microsoft as they
develop AI-based applications. Altinger’s Doctoral Thesis [ 2] re-
ports on fault prediction techniques applied to automotive software
development. Bures et al. [ 17] report on challenges and promising
solutions in the area of SE for Smart Cyber-Physical Systems.
3 METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 summarizes our methodology. For an initial set of four
exploratory interviews, we relied on our own experiences as SE
researchers in various robotics projects [ 21,22] where we collabo-
rated with robotics engineers, many of them from industry. In those
interviews, we asked previous collaborators, who are expert robot-
ics engineers, about their software engineering practices, tools,
and challenges, following the typical software-engineering phases
(from requirements via design over implementation and quality
Phase 2: data collection & analysisPhase 1: preliminary study9Exploratory interviews (4)Second stage interviews (14)RQ1. Practices in Robotics SERQ3. Challenges & solutions RQ2. Robotics SE compared to other domainsOwn experiences
Updated interviews guidelinesData analysis and triangulation
Filled questionnaires (156)QuestionnairePreliminary interviews guidelines
Transcriptions (16 hours)
Paper A (RQ1, Chapter 2) -An EmpiricalAssessmentof RoboticsSoftware EngineeringResultsCollected dataArtefactActivity
LegendQuestionnaire designOnline survey invitation & data collection
Figure 1: Research methodology overviewassurance), while also aiming to understand the organizational and
business context. This helped us sharpening our knowledge of the
typical terminology used in robotics. Based on this knowledge and
our research questions, we designed an interview guide and, in par-
allel, a survey questionnaire for the second phase of our study. Our
replication package [ 25] provides the questionnaire, an analysis
script, detailed results, and our interview guide.
3.1 Survey
Design . We implemented the survey questionnaire with Google
Forms, designing it to take no more than 15–20 minutes to com-
plete. It consists of 47 questions (27 optional, 20 mandatory) divided
into the sections: robotic platforms and context (e.g., which types
of robots are engineered), activities and paradigms (e.g., to which
extent requirements engineering is performed or what tools are
used), development practices (e.g., whether and how software arti-
facts are reused), quality assurance (e.g., where test data is obtained
from), mission specification (e.g., whether the robot behavior is
hard-coded), challenges and solutions (e.g., concerning applying
AI techniques), general perception (e.g., what characteristics are
unique to the domain), and finally a section on the respondents’
demographics (e.g., years of experience). The majority of questions
was closed-ended, using either checkboxes or 5-point Likert scales,
the latter to express the frequencies of applying certain activities
(e.g., code review), ranging from never via almost never, sometimes
and very often, to always. We also allowed declaring “Don’t know. ”
With this design, we followed an inductive and a deductive strat-
egy: on the one hand (inductive), we used questions similar to the
ones asked during the interviews so to generalize our findings; on
the other hand (deductive), we asked about hypotheses (proposed
explanations for phenomena) we learned about in the exploratory
interviews. Some examples of such hypothesis are: (1) robotics soft-
ware developers tend to “reinvent the wheel” instead of reusing
already existing solutions; or (2) some of the most important chal-
lenges in the field are the lack of standardized solutions and of inter-
nal and external documentation. To this end, we designed questions
such as: “Have you ever developed a software component from scratch
rather than reusing an existing (either self-developed or third-party)
one? If yes, why?” After the initial design, we tested the question-
naire internally among the authors, and five times externally with
industrial and academic colleagues with expertise in robotics to
fine-tune length, phrasing, and terminology before distribution.
Distribution . Our distribution strategy was three-fold. First, we
used social media (Twitter and LinkedIn) to distribute our survey in-
vitation, clearly asking for responses from practitioners in robotics.
Social media stimulated the response rate, since it is inherently in-
teractive and practitioners are active there—e.g., we knew examples
from Twitter and Linkedin allowed searching for specific companies
and roles. Second, we created a list of contacts from our previous
projects and collaborations. Third, we mined GitHub repositories
to extract their contributors’ public email addresses. Specifically,
we sought repositories from well-known tools (e.g., Gazebo [ 31]),
frameworks (e.g., ROS [ 41], ROS2 [ 34], OROCOS [ 16], Yarp [ 35]),
and libraries (e.g., OpenCV [ 40]). We also looked into repositories of
well-known companies (e.g., Boston Dynamics), companies found
in the media [ 19], and companies from survey respondents whoESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
provided their email addresses. We also asked recipients to distrib-
ute our survey to other potential respondents. Finally, to improve
gender balance, we used Google to find female robotics engineers
and found articles on this topic [49].
Survey Respondents . We sent out 2499 invitations and collected
156 responses (response rate of 6%, in line with the expectations
of SE survey’s response rate [ 45]). The most common occupation
among the respondents is industrial practitioner with 60.9% (31.4%
of leading technical roles and 29.5% of programmers). We also
received a substantial number of responses from academic practi-
tioners (57, 36.5% of the total), so we decided to not filter them out
and instead use that data to compare practices applied by academic
and industrial practitioners. The last group is formed by practition-
ers who did not identify themselves as industrial nor academic, and
people who decided not to answer with their occupation (4, 2.6%).
We used provided email addresses to identify the companies for
which our respondents work, and the associated countries. That
way, we mapped 72 of our industrial practitioners to 58 companies
from 20 different countries, distributed over geographical areas as
follows (number of respondents between parenthesis): a) Europe
(51), b) North America (13), c) Asia (7), and d) South America (1).
We also mapped 22 of our academic practitioners to 16 universities
from 10 different countries from the following geographical regions:
a) Europe (18), b) Asia (1), c) South America (1), and d) Oceania (1).
Almost half of our respondents have between five and 10 years of
experience in robotics (43.6%), 17.3% between 10 and 15, and 11.5%
more than 15. Out of the total, 24.4% of the respondents have be-
tween one and five years of experience and 3.2% did not provide an
answer to this question. Regarding the size of the company, almost
half of the answers (46.8%) belong to respondents who work for com-
panies with 50 or more employees. Then, 11.7%, 22.1%, and 15.6%
of the respondents work for companies with 31-50, 11-30, and 1-10
employees, respectively. Among all the respondents, 91.2% are men,
6.1% are women, and 2.7% preferred not to specify. In the remainder,
we refer to individual survey respondents as S1, S2, and so on.
3.2 Interviews
Design and Conduction . We designed an interview guide target-
ing interviews of around 45-60 minutes length. The guide started
with questions regarding the interviewee’s background (e.g., sub-
ject of university studies and previous roles at companies) and
roughly resembled the questionnaire’s structure and addressed each
research question. The interviews were semi-structured: we had
question blocks we wanted to cover, but allowed the interview to
flow freely based on interesting aspects the interviewee brought up,
where we then dug deeper if necessary. Before each interview, we
also studied the survey responses to prepare specific questions, such
as for clarification. We also emphasized special topics depending on
the interviewee and their role at the company. For instance, CEOs
were usually able to provide much information regarding the com-
pany’s organization or the overall project life-cycle. Software and
robotics engineers mostly provided information on development is-
sues, engineering paradigms, and technological spaces. Following a
grounded-theory-like approach for the analysis (explained shortly),
we also slightly changed our attention to frequent topics that arose
along with the interviews, such as the dominant use of ROS as a
robotics framework, its causes, and benefits and shortcomings.Table 1: List of interviewees
Cp.1Exp.2Role3Company description
1 A 6 RSE Small, specialized in outdoor mobile robots and professional
Research and Development (R&D) consultancy.
2 B 18 CEO Small, focuses on autonomous navigation solutions.
3 C 5 PM Large, mainly works in the field of engineering and electronics.
Currently investing in artificial intelligence and robotics.
4 C 6 PM
5 D 15 RSE Large technological center, mainly works in applied R&D.
6 E 2 RSE Small, manufactures humanoid robots and robotic platforms.
7 F 8 RSE Small, manufactures mobile service robotic platforms.
8 G 5 RSE Large, works in the intralogistics sector.
9 H 2.5 RSE Technology-oriented large company, also invests in robotics.
10I 6 RSE Large technology institute, which focuses in diverse industrial
fields, including mobile robots.
11C 14 RSE
12J 8 SAE Medium-sized, provides self-driving products and services.
13K 4 CEO Micro-business, develops and rents customer-tailored robots.
14L 4 CEO Micro-business, develops and rents modular robot solutions.
15 M 21 PM Large, mainly works in the aviation sector, but also with un-
manned air vehicles.
16N 11 PM Large research institute, focuses on industrial projects like arti-
ficial intelligence in automation.
17J 7 RSE
18O 8 CTO Small, works in educational technology using service robots.
1Company name (letter code),2experience with robotics in years.
3Roles: Robotics Software Engineer (RSE); Chief Executive Officer (CEO); Project
Manager (PM); Application Engineer (AE); Chief Technology Officer (CTO).
Interviewees . We recruited our interviewees: (1) among the survey
respondents who agreed to be contacted for follow-up questions,
(2) targeting domain experts using social media (see explanation
in Sec. 3.1), and (3) among previous colleagues with expert robotics
knowledge. We performed 18 interviews, summing up to 16 hours
of interview data. As detailed in Table 1, the interviewees belong to
15 companies from nine different countries (16 interviewees work
in Europe and two of them in North America), with roles ranging
from developer to CEO, giving us a broad perspective. We made
sure that all interviewees are pure industrial practitioners. The table
also shows our interviewees’ overall working experience within
robotics and briefly characterizes each company. In the remainder of
the paper, we refer to individual interviewees with I1, I2, and so on.
3.3 Data Analysis
We analyzed the survey quantitatively by creating diagrams and
manually aggregating responses to questions. To understand trends
in the Likert-scale questions, we created bar charts (many of which
are shown in the remainder). Furthermore, we analyzed the survey
results qualitatively by inspecting responses to the open-ended
questions. We created a technical report with the detailed results
(available in our replication package [ 25]), also separating the re-
sults by the respondent’s role, specifically: industrial practitioner
(further sub-divided into leading technical role and programmer)
and academic practitioner. We make this separation to understand
any deviations based on the role, and if there are, we report rele-
vant differences separately. After creating the technical report, we
triangulated the results with those from the interviews as follows.
We analyzed the interviews by transcribing them and then per-
forming open coding [ 48], as known from grounded theory [ 20].
Two authors coded the interviews iteratively, continuously dis-
cussing and refining the codes and organizing them in a hierarchy.
We defined a codebook consisting of 373 codes, which we provide inRobotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service Robotics Domain ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
our replication package [25] . Based on the codes, we triangulated
results from the survey and interviews (mapping codes to parts of
the technical report about the survey data). We report the results
by first providing the context in which our survey respondents and
interviewees perform their engineering, shortly in Sec. 3.4. There-
after, in Sections 4, 5, and 6, we use a narrative style to answer our
research questions RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3, respectively.
3.4 Robotic Platforms and Context
Most respondents (75%) affirm that they use (ground) mobile robots
in their projects. Collaborative robots and mobile manipulators
come in second and third place with 45.5% and 42.3%, respectively.
Table 2 gives an overview of the types of products and services
provided by the respondents and what field they are applied to. We
find a predominance of planning modules (64.1%) and low-level
functionalities (63.5%) as the most common types. Industrial practi-
tioners tend to provide more complete robotic systems (59.6%) than
the academic ones (37.5%). Our survey allowed us to enter an open-
ended text after answering “Other,” but despite the number of people
who chose this option only 13 open-ended responses were collected
for this question. Examples of answers include testing systems, real-
time operating systems, and high-level vision solutions. The most
common application fields are factory automation and research for
service robots (48.1% for both). The data shows a tendency among
industrial practitioners towards factory automation (51.1%) while
academic practitioners favor research for service robotics (60.7%).
4 PRACTICES (RQ1)
RQ1 focuses on practices applied during the software development
life cycle of robotic projects. It includes typical activities, develop-
ment paradigms, development processes, software languages and
frameworks, quality assurance (QA), reuse practices, and used tools.
4.1 Activities
Figure 2 (a) gives an overview of the frequency of different activities
according to the survey. The most common one is implementation,
99% of the respondents perform it always or very often. Real-world
experimentation and testing and simulation come in second (88%)
and third place (79%). The least common activities are automatic
code generation (15%) and requirements engineering (RE) with 49%.
Real-world experimentation and testing and simulation are per-
formed equally by industrial and academic practitioners. Interest-
ingly, respondents perform real-world experimentation more often
than simulation (88% versus 79%). The difference between industrial
and academic practitioners for software maintenance and evolution
mounts to a rate of 73% and 56%, respectively. The gap may be
Table 2: Provided service or product and application fields
Overall Industrial pract. Academic pract.
Planning modules 64.1 % 58.5 % 75 %
Low-level functionalities 63.5 % 59.6 % 71.4 %
Complete system 51.3 % 59.6 % 37.5 %
Drivers 44.9 % 43.6 % 44.6 %
Other 9 % 9.6 % 8.9 %
Factory automation 48.1 % 51.1 % 42.9 %
Service robotics research 48.1 % 38.3 % 60.7 %
Others 34.6 % 40.4 % 26.8 %
Transportation 24.4 % 24.5 % 23.2 %related to work conventions in academia: academic practitioners do
not focus on providing a final product to a customer, but on generat-
ing a proof-of-concept design that can be used to validate a scientific
contribution. Only 8% of the respondents responded “Don’t know”
to the RE question and, for the reminder, the respondents that per-
form RE are surprisingly low. We believe that the respondents had a
very specific understanding of RE in the sense of using dedicated RE
tools. Another possible reason is the large number of participants
who follow agile processes. We analyzed our data and discovered
that, from 156 respondents, 70 perform RE, and 48 perform RE and
agile processes always or very often. Therefore, at least a significant
portion of respondents who use agile processes indicate RE expe-
rience. Since they all need to somehow elicit requirements, we dug
deeper in the interviews and in fact we found that the majority elicit
requirements but in rather ad hoc ways. I8: “We had the customer
requirements and also all the list of features the customer needed,
and then we again sat down and decided how to design the software
architecture and realize that. But there was no official process that we
followed.” Furthermore, even when they followed an RE process,
some stated they did not, probably due to a terminology issue.
4.2 Development Processes
We present an overview of the frequency of applied SE processes
in Fig. 2 (b). The most common development process applied by
the survey respondents is agile (73% of the respondents apply it
always or very often versus 21% and 17% for waterfall and hybrid,
respectively). The “Don’t know” answers’ rate is 11%, 26%, and 30%
for agile, waterfall, and hybrid, respectively. There is a remarkable
difference between the industrial and academic practitioners’ re-
sults: 81% of the industrial ones adopt agile processes very often
or always, while the percentage of academic ones is 60%.
We observe that agile SE processes are more often followed
by industrial practitioners than by their academic counterparts
(81% agains 60%). Three academic practitioners respondents even
question how systematic are the processes followed by academia.
S1:“Almost always there is no clear SE process” .
Practitioners mainly focus on implementation and real-world ex-
perimentation (preferred over simulation) during software devel-
opment, typically following agile-style processes.
Observation 1 (Activities and Development Processes)
4.3 Paradigms
Figure 2 (c) gives an overview of the SE paradigms and their use
frequency in robotics. Most survey respondents make use of object-
oriented programming (OOP) (92%) and many follow a CBSE ap-
proach (65%). Software product line engineering (SPLE) and model-
based software development (MBSD) are rarely used (12% and 25%
use them always or very often, respectively). The “Don’t know”
answer’s ratio is 32% and 15% for SPLE and MBSD, respectively.
The prevalence of OOP and CBSE can be explained with the wide
usage of ROS, which works with Python and C++ and enforces a
component-based approach. We observe that only industrial respon-
dents report frequent use of SPLE, specifically 19% of the industrial
practitioners report using it very often or often, versus 0% of aca-
demic practitioners. We also conclude that MBSD is not extensivelyESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
0%
1%4%9%
8%
9%
21%
50%
61%99%88%79%69%
68%
60%49%
30%
15%1%
11%17%22%
24%
31%31%
20%
24%
Project management
Requirements engineeringArchitectural/detailed designImplementation
Automatic code generationTesting and simulationReal−world experimentation
Maintenance/evolution
Other
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses(a)
12%
55%
79%62%73%
21%
18%17%15%
24%
4%
20% Waterfall
HybridAgile
Other
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responsesNever Almost never Sometimes Very often Always
(b)
3%
14%
54%35%35%62%92%65%38%28%25%12%5%
21%
8%
36%40%25%
OOP
FPCBSE
MBSD
SPLEOther
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses(c)
4%
2%
51%
31%64%
66%
71%
75%76%89%
83%
36%27%14%
11%
10%
9%
4%7%
15%13%43%22%23%
19%
16%20%
JavaCC++
Python
UML
MATLAB/Simulink
Self−developed DSLs
Third−party DSLsOther
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses(d)
10%
20%14%21%80%91%65%61%56%36%15%
6%25%20%30%43%
5%3%
Unit testsIntegration tests
Performance testsCode reviews
Formal methodsOther
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses(e)
5%
4%
9%
8%
19%
20%
41%
92%82%
80%
73%
65%50%
47%
28%
0%13%16%
18%
27%31%
33%
31%
8%Source code
Conf. files
Software modelsLibraries
Components
Documentation
Test cases
Other
100 50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses(f)
Figure 2: Survey Results: Reported Frequencies of (a) Activities; (b) Processes; (c) Paradigms; (d) Software Languages; (e) QA Techniques; (f) Reuse of Artifacts. The
percentages refer to all cases in which the participant specified a frequency. We report on cases with a significant share of “Don’t know” answers in the text.
used in robotics, especially among leading technical role practition-
ers (only 16% of them apply it very often or always, in contrast to
30% and 27% of industrial programmers and academic practitioners).
4.4 Software Languages and Frameworks
Figure 2 (d) provides an overview of the use of software languages
in robotics. C++ and Python are used most often; 89% and 83% of
our survey respondents use them very often or always, respectively.
Self-developed (9%) and third-party (4%) domain-specific languages
are the least frequently used among the options. The “Don’t know”
answer’s rate for C++ and Python is 4%, while it ranges from 14%
to 23% for the rest of the options.
Considering frameworks, ROS is undeniably the most used frame-
work for robotics software development nowadays. In particular,
88.5% of the survey’s respondents and 16 interviewees use it. ROS2
and OROCOS follow as second and third with 22.4% and 18.6%, re-
spectively. ROS2 is, according to the conducted interviews, not yet
implemented in most of the companies, and there is not much inita-
tive to change that. An important reason that drives that decision is
stated by I16: “Some of our industrial partners are also more conserva-
tive. Never change a running system. If you have now ROS1, [...] why
change it if it’s not clear what exactly would be the improvement?”
For either question, there are no big differences in the results
between academic and industrial practitioners, probably due to the
widespread use of ROS in both communities. ROS is mainly written
in C++ and Python and provides many libraries that use them. Ac-
cording to one interviewee, Python is normally used for high-level
components that do not have hard-time constraints or for proto-
typing, since it is simpler than C++. I7: “It’s really fast and dynamic.
[...] For better performance we use C++, and also with C++ we have
the possibility to better protect the code than with Python. ” However,
a considerable number of the responses (around 20%) denote a lack
of awareness with respect to the other used languages.
Practitioners usually rely on frameworks to develop software, and
ROS is the preferred framework among roboticists. Aligned with
the popularity of ROS, we find C++ and Python as the most used
software languages, and OOP and CBSE as most typical paradigms.
Observation 2 (Paradigms, Languages, and Frameworks)
4.5 Quality Assurance
We investigate quality assurance (QA) techniques and sources of
test data for industrial and academic practitioners.Techniques . Figure 2 (e) shows that the most common QA tech-
nique among respondents is integration testing, 65% of them apply
it very often or always. Code reviews is the second option (61%),
unit testing the third (56%), and performance testing is the fourth
(36%). The least common answer is formal methods (6%) and in fact
43% answered “Don’t know” to this question.
Integration testing may be the most applied QA technique (65%)
due to the popularity of ROS, which enforces a component-based
approach for developing software. Therefore, practitioners need to
integrate different components to test a final product. Oppositely,
industrial practitioners often work in teams. Surprisingly, perfor-
mance testing is not performed as often as we expected taking
into account the cyber-physical nature of robots and the perfor-
mance constraints (e.g., regarding memory, power consumption,
computation requirements) they entail.
The most widespread QA techniques are code reviews and test-
ing, especially integration testing. Surprisingly, despite the role of
hardware constraints, performance testing is rarely performed.
Observation 3 (Quality Assurance Techniques)
Sources of Testing Data . The survey’s results show that the most
common source of data for testing is simulation (82.1%). The second
most used source is runtime monitoring (75%) and the third manu-
ally based on experience (64.7%). Testing data is acquired from run-
time monitoring (75%) almost as often as from simulation (82.1%),
which may mean that both industrial and academic practitioners
perform almost as much simulation as real-world testing. This was
already identified in Fig. 2 (a) and will be further discussed in Sec. 6.
Practitioners’ main source of data is simulation, but the difference
with runtime monitoring is surprisingly low.
Observation 4 (Sources of Testing Data)
4.6 Reuse
Reused Artifacts . As shown in Fig. 2 (f), source code and libraries
are the most commonly reused artifacts: 82% and 80% of the respon-
dents stated that they always or very often reuse them. Software
components and configuration files come in third and fourth with
73% and 65%. The percentages are similar for all the roles concern-
ing these artifacts. On the other hand, the least reused type of
artifact is test cases, which are always or very often reused by 28%
of the respondents. Among the industrial programmers, 38% veryRobotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service Robotics Domain ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
often or always reuse test cases versus 21% and 23% of leading roles
and academic practitioners, respectively.
Very few respondents reuse documentation (47% of the respon-
dents reuse it always or very often), in relation to the reuse fre-
quency of source code, libraries, or software components (82%, 80%,
and 73%, respectively). This finding relates to a challenge we discuss
in Sec. 6: lack of documentation and how it hinders further software
reuse (obs. 15). On the other hand, industrial programmers are the
group that most commonly reuses documentation (51%, 8% higher
than academic practitioners, and 9% higher than leading roles) and
test cases (38% as opposed to the 28% of the overall). A possible
explanation of these findings is that programmers are primarily
concerned with understanding, writing, and testing of code.
Roboticists commonly reuse source code and libraries, but not so
often test cases and documentation.
Observation 5 (Reused artifacts)
Roadblocks for reuse . The main reason (78.2%) among the survey
respondents to not reuse existing software resources relates to tech-
nical problems (e.g., component’s granularity does not fit, missing
functionality, incompatible interfaces). The second and third most
common reasons are lack of documentation (46.8%) and licensing
issues (44.2%). Among the respondents, 19.9% favor self-developed
components. Data regarding technical problems and licensing is-
sues differ between industrial and academic practitioners: the first
group finds more technical problems and licensing issues than the
second (83% versus 69.6% and 53.2% versus 28.6%, respectively).
The second most common cause for not reusing existing soft-
ware components is lack of documentation (46.8%), which might
be related to the first cause (technical problems with 78.2%)—i.e., it
is hard to assess the specifications of a component without proper
documentation. These findings are in line with literature: Accord-
ing to a recent study [ 24], technical problems are the most common
issue (e.g., outdated and buggy resources) for reusing software in
ROS—often caused by a lack of maintenance. The same study points
the lack of documentation as a problem for 56% of respondents.
As expected, licensing issues are more problematic for industrial
practitioners than for academic practitioners (53.2% versus 28.6%).
The main roadblocks for reusing software artifacts are (mainly)
technical problems and lack of documentation.
Observation 6 (Roadblocks)
Interoperability . Remarkably, for interoperability among soft-
ware components of their robotic systems, practitioners tend to rely
on the experience of the team (72.4% of the responses). This answer
was selected by far more often than those related to a systematic
Table 3: Most used tools for the activities: Implementation (I), Real-World
Experimentation (RWE), Testing/Simulation (TS), Project Management (PM),
Software Maintenance/Evolution (SME), Architectural and Detailed Design
(ADD), Requirements Engineering (RE), Automatic Code Generation (ACG).
I Visual Studio (22%) QtCreator (10%) Vim (8%) Pycharm (7%)
RWE Roslaunch (24%) Rosbag (20%) In-house (11%) ROS (8%)
TS Gazebo (36%) In-house (12%) gtest (8%) Rviz (3%)
PM Jira (19%) Git (18%) Trello (14%) Excel (11%)
SME Visual Studio (20%) Git (18%) Eclipse (7%) Vim (6%)
ADD UML editors (20%) PowerPoint (13%) Draw.io (10%) Confluence (5%)
RE Word (18%) Excel (17%) Jira (14%) Confluence (13%)
ACG In-house (19%) Python (12%) Matlab (8%) None (8%)approach to interoperability, such as having a clear definition of the
interfaces of each component (42.9%), following a precise architec-
ture (26.3%), or following a standardized solution (10.9%). The most
common standardized solution stated by the survey respondents is
ROS itself and its set of standardized messages.
To ensure the interoperability among heterogeneous system com-
ponents, practitioners tend to rely on ad hoc practices.
Observation 7 (Interoperability)
4.7 Tools
Table 3 shows the four most used tools among the respondents for
each activity introduced in Fig. 2. The use of dedicated tools for
project management indicates a high level of commitment to this
activity. Contrary to industrial practitioners, the academic ones
favor open-source tools as Redmine (9.9%) against proprietary ones
as Jira (6.9%). Respondents (both academic and industrial practi-
tioners) use mostly office suite applications for RE. This indicates
that requirements are usually elicited, specified, and modeled in
a simple manner, without using dedicated software. UML editors
(e.g., Papyrus, TikZ-UML, PlantUML), PowerPoint and draw.io are
the most common tools for Architectural and Detailed Design.
The preference of VisualStudio and PyCharm for implementa-
tion can be related to the preference of C++ and Python, the two
main languages supported by the ROS framework. Gazebo is the
most popular tool for testing and simulation (36%), which is not
surprising considering its strong integration with ROS. The an-
swers related to the software maintenance and evolution activity
are similar to those seen for implementation.
Respondents use specialized tools for the most common activities
(e.g., Gazebo for simulation) and generic tools for less common
ones (e.g., the Office suite for requirements engineering).
Observation 8 (Tools usage)
5 DISTINCT CHARACTERISTICS (RQ2)
RQ2 focuses on the distinguishing characteristics of robotics soft-
ware engineering compared to other domains. We pay particular
attention to the differences to other cyber-physical domains, which
are characterized by systems that integrate physical environment
and hardware with software—e.g., automotive, avionics. We dis-
cuss the responses to an open-ended question, in which we asked
the survey respondents to name and explain such characteristics.
We analyzed the respondents’ answers to create codes, group all
answers (and relevant parts thereof) using the codes, and counted
the matches of answers to codes. Overall, 156 textual answers were
provided and 161 matches counted. In the following summary, we
triangulate the survey results with answers from our interviewees.
Cyber-Physical Systems. A total of 64 of our survey respondents
perceive robotic systems as cyber-physical systems and stress the
integration between physical aspects and hardware and software
components. S2: “Any small change in code can be seen easily in the
behavior of the robot. On top of that, the work is done really close to
the hardware that constitutes the robots. ” Interactions with the real
world lead to a special emphasis on non-functional concerns such
as safety and reliability: I14: “I think we have to be very careful when
we develop software for systems that are out there in the physicalESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
world. If I don’t get a particular tweet, that doesn’t really matter much.
But if my robot goes berserk and starts killing people, that’s not good. ”
Heterogeneous Disciplines. Out of the total, 24 survey respon-
dents noted that a robotic system bridges diverse domains such as
hardware drivers, firmware, planning, perception, and AI. S3: “The
systems we develop are incredibly complex and involve multiple disci-
plines and technologies, while doing work in the real world. This means
there are dozens of integration points and world interactions that have
to be designed, engineered, and tested. ” Our synthesis of the topic is:
The creation of a full-working robotic system requires knowledge
beyond just software, including hardware, mechanics, and physics.
Observation 9 (Heterogeneous Disciplines)
On the organizational level, the associated challenges are addressed
by engineering teams with diverse experiences and backgrounds.
Testing. As observed by 22 respondents, the interaction with the
physical world gives rise to specific requirements on the testing pro-
cess. They stress a need for integration testing in the real world. S5:
“Testing is slower. [It] Requires that you actually have a piece of hard-
ware operating in the real world, where every sensor is lying to you,
your environment is actively fighting back, and you have to still main-
tain sufficient functionality for an outside observer to be happy with
your performance. Every assumption must be constantly questioned” .
Maturity. A total of 20 survey respondents address the maturity
of the robotics SE community. Awareness for SE practices seems to
be lower than in other domains. S6: “Common SE practices are less
common or known in robotics and therefore software and software
maintainability suffer. ” Our observation is as follows:
Awareness of software engineering practices among robotics practi-
tioners is low, which hinders software quality and maintainability.
Observation 10 (SE practices)
A possible explanation is that software development is often seen as
an auxiliary task for developing an actual system. S7: “Software is not
the goal at all. It’s only an executable form of robotics theories and al-
gorithms. ” A recurring topic mentioned by three survey respondents
is a lack of standardized solutions. S8: “In robotics, SE is challenged
by the lack of standards and guidelines in the development. ”
Context and Adaptation. Real-world interactions lead robots to
deal with heterogeneous contexts and adaptation, topic that is
touched on by 13 survey respondents. S10: “Robots act in the real
world, which introduces all sorts of unexpected error cases that one
wants to catch. Software engineering in other domains often feels
«sandboxy» in comparison. ” Various responses point out that a robot
also becomes an actor that shapes the environment. S11: “They also
3%
7%9%
15%15%16%19%17%21%29%53%32%83%74%63%62%61%58%58%57%52%48%47%34%14%19%28%23%24%26%23%26%27%23%
0%
34%
Specifying missionsSoftware reuseLack of documentation
Lack of standardsInt. among componentsValidation
Safety certificationRobustness
Dynamic adaptation
Simulation to real world
AIOther
50 0 50 100
Percentage of responses
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
“Don’t know” (from top to bottom):
4%, 7%, 3%, 10%, 8%, 5%, 12%, 4%, 2%, 8%, 90%, 12%
Figure 3: Challenges in robotics software engineering (all roles).change the environment itself via actions. Covering all these cases
might be intractable in certain scenarios. ”
Among the most frequently named characteristics of robotics are
(1) their cyber-physical nature, (2) the need for testing processes
that contemplate the influence from hardware and the physical
world, (3) and the necessity to react to a large variety of contexts.
Observation 11 (Adaptable Cyber-Physical Systems)
No difference. In contrast to the majority of responses, only eight
survey respondents found the differences to other domains negligi-
ble. One interviewee points out that an emphasis on the differences
to other domains can actually lead to a problematic mindset. I5: “It
differs much less than people think. [...] Actually, sometimes robotics
reinvent the wheel or have a syndrome of «not invented here». ”
Influence of academia. The influence of academia is commented
on by four survey respondents, mostly pointing out a negative in-
fluence of academia: S12: “A larger than usual share of code comes
from researchers, as opposed to professional software developers. This
often causes quality issues. ”
With respect to other CPS. What follows are the main differences
between robotics and other CPS (e.g., automotive) as perceived
by four responses: (1) Higher autonomy, more decision making
and planning; (2) More flexibility for interacting with the world;
(3) More generic perception capabilities; (4) More advanced and
computationally intensive algorithms (for perception and planning).
The main differences with respect to other CPS are a higher im-
portance of computation requirements and autonomy for decision
making, since robots interact with the environment and humans.
Observation 12 (Distinguishing Characteristics related to other CPS)
6 CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS (RQ3)
Practitioners in service robotics face various challenges and apply
a large variety of solutions to address them. In this section, we first
present in detail nine of the major challenges that we identified
during the first phase of our study (see Fig. 1) from the exploratory
interviews, our experiences, and literature (specifically, the studies
of Brugali [ 10], Bures [ 17], and García [ 26]). We quantified the rel-
evance of these challenges in the studyâĂŹs second phase through
the survey. We report on a rating of the challenges relevance’s
quantification (see Fig. 3 for an overview), and on their applied so-
lutions as specified in open-ended questions. Coding 143 responses
to the open-ended question yielded 150 solutions; we filtered out
13 answers for being empty or due to not specifying a solution.
Robustness . Most respondents (83%) agreed or strongly agreed
that the biggest challenge is ensuring enough robustness to robotic
systems. That is, both software and hardware parts that constitute a
robot must work continuously without (critical) failures regardless
the context—i.e., the mission and the environment. I3: “Program-
ming the [robot’s] task is not the most time consuming thing, but
programming the failure handling [...] People might need two weeks to
set up one application, two days to set up the task, and eight days to set
up all the failure case. ” We collected 19 solutions for ensuring robotic
robustness. The most frequently named ones are rigorously defined
development processes (e.g., V-Model) and thorough testing.
Validating Robotic Systems . It appears to be the second most
important challenge, as acknowledged by 74% of our respondents.Robotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service Robotics Domain ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Validation is challenging due to the interaction of robotic systems
with the real world, which makes the validation process both ex-
pensive and slow (obs. 11). We obtained 16 responses with solu-
tions, including the employment of an independent team for testing,
defining a standard set of tests the robot or middleware has to be
compliant to, and formalizing (e.g., modeling) the system as much
as possible to automate code generation and validation processes.
Lack of Documentation . It was considered a major challenge by
63% of our respondents. This finding is aligned with our observation
from Sec. 4 (obs. 6): 46.8% of the respondents do not reuse already
existing solutions due to lack of documentation. I1: “The biggest
challenge for a commercial company is actually to get the right doc-
umentation or the right engineers having the right experience and
knowledge about those tools. ” In 17 responses with solutions, we find
the reviews, use of wikis, guidelines on comments, and automatic
generation of documentation as typical solutions. Five respondents
consider this challenge as unsolved, as developers frequently have
to understand undocumented source code.
Dynamic Adaptation . It is considered a challenge by 62% of the re-
spondents. Dynamic adaptation is becoming an important topic for
academic and industrial practitioners, as service robots are expected
to adapt to environment conditions [ 26]. This challenge is tightly re-
lated with robustness (i.e., autonomy). From nine solutions specified
by our respondents, the most common one (three responses) is to
test as many real-world situations as possible, focusing on possible
problems and outcomes, which are then modeled and hard-coded
in the system to enable adaptation. A common modeling paradigm
(mentioned by four interviewees) is to define adaptation based on
states and pre-defined events, as in state machines or behavior trees.
Achieving robustness, validation, and dynamic adaptation are
ranked as three of the top 4 challenges. The main solutions for these
challenges are rigorous development and test processes (involving
real-world testing) and programming error handling.
Observation 13 (Robustness and validation)
Interoperability . This topic is considered a challenge by 61% of
the respondents. As discussed in Sec. 4.4 and pointed in obs. 2, most
robotic projects currently use ROS, which uses a component-based
approach. Therefore, robotic functionalities are often packaged as
components that must be integrated into a robotic system. Integra-
tion issues are a consequence of such systems. From 13 provided
responses with solutions, most respondents (seven) suggest to ad-
here to a clearly defined architecture and to model and document
existing components and interfaces.
Simulation-to-Real-World Transition . This issue is considered
a major challenge by 58% of the survey respondents. Interviewees
and respondents claim that current simulation tools are not suffi-
cient to properly validate robotic applications due to issues such as
badly-simulated phenomena like physics and sensor feed. Among
13 collected solutions, five respondents opt for improving the simu-
lation system based on machine learning techniques. Another five
respondents suggest transitioning to real-world experimentation as
soon as feasible. S14: “The simulation to real-world gap is real, don’t
trust any performance measures of anything in simulation, especially
if the system is complex. Transition to real world components as soon
as it’s monetarily feasible. ” Regarding this topic, we found:Current simulation solutions are not able to emulate real-world
phenomena in a sufficiently realistic manner. Therefore, practi-
tioners distrust them for validating reliable robotic systems and
instead they are relegated to validate basic robotic functionalities.
Observation 14 (Real World to Simulation Transition)
Safety Certification . More than half of the respondents (58%)
considered safety certification a major challenge. As robots interact
with the environment, and sometimes with humans, safety becomes
a crucial issue. I17: “It’s hard to guarantee that a system that relies
on learning from a data set, actually generalizes well [...] and learns
the right things to be safe, once you deploy it on a completely different
environment” . The 10 solutions obtained for this challenge are rather
heterogeneous. For instance, one respondent employs a specialized
team for such issues. Another respondent partners with a company
with expertise in the domain. A third respondent trains their staff
on related standards, such as ISO 13849 and IEC 61508/62061.
Lack of Standardized Solutions . 57% of the respondents agreed
with this topic being a challenge. According to four of them, the lack
of standardized solutions in robotics is directly related with its early
state of maturity. S13: “The lack of standards, common datasets and
problems, and general lack of reuse of software/infrastructure/APIs
is making steady progress difficult.” We collect 14 answers with
solutions for this topic. The one specified the most (named five
times) is to develop internal standardized solutions as company
guidelines. Two respondents opt to cherry-pick from solutions from
other domains (e.g., A-SPICE [54] from the automotive domain).
Software Reuse . Among the respondents, 52% agreed or strongly
agreed with software reuse being a challenge. I8: “In the future,
implementing everything from scratch would get harder and harder.
So the challenges that I see are basically how to reuse existing solutions
and how to integrate them into your own development. ” We discussed
types, artifacts, and roadblocks to reuse in Sec. 4.6 (obs. 5, 6). We
obtained 17 responses with solutions to this challenge. Six survey
respondents encourage modularization and use of libraries and
toolboxes. Other proposed solutions include adherence to standards,
use of shared repositories, and model-driven development.
The lack of standard methods, frameworks, libraries, and refer-
ence models complicates the development of robotics systems. This,
together with a large number of existing poorly-documented re-
sources impede interoperability and easy reuse of software, which
hinders the development pace of robotics SE.
Observation 15 (Lack of Documentation and Established Conventions)
Specifying Missions . Almost half of the respondents (48%) con-
sider mission specification a challenge, being a key issue to make it
easy enough for end-users. Also, mission specification mechanisms
should enable users to express “exceptional" behaviors to specify
how robots ought to cope with the variability of conditions of appli-
cation scenarios in real environments in which robots are required
to operate [ 26]. This is especially problematic in scenarios involving
humans (obs 11). We collected 10 responses with solutions, divided
into two groups: mission specification with and without end-user
involvement. If the end-user is directly involved, methods including
DSLs, GUIs, and frameworks are proposed. If not, developers need
to “hard code” the mission into the system, typically based on itera-
tive meetings with the end-users. End-users need to be involvedESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
in this iterative mission specification in the case of multi-purpose
robots that might be used for a variety of missions and/or scenarios
that cannot be or it is impractical to specify upfront.
Applying AI Techniques . This topic was considered a challenge
by 34% of the respondents. Out of 18 interviewees, seven apply
AI techniques to their projects, five of them to perform obstacle
and object detection. We collected three solutions to this challenge,
including applying and extending current research to solve relevant
problems, and to provide additional education.
Others . Of “Other” responses, 90% answered “Don’t know.” The
remaining 10% provided eight responses, including: “deterministic
execution, timestamping, clock synchronization,” “self-x capabili-
ties,” and “lacking extensibility or clear APIs leading to forking.”
7 IMPACT AND PERSPECTIVES
Our collected data and the answers to our three research questions
give rise to the following three research themes deserving further
attention. We discuss them along with observations, formulate
hypotheses trying to explain them, and propose actions.
7.1 Robustness and System Validation
Observations . Even though testing practices are among the most
widespread quality assurance techniques in robotics (obs. 3), and
thorough real-world testing and experimentation processes are
mentioned as the most common activities performed by our respon-
dents (obs. 1), our results point out that robustness and validation
are still perceived as the top challenges of the domain (obs. 13). The
respondents emphasize the importance of real-world testing espe-
cially in the light of the inaccuracy of simulations (obs. 14, discussed
below). Respondents also highlight the difficulty and the importance
of programming robots to handle failures (obs. 13), i.e., act robustly.
Hypotheses . We hypothesize that the importance of robustness
and real-world testing relates to the fact that service robots are
required to operate without human intervention in a large variety
of real-world contexts, which are characterized by an unwieldy
diversity of sources of uncertainty. Systematic testing processes
can support the management of possible failures and unexpected
environmental events over prolonged timeframes.
Proposed actions . As real-world testing is expensive, practition-
ers would largely benefit from techniques that provide realistic test
data. Most contemporary methods in the testing domain generate
test data by relying on code-centric information like coverage cri-
teria and input spaces. In contrast, there is a potential for novel
testing techniques that consider historical real-world data and use
them for systematically producing new critical scenarios, which
we propose as an action for researchers. Collections of real-world,
industry-based critical scenarios are required to recreate testing
cases and therefore improve the robustness of robotic systems.
These critical scenarios should be collected by industrial practition-
ers. Moreover, the uncertainty to which robots are exposed asks for
novel mechanisms of instilling robustness to robots, e.g. domain-
specific languages especially tailored to code environment-based
exceptions so to cope with uncertainty. For the development of such
mechanisms, we encourage collaboration among researchers and
practitioners, being the former those who take the lead in the idea
conception and prototype development and the latter those who
apply their knowledge to sharpen the prototype into a refined tool.7.2 Simulation
Observations . Since real-world experimentation is time demand-
ing and costly, it is tempting to assume that simulation is the pri-
mary means of validating robotic functionalities. However, we
found that practitioners rely on experimentation as much and some-
times even more than on simulation (obs. 1 and 4). This is due to the
difficulty of modeling real-world phenomena and events typical of
environments where robots operate, especially those that involve
humans (obs. 11, 12, and 14). Therefore, improving the capabilities
of robotics simulations is a key challenge.
Hypotheses . The insufficient ability of simulations to validate
robotic systems trustworthily can be explained with the hypothesis
that existing simulations are decoupled from the real world. While
simulations are typically inspired by real-world phenomena, there
is usually little effort to update them with real-world data to make
them consistent with real-world observations. Doing so is a big chal-
lenge due to the complexity of the real world (see discussion above).
Proposed actions . Efforts to improve simulation may benefit from
Multi-Paradigm Modeling (MPM, [ 53]), which suggests the use of
appropriate formalisms and abstraction levels to model all relevant
aspects of the system (e.g., the mission to perform, the robot em-
bodiment) and the environment (e.g., human behavior, physics).
The application of appropriate abstraction levels permits to hide
the underlying complexity of those aspects, which are modeled
with the aim of being usable by domain experts. Using MPM, those
models from different domains are then automatically mapped to a
common domain, which can be easily managed by developers [ 52].
Furthermore, MPM has been proposed as an effective manner of
tackling the challenges of interdisciplinary domains design as is
the example of cyber-physical systems [ 52]. We foresee a huge
potential in the application of MPM techniques in robotics to allow
domain experts to easily specify their concerns and model specific
aspects that can then be integrated into a common domain. To
bridge the gap between the physical and the virtual world in all
life cycle phases, MPM could benefit from the use of digital twin
technology [ 6], which allows keeping the models synchronized
through the development life-cycle based on real-world data. We
recommend close collaborations of researchers and practitioners to
develop improved “live” MPM frameworks, where the former would
act as the lead on the research and development and the latter can
help by providing realistic models from their experimentation data.
7.3 Conventions, Frameworks, and Reference
Models
Observations . The development of robotic software mostly con-
sists of integrating reusable components that implement recurrent
functionalities. While de facto conventions for hardware interfaces
in some technical scopes and inter-component communication ex-
ist (e.g., ROS messages, see obs. 2), reusable solutions for recurrent
problems in application development are still missing (obs. 15). In
practice, integration is typically performed in an ad hoc way (obs. 7)
while being complicated by the wide range of disciplines practition-
ers working to develop a full-working robotic system have (obs. 9). A
related issue is the lack of documentation of implemented solutions,
one of the main causes for the lack of reuse of existing resources
(obs. 6). There have been attempts at providing universal solutionsRobotics Software Engineering: A Perspective from the Service Robotics Domain ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
for robotics, such as the OMG Robotics Domain Task Force [ 37],
which aims at fostering the integration of robotic systems. However,
to our knowledge, the latter has not produced relevant results so far.
Hypotheses . We hypothesize that the lack of success of such initia-
tives comes from the inherent essential complexity of the domain.
Existing conventions on hardware interfaces are not global for the
robotics domain, but specific to certain technical scopes, which does
not adequately address the continuous supply with new types of
hardware. Also, the robotics domain as a whole is divided into a va-
riety of sub-domains, including vertical ones (e.g., drivers, planning,
navigation) and horizontal ones (e.g., defense, healthcare, logistics).
Proposed actions . A common recommendation [ 12,27] is to ex-
ploit and reuse reference architectures, instead of single compo-
nents to ease the instantiation, implementation, and reuse of system
abilities [46]. However, due to the domain’s complexity, developing
a standardized reference architecture for robotics might be infeasi-
ble. Instead, we propose to identify a reference architecture for each
horizontal domain represented as “end-user market domains” in the
Multi-Annual Robotics Roadmap [ 46]. Yet, these domains are sub-
ject to huge variability and it would be required to decompose them
into specific, narrow sub-domains that can be used to define refer-
ence architectures. When focusing on a single sub-domain, the refer-
ence architecture should be profitably decomposed in various views
and viewpoints, as recommended by the ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 stan-
dard [ 30]. The standard recommends taming the complexity of mod-
ern systems through the use of various views, each conforming to a
viewpoint, which is identified to frame specific concerns of a precise
set of stakeholders. Then, the various viewpoints are contained into
an architecture framework, which defines conventions, principles,
and practices for the description of architectures established within
a specific domain of application and/or community of stakeholders.
Two studies of Pelliccione et al. are examples of an architecture
framework in the automotive field [ 39], and of a specific viewpoint
on connected vehicles [ 38]—the latter contains also a functional ref-
erence architecture for the specifically connected vehicle viewpoint.
Researchers in the software architecture community might bring
expertise acquired in other fields to help to establish conventions,
principles and practices, and developing architecture frameworks
and reference architectures. To do so, researchers will need to col-
laborate with robotics practitioners. This may bring an important
innovation in the field as it happened in the past with the arrival of
middleware frameworks like ROS and OROCOS, which enormously
simplified the reuse of software resources by (mainly) establishing
communication architectures and interfacing conventions. This
caused a shift in the community mindset, which understood the
advantage of those frameworks to solve issues related to system
integration—e.g., concurrency, synchronization, real-time commu-
nication. We suggest making similar efforts towards the standard-
ization and establishment of conventions, principles, and practices.
8 THREATS TO VALIDITY
We discuss the threats to the validity using the standard categoriza-
tion by Wohlin et al. [55].
External Validity . To ensure a high degree of external validity,
we used a diverse recruitment strategy for our interviews and sur-
vey, described in Sec. 3. Our interviewees and respondents work
with robotic systems, covering a wide range of domains, contexts,and backgrounds. The practices, characteristics, and challenges we
describe are applicable to service robots in similar domains.
Construct Validity . The main threat are terminology issues: while
we benefit from our own experience in the domain, a lack of a shared
understanding with our respondents may threaten our conclusions.
As one example, we point out the case of requirements engineering
(RE): only 49% of all survey respondents specify that RE is performed
very often or always in their organizations. We noticed that several
interviewees had a somewhat narrow understanding of RE, focusing
on specialized notation and tools, and that a RE process in a wider
sense was universally applied. Apart from this case, by collecting
and triangulating qualitative and quantitative data, we were able
to observe that the general trends were in line in both data sources.
Internal Validity . We relied on voluntary participants from in-
dustry, most of whom we did not know personally. Therefore, our
sample may be affected by selection bias: it may be skewed towards
participants who are willing to participate in volunteering activities,
which may be correlated with some relevant phenomena such as
the willingness to contribute to open-source projects.
Conclusion Validity . Coding as we performed it for our quali-
tative analysis is subject to interpretation. We mitigated bias by
cross-checking the obtained codes and refining the coding in a col-
laborative manner. We triangulated the coding with our qualitative
and quantitative data to enhance our study’s validity.
9 CONCLUSION
We presented an empirical assessment of the current state of ro-
botics SE, comprising 18 interviews with industrial practitioners
from 15 different companies and a survey with 156 respondents
from 26 countries. We discussed (1) common practices applied by
practitioners for developing robotic applications, (2) the main char-
acteristics of robotics SE, and (3) challenges commonly faced by
practitioners and applied solutions. Robotic systems are required to
provide higher levels of autonomy in terms of decision making and
planning because they must interact with (and react to) the environ-
ment and humans. Software development for such systems renders
important challenges and calls for systematic SE approaches to
build them. During our study, we found an overall lack of SE best
practices in robotics development (obs. 10) and a substantial aware-
ness of this issue. In our understanding, robotics would enormously
benefit from the application of such practices to solve some of the
challenges we elicited—e.g., software architectures to cope with
software and hardware interoperability, modeling to promote mod-
ularity and reusability. We hope our work contributes to raising
awareness of the importance of further investigation of this topic.
Based on our discussion, possible directions for future work are:
(1) Investigating novel testing techniques that consider real-world
data; (2) the development of “live” multi-paradigm modeling frame-
works that use the digital twin technology; and (3) the conception
of reference architectures for specific end-user market domains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research supported by the EU H2020 Prog. under GA No. 731869
(Co4Robots) and the Centre of EXcellence on Connected, Geo-
Localized, and Cybersecure Vehicle (EX-Emerge), funded by Italian
Government under CIPE resolution n. 70/2017 (Aug. 7, 2017). We
are thankful to the participants for their collaboration.ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Patrizio Pelliccione
REFERENCES
[1]Aakash Ahmad and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2016. Software Architectures for
Robotic Systems: A Systematic Mapping Study. Journal of Systems and Software
122 (2016), 16–39.
[2]Harald Altinger. 2017. State of the Art Software Development in the Automotive
Industry and Analysis Upon Applicability of Software Fault Prediction . Cuvillier
Verlag.
[3]Scientific American. 2016. Hitomi Spacecraft. https://www.scientificamerican.
com/article/software-error-doomed-japanese-hitomi-spacecraft/.
[4]Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall, Ece
Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan, Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019.
Software Engineering for Machine Learning: A Case Study. In ICSE-SEIP . IEEE
Press, 291–300.
[5]Saddek Bensalem, Lavindra de Silva, Félix Ingrand, and Rongjie Yany. 2011. A
Verifiable and Correct-by-Construction Controller for Robot Functional Levels.
Journal of Software Engineering for Robotics 2 (2011), 9–19.
[6]Stefan Boschert and Roland Rosen. 2016. Digital twin—the simulation aspect. In
Mechatronic futures . Springer, 59–74.
[7]Darko Bozhinoski, Davide Di Ruscio, Ivano Malavolta, Patrizio Pelliccione, and
Ivica Crnkovic. 2019. Safety for mobile robotic systems: A systematic mapping
study from a software engineering perspective. Journal of Systems and Software
151 (2019), 150–179.
[8]Davide Brugali. 2010. From the Editor-in-Chief: A New Research Community, a
New Journal. Journal of Software Engineering for Robotics 1 (2010), 1–2.
[9]Davide Brugali. 2015. Model-Driven Software Engineering in Robotics. IEEE
Robot. Automat. Mag. 22, 3 (2015), 155–166.
[10] Davide Brugali, Arvin Agah, Bruce MacDonald, Issa A. D. Nesnas, and William D.
Smart. 2007. Trends in Robot Software Domain Engineering . Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 3–8.
[11] Davide Brugali, Alex Brooks, Anthony Cowley, Carle Côté, Antonio C.
Domínguez-Brito, Dominic Létourneau, Françis Michaud, and Christian Schlegel.
2007. Trends in Component-Based Robotics . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 135–142.
[12] Davide Brugali, Luca Gherardi, A Biziak, Andrea Luzzana, and Alexey Zakharov.
2012. A reuse-oriented development process for component-based robotic sys-
tems. In SIMPAR . Springer, 361–374.
[13] Davide Brugali and Erwin Prassler. 2009. Software engineering for robotics [From
the Guest Editors]. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 16, 1 (2009), 9–15.
[14] Davide Brugali and Monica Reggiani. 2005. Software stability in the robotics
domain: issues and challenges. In IRI. IEEE Press, 585–591.
[15] Herman Bruyninckx, Markus Klotzbücher, Nico Hochgeschwender, Gerhard
Kraetzschmar, Luca Gherardi, and Davide Brugali. 2013. The BRICS Component
Model: A Model-based Development Paradigm for Complex Robotics Software
Systems. In SAC. ACM, 1758–1764.
[16] Herman Bruyninckx, Peter Soetens, and Bob Koninckx. 2003. The real-time
motion control core of the Orocos project. In ICRA , Vol. 2. IEEE, 2766–2771.
[17] Tomas Bures, Alessia Knauss, Pankesh Patel, Awais Rashid, Ivan Ruchkin,
Roykrong Sukkerd, Christos Tsigkanos, Danny Weyns, Bradley Schmer, Eduardo
Tovar, Eric Boden, Thomas Gabor, Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Pragya Gupta, and
Eunsuk Kang. 2017. Software Engineering for Smart Cyber-Physical Systems:
Challenges and Promising Solutions. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes
42 (2017), 19–24.
[18] Tomas Bures, Danny Weyns, Christian Berger, Stefan Biffl, Marian Daun, Thomas
Gabor, David Garlan, Ilias Gerostathopoulos, Christine Julien, Filip Krikava, et al .
2015. Software engineering for smart cyber-physical systems–towards a research
agenda: report on the First International Workshop on Software Engineering for
Smart CPS. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes 40, 6 (2015), 28–32.
[19] The Construct. 2019. Top 10 ROS Based Robotics Companies in 2019. http:
//www.theconstructsim.com/top-10-robotics-companies-2019-ros-based.
[20] Juliet M Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1990. Grounded theory research: Procedures,
canons, and evaluative criteria. Qualitative sociology 13, 1 (1990), 3–21.
[21] CORDIS. 2013. Best Practice in Robotics (BRICS). https://cordis.europa.eu/
project/id/231940.
[22] CORDIS. 2020. Co4Robots. https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/731869.
[23] Ayssam Elkady and Tarek Sobh. 2012. Robotics Middleware: A Comprehensive
Literature Survey and Attribute-Based Bibliography. Journal of Robotics (2012).
[24] Pablo Estefó, Jocelyn Simmonds, Romain Robbes, and Johan Fabry. 2019. The
Robot Operating System: Package reuse and community dynamics. Journal of
Systems and Software 151 (2019), 226–242.
[25] Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Thorsten Berger, and Pa-
trizio Pelliccione. 2020. Replication Package. Replication package website:
https://sites.google.com/view/empirical-study-robotics-se/home
Archived at: https://figshare.com/articles/conference_contribution/Robotics_
Software_Engineering_A_Perspective_from_the_Service_Robotics_Domain/12376931
With DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.12376931.
[26] Sergio García, Daniel Strüber, Davide Brugali, Alessandro Di Fava, Philipp
Schillinger, Patrizio Pelliccione, and Thorsten Berger. 2019. Variability Mod-
eling of Service Robots: Experiences and Challenges. In VaMoS . ACM, 8.
[27] Luca Gherardi and Davide Brugali. 2014. Modeling and reusing robotic software
architectures: the hyperflex toolchain. In ICRA . IEEE, 6414–6420.
[28] Félix Ingrand and Malik Ghallab. 2017. Deliberation for autonomous robots: A
survey. Artificial Intelligence 247 (2017), 10–44.
[29] ISO. 2012. ISO 8373:2012. Robots and robotic devices - Vocabulary. https://www.
iso.org/standard/55890.html.
[30] ISO/IEC/IEEE. 2011. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011. Systems and software engineering
- Architecture description. https://www.iso.org/standard/50508.html.
[31] Nathan Koenig and Andrew Howard. 2004. Design and use paradigms for gazebo,
an open-source multi-robot simulator. In IROS , Vol. 3. IEEE, 2149–2154.
[32] David Kortenkamp, Reid Simmons, and Davide Brugali. 2016. Robotic systems
architectures and programming. In Springer Handbook of Robotics . Springer,
283–306.
[33] Markets and Markets. 2017. Service Robotics Market – Global Forecast to
2022. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/service-robotics-
market-681.html.
[34] Yuya Maruyama, Shinpei Kato, and Takuya Azumi. 2016. Exploring the perfor-
mance of ROS2. In EMSOFT . 1–10.
[35] Giorgio Metta, Paul Fitzpatrick, and Lorenzo Natale. 2006. YARP: yet another
robot platform. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 3, 1 (2006), 8.
[36] Arne Nordmann, Nico Hochgeschwender, Dennis Wigand, and Sebastian Wrede.
2016. A Survey on Domain-Specific Modeling and Languages in Robotics. Journal
of Software Engineering for Robotics 7 (2016), 75–99.
[37] OMG. 2019. Robotics Domain Task Force. https://www.omg.org/robotics/.
[38] Patrizio Pelliccione, Eric Knauss, Magnus Ågren, Rogardt Heldal, Carl Bergenhem,
Alexey Vinel, and Oliver Brunnegård. 2020. Beyond connected cars: A systems
of systems perspective. Science of Computer Programming 191 (2020), 102414.
[39] Patrizio Pelliccione, Eric Knauss, Rogardt Heldal, Magnus Ågren, Piergiuseppe
Mallozzi, Anders Alminger, and Daniel Borgentun. 2017. Automotive architecture
framework: The experience of Volvo cars. Journal of systems architecture 77 (2017),
83–100.
[40] Kari Pulli, Anatoly Baksheev, Kirill Kornyakov, and Victor Eruhimov. 2012. Real-
time computer vision with OpenCV. Commun. ACM 55, 6 (2012), 61–69.
[41] Morgan Quigley, Ken Conley, Brian Gerkey, Josh Faust, Tully Foote, Jeremy Leibs,
Rob Wheeler, and Andrew Y Ng. 2009. ROS: an open-source Robot Operating
System. ICRA workshop on open source software 3, 3.2 (2009), 5.
[42] Christian Schlegel. 2007. Communication patterns as key towards component
interoperability. In Software Engineering for Experimental Robotics . Springer,
183–210.
[43] Christian Schlegel, Thomas Haßler, Alex Lotz, and Andreas Steck. 2009. Robotic
software systems: From code-driven to model-driven designs. In ICRA . IEEE,
1–8.
[44] Douglas C. Schmidt. 2006. Guest Editor’s Introduction: Model-Driven Engineer-
ing. Computer 39, 2 (2006).
[45] Forrest Shull, Janice Singer, and Dag IK Sjøberg. 2007. Guide to advanced empirical
software engineering . Springer.
[46] SPARC. 2016. Robotics 2020 Multi-Annual Roadmap. https://eu-
robotics.net/sparc/upload/about/files/H2020-Robotics-Multi-Annual-
Roadmap-ICT-2016.pdf.
[47] Andreas Steck, Alex Lotz, and Christian Schlegel. 2011. Model-driven Engineering
and Run-time Model-usage in Service Robotics. In GPCE . 73–82.
[48] Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. 1990. Open Coding. Basics of Qualitative
Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques 2 (1990), 101–121.
[49] SVR. 2019. Women in robotics on International Women’s Day 2019. https:
//svrobo.org/women-in-robotics-on-international-womens-day-2019.
[50] Walter F Tichy. 2000. Hints for reviewing empirical work in software engineering.
Empirical Software Engineering 5, 4 (2000), 309–312.
[51] Hans Utz, Stefan Sablatnog, Stefan Enderle, and Gerhard Kraetzschmar. 2002.
Miro-middleware for mobile robot applications. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and Automation 18, 4 (2002), 493–497.
[52] Yentl Van Tendeloo and Hans Vangheluwe. 2017. The Modelverse: a tool for
multi-paradigm modelling and simulation. In WSC . IEEE, 944–955.
[53] Hans Vangheluwe, Juan De Lara, and Pieter J Mosterman. 2002. An introduction
to multi-paradigm modelling and simulation. In AIS. 9–20.
[54] VDA QMC Working Group 13 / Automotive SIG. 2015. Automotive SPICE Process
Assessment / Reference Model. Issue 3.0.
[55] Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Höst, Magnus C Ohlsson, Björn Regnell, and
Anders Wesslén. 2012. Experimentation in software engineering . Springer Science
& Business Media.