Understanding and Detecting Performance Bugs in
Markdown Compilers
Penghui Li, Yinxi Liu, and Wei Meng
Chinese University of Hong Kong
{phli, yxliu, wei}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract —Markdown compilers are widely used for translating
plain Markdown text into formatted text, yet they suffer from
performance bugs that cause performance degradation and
resource exhaustion. Currently, there is little knowledge and
understanding about these performance bugs in the wild. Inthis work, we ﬁrst conduct a comprehensive study of known
performance bugs in Markdown compilers. We identify that the
ways Markdown compilers handle the language’s context-sensitive
features are the dominant root cause of performance bugs. To
detect unknown performance bugs, we develop MDPERF FUZZ ,a
fuzzing framework with a syntax-tree based mutation strategy
to efﬁciently generate test cases to manifest such bugs. It equips
an execution trace similarity algorithm to de-duplicate the bug
reports. With MDPERF FUZZ , we successfully identiﬁed 216
new performance bugs in real-world Markdown compilers and
applications. Our work demonstrates that the performance bugs
are a common, severe, yet previously overlooked security problem.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Markdown is an easy-to-use domain-speciﬁc markup lan-
guage. Markdown compilers analyze input text to generate
formatted text with decorated styles according to the Mark-
down language syntaxes. Because of the ﬂexibility Markdown
offers, Markdown compilers are commonly included in many
application scenarios such as code hosting software, content
management systems (CMSs), online Markdown editors, etc.
For example, two leading code hosting providers—GitHuband GitLab—support Markdown document compilation and
rendering at both the server end [ 1,2] and the client end [ 3,4];
popular CMSs like WordPress [ 5] and Drupal [ 6] also provide
support for Markdown content rendering in the posts with
their server-side Markdown compilers; among the Alexa top 1
million websites [ 7] are many online Markdown editors such
as StackEdit [8].
Due to the wide application of Markdown compilers, the bugs
in them can potentially impact many services and their users. In
particular, Markdown compilers could have performance bugs,
which have recently become an emerging attack vector for
launching denial-of-service (DoS) attacks [ 9–11]. Such bugs
could cause excessive resource consumption and negatively
affect user experiences. By specially crafting inputs to exploit aperformance bug in a Markdown compiler running on a server,
attackers can exhaust the server’s computing resources (e.g. ,
memory and CPU) and signiﬁcantly impair the application’s
availability for legitimate users. Some performance bugs require
only low-bandwidth trafﬁc to exploit and can be leveragedto easily overwhelm a target system [
12–14]. Detectingperformance bugs in Markdown compilers could help mitigate
or even prevent such DoS attacks to safeguard the normal
operation of many popular and critical services on the Internet.
Prior works have studied and revealed the performance bugs
in different types of software such as regular expression engines
[15,16], desktop software [ 17], and Android applications
[18]. To the best of our knowledge, performance bugs in
Markdown compilers have not been well investigated and
understood yet. To this end, we conduct a comprehensive study
of the performance bugs in Markdown compilers to answer
the following research questions:
•What are the main causes of performance bugs in Markdown
compilers?
•How widespread are such bugs in the wild?
•How severe are such bugs?
We empirically analyze 49 known performance bugs in
mainstream Markdown compilers and thoroughly summarize
their characteristics. We observe that there has been a contin-
uous growth in the number of reported performance bugs inthe past 3 years. We further identify that the dominant rootcauses of these performance bugs are the speciﬁc ways that
Markdown compilers handle the language’s context-sensitive
features. In particular, Markdown compiler developers often
choose to implement these language features by backtracking.
The backtracking strategies can be abused or exploited with
specially crafted yet syntactically legitimate inputs for causing
worst-case performance issues. We also ﬁnd that the developers
usually mitigate such exploitation by enforcing a hard limit on
the maximum number of backtracking steps, which, however,
limits the intended functionality of the Markdown compilers.
We then seek to detect unknown performance bugs in
Markdown compilers. We focus on CPU-exhaustion perfor-
mance bugs, which are the dominant type of performance
bugs. In particular, we consider leveraging fuzz testing—the
go-to approach—to detect performance bugs. Fuzzing is free
from some limitations of static analysis techniques e.g. , high
false positives [ 17,19,20]. It has been extensively applied
to detect thousands of vulnerabilities in various real-world
software [ 21–23]. Existing fuzzers for performance bugs like
SlowFuzz [ 24], PerfFuzz [ 25] and SAFFRON [ 26] are not
designed for domain-speciﬁc languages such as Markdown
hence cannot efﬁciently generate inputs to thoroughly exercise
the compilers. To efﬁciently fuzz Markdown compilers, a
grammar-aware approach would be needed. Therefore, we study
UI*&&&"$.*OUFSOBUJPOBM$POGFSFODFPO"VUPNBUFE4PGUXBSF&OHJOFFSJOH	"4&
%0*"4&2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) | 978-1-6654-0337-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ASE51524.2021.9678611

	
    
the CommonMark [ 27] speciﬁcation and model the Markdown
grammar. We then extend existing fuzzers with a syntax-tree
based mutation strategy [ 28] speciﬁcally for Markdown. Such
a mutation strategy could preserve useful Markdown syntaxes
during the input mutation process, and help efﬁciently generate
high-quality inputs to fuzz Markdown compilers.
To detect CPU-exhaustion performance bugs in Markdown
compilers, we monitor the program execution under the gener-
ated inputs. We employ a statistical model using Chebyshev
inequality to label abnormal cases as performance bugs. Like
in prior works [ 24,25], our approach can potentially lead
to duplicate bug reports because different yet highly similar
inputs could actually trigger the same performance bug. It is
time-consuming and impractical to manually de-duplicate them.
Y et it is non-trivial to automate this process in the scenario
of performance bugs. Existing bug de-duplicating methods in
fuzzing use coverage proﬁle and call stack snapshots, which
are not applicable to performance bugs. For example, it is hard
to obtain an accurate and deterministic call stack snapshot that
represents the run-time program state when a performance bug
is triggered. Following prior trace analysis works [ 29–32], we
propose an execution trace similarity algorithm to de-duplicate
the reports. Speciﬁcally, we represent the execution trace per
report into a vector, compute the cosine similarity [ 33] between
vector pairs, and classify highly similar vectors (bug reports)
as the same bug.
We integrate the above-mentioned techniques into
MDPERF FUZZ , a fuzzer specialized in detecting performance
bugs in Markdown compilers implemented in C/C++.
With MDPERF FUZZ , we successfully detected 7 new
performance bugs in 2 standalone Markdown compilers.
It also outperformed the state-of-the-art works with more
detected unknown performance bugs, higher performance
slowdown, and higher code coverage. To detect performance
bugs in Markdown compilers and plugins that are not written
in C/C++, we further summarized the exploits generatedby
MDPERF FUZZ into 45 attack patterns. By applying
these patterns we found 209 new performance bugs, whichcould potentially affect millions of websites and their users.Our evaluation results demonstrate that such performancebugs were widespread and they existed in the latest stable
versions of almost all Markdown compilers we tested. We
further showed that such bugs can be easily exploited using
only low-rate trafﬁc to launch DoS attacks against a server,
demonstrating the severity of this emerging threat.
We also revealed that vulnerable Markdown compilers imple-
mented in different programming languages could be exploited
by the same inputs because different compiler developers
implemented the compilers in exactly the same buggy ways.
We are in the process of responsibly disclosing our ﬁndings to
the affected parties. At the time of writing, 25 bugs have been
acknowledged and one new CVE ID has been assigned. To
facilitate future research, we release MDPERF FUZZ as an open-
source software at https://github.com/cuhk-seclab/mdperffuzz .
Researchers can easily build on MDPERF FUZZ their tools to
study performance issues in the compilers of other domain-speciﬁc languages such as Latex and Wikitext.
In summary, we make the following contributions.
•We presented the ﬁrst empirical study of the performance
bugs in Markdown compilers.
•We developed MDPERF FUZZ to generate high-quality test
inputs to detect performance bugs in Markdown compilers.
•We proposed an execution trace similarity algorithm to
effectively de-duplicate performance bugs.
•We detected 175 new performance bugs in 17 Markdown
compilers and 41 new performance bugs in 4 popular real-
world applications.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Markdown
Created by Swartz and John Gruber in 2004, Markdown
has been a prevalent markup language for creating formatted
text from plain text. To date, CommonMark [ 27] has become
a well-recognized Markdown speciﬁcation in the community.
We introduce some of its important features below.
•V alid Markdown documents. Any sequence of characters is
a valid Markdown document, where a character is usually a
Unicode code point.
•Text stylization. Markdown provides diverse syntax supports
for stylizing the text. Speciﬁcally, it treats asterisks ( *) and
underscores ( _) as indicators of emphasis of the enclosed
text. A pair of asterisks or underscores (e.g. ,'*text emphasis
*') represents text emphasis. A pair of double asterisks or
underscores (e.g. ,'__text bold__') denotes text bold (strong).
•Links. Markdown allows inserting links with the format of
'[demo](url)' . The [demo] is the link label and is the formatted
preview text. The (url) is the link target that directs to either
internal or external resources speciﬁed by the URL ( url).
•HTML blocks. Markdown documents use HTML blocks to
insert raw HTML contents. The HTML blocks are enclosed
with start and end conditions such as '<script> </script>' ,'
<![CDATA[ ]]>' ,'<? ?>' , and'<!A >' .
B. Markdown Compilers
Markdown compilers take valid Markdown strings as inputs
and output formatted text, e.g. , HTML documents. The Mark-
down syntax tokens in the input strings are interpreted into
the ones in the target format. Markdown compilers generally
take three steps to analyze the input strings: (1) Markdown
compilers ﬁrst scan the input strings and group the characters
into tokens in the lexical analysis; (2) they then analyze the
tokens for their syntactical and semantic meanings in the syntax
and semantic analysis; (3) based on the results of the previous
step, they further produce the ﬁnal code ( e.g. , HTML) in
the code generation step. Unlike other compilers (e.g. , GCC),
Markdown compilers usually do not have the intermediate code
optimization step since Markdown is a markup language.
Markdown has some context-sensitive features [ 27]. For the
same token, different behaviors can be exhibited depending onthe analysis context (i.e., the other tokens in the same input). To
handle such features, Markdown compilers have to record the
relevant compilation information as the context to determine
how to process a token. Sometimes, due to the nature of the
Markdown language design, several possible choices (options)
are applicable for interpreting a token in a given context. For
example, the token of double asterisks ( **) can possibly be the
open delimiter of text bold syntax or just two asterisks in plain
text.
To support such features, modern compilers search in
multiple possible options with a default order. A previously
chosen option could become invalid when more information is
collected along with the analysis on the input strings. Compiler
developers usually use the strategy of backtracking to explore
a different choice. The compilers continue this strategy till a
correct option is ultimately determined. For example, when
analyzing the input string '**text bold', Markdown compilers
usually ﬁrst prioritize the choice of open delimiter of text
bold syntax for the token ( **). When no corresponding close
delimiter for the token can be found, the compilers backtrack
and try other options for the token ( **),e.g. , plain text. Since
any sequence of characters in Markdown is valid, plain text is
the default last option in the compilers for the tokens.
C. Performance Bugs in Markdown Compilers
Performance bugs could degrade a program’s performance
and waste computational resources. Usually, people deﬁne
performance bugs as software defects where relatively simple
source-code changes can signiﬁcantly optimize the execution
of the software while preserving the functionality [ 17,34,35].
There can be several different performance issues regarding
different categories of resources (e.g. , CPU [ 12,14], memory
[36]). In the past, several publicized operation incidents were
caused by performance bugs, consequently, many software
projects were abandoned [17, 37].
Performance bugs in Markdown compilers could particularly
impact end-user experiences. Exploitation of client-side perfor-
mance bugs can lead to excessive resource consumption and
lower responsiveness. What is worse, Server-side performance
bugs can be exploited by attackers for DoS attacks, which can
impair the availability of critical services [ 10]. For example,
a performance bug MDPERF FUZZ detected had existed in
all versions of GitLab Community Edition and Enterprise
Edition before 13.12.2 [ 9]. This bug allows an attacker to
cause unrestricted server resource consumption with a speciallycrafted issue or merge request. It could potentially lead to DoSand impact many other users concurrently accessing the GitLab
server.
III. U NDERST ANDING PERFORMANCE BUGS IN
MARKDOWN COMPILERS
In this section, we present an empirical study on several
known performance bugs in mainstream Markdown compilers
to understand their characteristics.
A. Data Collection
We investigate performance bugs in the CommonMark spec-
iﬁcation [ 27] and 4 representative Markdown compilers chosenTABLE I: The existing performance bugs included in our study. Lang.
means the underlying programming language for implementing the
Markdown compiler.
Software Lang. # Bugs Time Periods
CommonMark-spec N/A 13 10/26/2014 - 02/17/2020
cmark C 13 01/14/2017 - 12/20/2020MD4C C 6 03/10/2019 - 09/10/2019
commonmark.js JS 9 09/28/2017 - 08/13/2019markdown-it JS 8 08/14/2019 - 11/20/2020
from the recommended implementations of the speciﬁcation. In
particular, cmark1and MD4C2are two high-performance Mark-
down compilers written in C. commonmark.js3and markdown-
it4are two Node.js packages used in both client-side and
server-side applications. We do not consider the software that
uses Markdown compilers as one of its sub-components/plugins
(e.g. , GitLab), because such software usually does not modify
the internal workﬂow of the included compilers. We limit our
manual analysis to only 4 representative Markdown compilers
because the analysis is quite time-consuming. Furthermore,
we ﬁnd that our current software set already allows us to
characterize the bugs and extract some general features, which
we will present later in this section.
In these Markdown compilers, we manually collected 49
distinct performance bugs from their public bug disclosure chan-
nels and their GitHub repository issues. The bug distribution
is presented in Table I. We found all these performance bugs
were abusing the CPU resources instead of other resources like
memory. This suggests CPU-exhaustion performance bugs are
the dominant type of performance bugs. We next characterize
the 49 performance bugs and present our ﬁndings.
B. Bug Disclosure Methods
Detecting and disclosing performance bugs is an important
security and software engineering task. We investigate how
performance bugs in Markdown compilers are usually detected
and exposed by analyzing bug reports and relevant online
discussions. We observe that manual analysis has been the
dominant approach to hunting performance bugs in Markdowncompilers. Some bug reports suggested that the security analysts
found the bugs by crafting special test inputs according to the
CommonMark speciﬁcation ( e.g. ,[38]). Speciﬁcally, 44 out of
the 49 performance bugs were identiﬁed and reported through
manual analysis or testing. Only 5 performance bugs were
detected by automated tools like OSS-fuzz [ 22]. This motivates
us to develop better automated techniques to detect such bugs.
C. Disclosure and Patch Time
To understand the trend of performance bugs, we analyze
the disclosure time of the 49 bugs. We depict the numberof performance bugs along the time they were disclosed in
1https://github.com/commonmark/cmark
2https://github.com/mity/md4c
3https://github.com/commonmark/commonmark.js
4https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it
Fig. 1: The number of performance bug reports over time from
September 2014 to December 2020.
Figure 1. We observe that few bugs were reported before early
2015, and the number of reported bugs had been gradually
growing from early 2018 till late 2020. In particular, 28
(57.14%) out of the 49 performance bugs were disclosed
between April 2018 and December 2020 (inclusive, 32 months);
21 (42.86%) bugs were reported before 2018. It reveals that
such bugs had been gradually drawing the attention from the
compiler developers and security analysts.
We further analyze the time it took to release a patch since
a bug was initially reported. We were able to successfullydetermine the time for 32 performance bugs. For the restbugs, either we did not ﬁnd the explicit bug patch time
(e.g. ,[
39]) or they have not been patched yet (e.g. ,[40]).
We ﬁnd that the average duration for patching performance
bugs is 19 days. Further, 23 (71.88%) bugs were patched
within 30 days. We particularly investigated those bugs that
took much longer patch time, e.g. , more than 4 months. We
observed that they were usually related to the ambiguity of
the CommonMark speciﬁcation. Thus their patches usually
require some work from both the compiler developers and the
speciﬁcation maintainers. Some of the bugs and patches have
led to the modiﬁcations of the language speciﬁcation.
D. Root Causes
Identifying the common root causes of real-world perfor-
mance bugs can beneﬁt potential future research and software
developments. We manually analyzed 49 performance bugs
and successfully ﬁgured out the root causes for 39 bugs. We
classify the root causes into three categories. A bug is assigned
to multiple categories if it has multiple major causes.
R1: Worst-cases in super-linear algorithms. Some normal
algorithms implemented in Markdown compilers have super-
linear worst-case complexity [ 24,25]. Attackers can craft inputs
to trigger the worst-case behaviors and lead to performance
issues. In particular, supporting some context-sensitive features
in Markdown compilers is prone to introducing performance
bugs. The majority (25 out of 39) of bugs were related to such
worst-case behaviors.
Some Markdown syntaxes (e.g. , links, emphasis and strong
emphasis, HTML blocks) are related to the language’s context-sensitive features. As discussed in §II-B , supporting context-
sensitive features in Markdown requires the compilers to
backtrack, which could take more than linear time. The
backtracking strategies can easily be abused with crafted inputs
hence lead to performance issues. For instance, links were
the primary vulnerable syntax in Markdown compilers, where
11 of the known performance bugs could be exploited with
special inputs with links. Similarly, 8 of the bugs were caused
by the buggy emphasis and strong emphasis handlers. Our
study reveals that the implementation of the context-sensitive
features in the Markdown compilers is prone to introducing
performance bugs.
One typical input pattern that exploits the context-sensitive
syntax handler to trigger performance bugs is many open tokens.
This pattern can lead the compilers to repeatedly search a
close token towards the end of the input string for each such
open token. To correct the wrong options the compilers have
selected, the compilers would normally backtrack to explore
other options. For example, deeply nested CDA T A block open
delimiters can result in an excessive compilation time. When fed
with n-nested CDA T A block open delimiters (e.g. ,'<![!CDATA[<![
CDATA[<![CDATA[...' ) that are not closed with the corresponding
close delimiters (i.e., ]]>) or are closed in the end of the input
string, the compilers need to compare with all tokens in theinput string to determine if an open delimiter can be closed
or not. Once the compilers ﬁnd an open delimiter cannot be
closed, they switch to other possible options for that delimiter
next, for instance, the open delimiter <!in'<!A>' , which cannot
be closed either. Thus the time for handling such input stringsis at least in polynomial time complexity. By providing a long
input with many such open tokens, it is simple to cost the
compiler several-second or even more execution time.
R2: Unoptimized code. Some unoptimized code in the
Markdown compilers could also lead to performance issues.
For instance, some functions do not coordinate well for certain
functionalities. We ﬁnd that 9 performance bugs were caused
by such unoptimized code. Unlike the algorithms in R1, such
performance issues could be addressed by code optimization.
However, each problem needs to be separately analyzed and
ﬁxed, which could be time-consuming. We next discuss an
example of such unoptimized code.
Minor performance issues in individual problematic functions
could accumulate when the given inputs can repeatedly trigger
the execution of such functions. For example, in one bug,
cmark calls S_find_first_nonspace() to ﬁnd the ﬁrst non-space
character from the current offset in a line. The function in a
second call would still search from the initial position, even
if in a previous call it has already recognized the location
of the ﬁrst non-space character. This means function calls
toS_find_first_nonspace() sometimes were unnecessary. Crafted
inputs with lots of complicated and nested indents could result
in repeated invocations of this function and cause performance
bugs. The problem, however, can be solved by using betterstrategies like cashing the positions of the previously found
non-space characters.
Seeds Markdown Grammar Input Mutation
Corpus Refinement Corpus PoolBug De-Duplication
Fitness Function
Fig. 2: The architecture of M DPERF FUZZ .
R3: Problematic implementations. Other causes of the bugs
are speciﬁc to the compiler implementations or designs. Some
compilers overlooked part of the CommonMark speciﬁcation,
for example, Unicode support. This can lead to inﬁnite loops
when unexpected inputs are provided to the compilers. Some
other bugs in this category were caused by wrong data
structures. 5 performance bugs fall into this category.
E. Patches of Performance Bugs
We investigate the patches of the performance bugs in the
Markdown compilers to understand how they were addressed.
We manage to identify the bug ﬁx patterns for 28 performance
bugs. We present our ﬁndings below.
P1: Enforcing limits. The most common patch pattern is to
add limits for certain conditions such as the maximum depth of
the nested structure, although the CommonMark speciﬁcation
does not explicitly specify any such limits. When such limits
are reached, the compilers directly regard the rest unanalyzed
inputs as plain text. Enforcing limits can prevent excessive
CPU usages caused by the worst-case exploitation with too
large test cases. However, the intended functionality might be
violated. It is also difﬁcult to set a correct limit to prevent all
attacks while not breaking some unusual yet legitimate inputs.
Such a strategy has been applied to patch 13 out of the 28
bugs we investigate.
P2: Logic changes. Logic changes sometimes are necessary as
the bugs are caused by incorrect coordination among multiple
program components and functions. Some inefﬁcient code snip-
pets need to be further optimized to eliminate the underlying
performance issues. For some other performance bugs caused
by incorrect regular expressions, compiler developers mainly
review and rewrite the regular expressions.
IV . M DPERF FUZZ
Though we have characterized known performance bugs,
it is unclear if there exist many unknown performance bugsin Markdown compilers and related applications. Therefore,
we try to detect unknown performance bugs in real-world
Markdown compilers. We focus on CPU resource exhaustion
performance bugs in this work because they are the dominant
type of performance bugs.
To avoid the high false-positive rates in static analyses
[19,20], we propose to use dynamic fuzz testing to detect and**[demo](url)**
Link
demo ] [ url ) (**
Link Label Link Target   **
Fig. 3: AST of the statement '**[demo](url)**' .
exploit performance bugs. To do so, we face two technicalchallenges. First, generating Markdown documents to testMarkdown compilers and exploit the performance bugs (if
any) is naturally difﬁcult because of the huge document
search space. Prior fuzzers [
24,25] are not very efﬁcient
in generating the specially formatted inputs to trigger theperformance bugs in Markdown compilers (which we willdiscuss in §
V- C ). Second, since many distinct inputs can
trigger the same performance bug, it is naturally challenging toaccurately de-duplicate the bug reports. Prior performance bug
fuzzers [ 24,41] do not try to de-duplicate performance bugs.
Other fuzzers for detecting memory corruptions de-duplicate
bugs using the unique memory footprints (e.g. , coverage proﬁles
and call stacks [ 42]) when the bugs are triggered, whereas
one performance bug can potentially exhibit different memory
footprints.
We overcome these challenges with MDPERF FUZZ . The
overall methodology is depicted in Figure 2. MDPERF FUZZ
follows the general fuzzing workﬂow and is built on topof AFL [
23]. Inside the main fuzzing loop, we particularly
design a grammar-aware syntax-tree based mutation strategy toefﬁciently generate high-quality inputs ( §
IV -A ). We ﬁrst model
Markdown grammar from the CommonMark speciﬁcation to
parse the test cases into abstract syntax trees (ASTs). Themutation strategy then mutates the ASTs while preservingthe Markdown syntaxes to well exercise the diverse syntax
components of Markdown compilers. To guide the fuzzer to
detect CPU-exhaustion performance bugs, we use a ﬁtness
function to measure if an input should be favored or not (§ IV -B ).
The ﬁtness function considers both code coverage and resource
usage. To report only unique bugs, we compute the cosine
similarity between each pair of the vector representations of the
execution traces in bug reports and group highly similar reports
as duplicate ones (§ IV -C ). We then present the implementation
details (§IV -D).
A. Syntax-Tree Based Mutation Strategy
Above the default mutation strategies of AFL ( e.g. , bit ﬂip-
ping), MDPERF FUZZ introduces a syntax-tree based mutation
strategy to better preserve the Markdown syntaxes. Due to the
complexity of Markdown language, no prior work has attempted
to formalize its grammar, which is non-trivial. We spent a
considerable amount of efforts on analyzing the CommonMark
speciﬁcation and modelling the language grammar. Given the
grammar, our syntax-tree based mutation strategy parses a test
case into an AST, traverses the AST, and randomly replaces
several subtrees ( treesrc) with candidate subtrees ( treedst).
We construct the simplest ASTs each representing a Markdown
syntax and include them as candidates of treedst.W ed o
not consider the combination of multiple Markdown syntaxes
when constructing one candidate of treedst because it can be
achieved via replacing multiple treesrc. In this way, compared
to mutation strategies that randomly ﬂipping bits, our strategy
preserves and extends the syntax of the original test case. Thus
it can efﬁciently construct syntactically correct new test cases
from the modiﬁed ASTs for later testing.
For example, given a test case of '**[demo](url)**' , we ﬁrst
parse it into the AST shown in Figure 3. We identify the basic
subtrees ( i.e., 1,2,3) and randomly replace each of them
to generate new test cases. For instance, we can replace the
whole link ( 1) with an inline code span and produce a test
case of'**/asciigraverandom/asciigrave**' . The newly generated test case remains
the text bold syntax but also exercises new syntax features. It
is worth noting that the default mutation strategies of AFL can
also be applied when the syntax-tree based one fails to parse
a test case.
B. Fitness Function and Performance Bug Detection
MDPERF FUZZ uses a ﬁtness function to decide whether to
favor a test case or not. We include both the coverage and
the control ﬂow graph (CFG) edge hit counts into the ﬁtness
function. As in other works [ 22,42], the coverage feedback
drives MDPERF FUZZ to explore more newly discovered code.
Only it, however, is not sufﬁcient for our purpose as it does not
consider loop iterations which are crucial for detecting high-
complexity performance bugs [ 24]. The CFG edge hit counts,
standing for the times a CFG edge is visited under a test case,
enables MDPERF FUZZ to explore computationally expensive
paths. As stated in prior work [ 25], many programs (e.g. , PHP
hash functions [ 25]) do have non-convex performance space.
We thus do not use the number of executed instructions to guide
MDPERF FUZZ because it might fail to ﬁnd the performance
issues caused by local maxima. Therefore, as in the state-of-
the-art work, PerfFuzz [ 25], we design MDPERF FUZZ to favor
those test cases that maximize certain CFG edge hit counts
to better detect performance bugs. In this way, MDPERF FUZZ
tends to select test cases to either trigger new code or exhaust
certain CFG edges. Note that we do not use run-time CPU
usage or concrete execution time as the metric, because they
show large variations affected by many uncontrollable factors,
such as the fuzzer’s concurrent features and the characteristics
of the applications being tested.
Prior works [ 24,25] rely on analysts to label performance
bugs, which is time-consuming and does not scale. We thus
design a statistical model to accurately identify performance
bugs. Our statistical model ﬁrst obtains the normal program
execution behaviors, which help label abnormal ones asperformance bugs. In particular, as in [
25], we compute the
total execution path length—the sum of the CFG edge hitcounts—under a test case as the metric. We ﬁrst prepareabundant random normal test cases; we feed each test case to
the testing program and obtain the corresponding execution path
length. We calculate the mean ( lμ) and the standard deviation
(lσ) of the execution path lengths ( li). We label a case as a
performance bug if its execution path exceeds the normal level
to a certain extent. According to Chebyshev inequality (as
shown in Equation 1), the probability of the random variable
lithat is k-standard deviations away from the mean ( lμ)i s
normally no more than 1/k2. Since only in rare cases would
the execution path length signiﬁcantly deviate from the normal
situations, we label a performance bug if its execution path
length ltis more than klσaway from the lμ(see Equation 2).
P(|li−lμ|>k lσ)≤1
k2(1)
lt>lμ+klσ (2)
C. Bug De-Duplication
Though the execution path lengths under different test cases
could all meet Equation 2, they could actually trigger the same
performance bug. De-duplicating the bug reports is necessary
for a more precise result, whereas prior works [ 24,25] do not
apply automated methods to de-duplicate the reports. Existing
fuzzing works identify unique bugs using the call stack formemory corruptions ( e.g. , crashes). However, it does not ﬁt
well our purposes for performance bug de-duplication. Though
we can possibly collect the call stack as well ( e.g. , by forcibly
terminating the program at some point), the call stacks might
not be accurate enough to represent unique bugs. This is
because the exactly critical call stack for a performance bug
can hardly be accurately exposed. Unlike memory corruption
bugs that have deterministic call stacks when the bugs are
triggered, performance bugs might exhibit diverse call stacks
depending on when to obtain them. Therefore, a better bug
de-duplication method is needed.
We propose a bug de-duplicating approach by merging
reports with similar execution traces, similar to prior trace
clustering methods [ 29–32]. The high-level idea is that different
exploiting inputs of the same performance bug should exhibit
similar execution traces, i.e., most CFG edges are visited in
similar frequencies. In particular, we apply the test cases in
the reports to the instrumented target software and obtain the
CFG edge hit count ( i.e., number of times a CFG edge is
visited in a test) for each edge. We summarize the unique CFG
edges that are visited in all reports during fuzz testing into an
n-dimensional vector space, where nis the total number of
unique CFG edges being visited and each dimension in the
vector space corresponds to a CFG edge. In other words, we
construct an edge-hit-count vector, e.g. ,#»v=(c1,c2, ..., cn),
for each report. Each dimension ( ci) represents the hit count
of the ith CFG edge in that report. To consider if two reports
point to the same bug, we compute the cosine similarity [ 33]
between their edge-hit-count vectors (e.g. ,#»v,#»v/prime), as shown
inEquation 3. Cosine similarity is based on the inner product
of the two vectors and thus naturally assigns higher weights
to the dimensions with larger values ( i.e., edges visited most).
TABLE II: Bug detection results of the Markdown compilers in C.
Rep. is the reports from the fuzzer. U-Rep. is the unique reports after
de-duplication. Con. is the manually conﬁrmed bugs.
Software Lang. # Rep. # U-Rep. # Con.
cmark (0.29.0) C 1321 7 4
MD4C (0.4.7) C 239 3 0cmark-gfm (0.29.0) C 981 4 3
Therefore, we calculate the cosine similarity between every
two reports and merge reports as the same bug if the cosine
similarity between their corresponding edge-hit-count vectors
exceeds a threshold.
cosine (#»v,#»v/prime)=#»v·#»v/prime
|#»v||#»v/prime|=/summationtextn
i=1cic/prime
i/radicalbig/summationtextn
i=1c2
i/radicalbig/summationtextn
i=1c/prime2
i(3)
D. Implementation
We implemented the fuzzing part of MDPERF FUZZ on top of
an AFL-based fuzzer, PerfFuzz [ 25]. Speciﬁcally, we compiled
a simpliﬁed Markdown grammar via ANTLR4 [ 43] into a
Markdown parser; then we introduced the syntax-tree based
mutation strategy as an extension that can be ﬂexibly plugged
in; we enhanced a C/C++ compiler to instrument the testing
software and modiﬁed AFL’s showmap functionality to trace
the execution on the instrumented applications to obtain the
CFG edge hit counts for bug de-duplication.
V. D ETECTING PERFORMANCE BUGS VIA MDPERF FUZZ
In this section, we investigate the prevalence of performance
bugs in the wild. We apply MDPERF FUZZ to detect perfor-
mance bugs in several mainstream Markdown compilers.
A. Experimental Setup
Dataset. Since MDPERF FUZZ employs an AFL-based fuzzer,
it is only capable to analyze Markdown compilers implemented
in C/C++. Therefore, we select all the 3 Markdown compilers
in C in the recommended implementation list of CommonMark
speciﬁcation [ 27] and list them in the ﬁrst column of Table II.
Experiments. Each Markdown compiler is ﬁrst instrumented
using our enhanced C compiler. We then apply MDPERF FUZZ
to detect performance bugs on the instrumented Markdown
compilers. We apply the PoCs collected in §III as the initial
seeds and conﬁgure MDPERF FUZZ to use a single process, a
timeout of 6 hours, and an input size of 200 bytes. After
our preliminary study, we empirically set kto 5 and the
cosine similarity threshold to 0.91 for all testing software.
All experiments described in this section are conducted on a
server running Debian GNU/Linux 9, with an Intel Xeon CPU
and 96GB RAM.
B. Results
We present the performance bug detection results in Table II.
Duplicate performance bug reports are naturally common
during fuzzing. The fuzzing part of MDPERF FUZZ reported
2,541 cases in total and our de-duplicating algorithm merged
them into 14 distinct reports. We observe that all the 14 casesdid successfully slow down the Markdown compilers by from
2.31× to 7.28× compared to normal-performance cases.
We further manually check the reports to validate the
performance bugs. Since MDPERF FUZZ limits the input size
like in other works [ 22,24,25] due to the concerns of
large search space, our manual analysis attempts to identifythe severity of the performance slowdown in more realisticscenarios, e.g. , larger input sizes of thousands of characters.
To this end, we ﬁrst identify the exploit input patterns in the
reports that exhaust the run-time resources. With the patterns,
we further construct larger test cases to verify the performance
issues in practice. Finally, 7 cases in 2 Markdown compilers
were conﬁrmed as performance bugs, including 4 new bugs,
after our manual analysis. We are in the process of reporting
the new bugs to the concerned vendors. At the time of writing,
1 bug has been well acknowledged.
We found no bug in MD4C. The developers of MD4C
explicitly mention that they seriously considered performance
as one of their main focuses during the development. Therefore,the performance bugs could be avoided with domain knowledge
and special care, which are often difﬁcult for most developers.
We have investigated those false-positive cases to understand
the reasons. We ﬁnd that the unique buggy cases reportedby
MDPERF FUZZ indeed triggered performance issues, i.e.,
those test cases led to longer execution paths. However, the
larger attack inputs we constructed manually did not manifest
such performance issues. This is because in our experiments
we let MDPERF FUZZ explore only small-size test cases (e.g. ,
hundreds of bytes) to limit the search space. As we discussed
in§III-E , developers might choose to patch the performance
bugs by enforcing certain limits (e.g. ,P1). Such a strategy
guarantees that there is no performance issue in large-size testcases; small-size test cases, however, can still trigger worst-case
behaviors. We ﬁnd all the false positives were caused because
of this.
C. Comparison
We compare MDPERF FUZZ with two state-of-the-art works,
SlowFuzz [ 24] and PerfFuzz [ 25].MDPERF FUZZ and PerfFuzz
are implemented above AFL whereas SlowFuzz is built on top
of libFuzzer [ 44]. SlowFuzz (libFuzzer) uses in-process fuzzing,
which is much faster as it has no overhead for process start-up;
however, it is also more fragile and more restrictive because it
traps and stops at crashes [ 44]. Nevertheless, we evaluate all
the tools with the same dataset in Table II and run them for
the same amount of time (6 hours), and the same input size
(200 bytes) for a fair comparison. We failed to run SlowFuzz
on MD4C because of some unexpected crashes after several
minutes of the execution. To the best of our knowledge, there isno way to suppress such crashes.
MDPERF FUZZ and PerfFuzz—
AFL-based fuzzers—do not suffer from this problem.
The results show that MDPERF FUZZ outperformed PerfFuzz
and SlowFuzz by detecting 3 and 5 more performance bugs,
respectively. In particular, PerfFuzz reported 820/114/783 cases
in cmark/MD4C/cmark-gfm, respectively; SlowFuzz reported
432/408 cases in cmark/cmark-gfm, respectively. These results
TABLE III: The performance slowdown and code coverage of
MDPERF FUZZ , PerfFuzz [ 25], and SlowFuzz [ 24]. The Best Slow-
down across all tools is normalized over the baseline of the same
random normal-performance case. Line Cov. and Func. Cov. denote
line coverage and function coverage, respectively.
Tool Software Best Slowdown Line Cov. Func. Cov.
MDPERF FUZZ cmark 7.28× 71.90% 67.91%
MD4C 2.31× 76.22% 58.11%
cmark-gfm 6.54× 55.78% 57.35%PerfFuzzcmark 6.82× 56.21% 51.35%
MD4C 2.21× 67.20% 50.20%
cmark-gfm 5.05× 48.26% 44.31%SlowFuzzcmark 4.32× 40.28% 41.65%
cmark-gfm 3.29× 38.30% 42.33%
also demonstrate the need of a bug de-duplication method. We
applied our bug de-duplication algorithm to identify unique
bugs and then manually conﬁrmed the reports. Finally, PerfFuzz
detected 2/0/2 real performance bugs in cmark/MD4C/cmark-
gfm, respectively. SlowFuzz detected 1/1 real performance
bugs in cmark/cmark-gfm, respectively. This demonstrates that
our syntax-tree based mutation strategy can improve fuzzing
efﬁciency by generating better inputs within the same resource
budget.
1) Performance Slowdown: Table III shows the performance
slowdown caused by the inputs generated by MDPERF FUZZ ,
PerfFuzz, and SlowFuzz. We use the maximum execution
path length as the performance metric, and normalize theperformance slowdown using a baseline obtained from the
random normal-performance cases. We notice that, though all
tools caused performance slowdown on the testing applications,
MDPERF FUZZ achieved a 14.71% higher average best perfor-
mance slowdown over PerfFuzz, and 41.21% over SlowFuzz.
Furthermore, we observe that MDPERF FUZZ could generate
inputs that slow down the compilers much faster than the other
tools. For example, to reach a 4.32 ×performance slowdown
on cmark, MDPERF FUZZ took 3.2 hours, whereas PerfFuzz
and SlowFuzz used 3.9 hours and 6.0 hours, respectively. This
demonstrates the high efﬁcacy of MDPERF FUZZ in detecting
performance bugs.
2) Code Coverage: We also evaluate the code coverage each
tool achieves to measure the efﬁcacy of our syntax-tree basedmutation strategy. We collect the test cases generated by eachtool and run on aﬂ-cov [
45], which detects the code coverage
using the overall execution traces covered by the test cases.
Though SlowFuzz is not based on AFL, we believe using its
test cases on aﬂ-cov can accurately reﬂect the code coverage
under a fair metric.
We present the results of line coverage and function coverage
in Table III. The syntax-tree based mutation strategy of
MDPERF FUZZ was effective in reaching high code coverage.
It enabled MDPERF FUZZ to visit 67.97% of lines of code
and 61.79% of functions on average. MDPERF FUZZ achieved
higher code coverage than PerfFuzz and SlowFuzz in all
testing software. In the Markdown compilers, MDPERF FUZZTABLE IV: Evaluation results on other Markdown compilers and
applications. ∗denotes the security mode of the compiler.
Software Lang. # BugsOther Markdown compilerscommonmark.js (0.29.3) JS 7
markdown-it (12.0.4) JS 2
marked (1.2.7) JS 25
Snarkdown (2.0.0) JS 13
commonmark-java (0.17.0) Java 6
ﬂexmark-java (0.62.2) Java 15
commonmark.py (0.9.1) Python 27
php-commonmark (1.5.7) PHP 19
php-commonmark* (1.5.7) PHP 0
Parsedown (1.7.4) PHP 8
Parsedown* (1.7.4) PHP 8
php-markdown (1.2.8) PHP 6
markdown-go Go 13
Comrak (0.9.0) Rust 11
StackEdit JS 9
DILLINGE JS 7AppsGitLab (13.7.3) Ruby 6
BitBucket (7.9.1) Java 8
Hugo (0.74.3) Go 13
Hexo (5.2) JS 14
outperformed PerfFuzz by 20.75% more lines of code and
13.17% more functions; MDPERF FUZZ outperformed Slow-
Fuzz by 28.68% more lines of code and 19.80% more functions.
With the mutation strategy, MDPERF FUZZ successfully fuzzed
8.02% of lines of code and 11.39% of functions that were not
ever visited by other tools. As a result, 2 new performance
bugs were identiﬁed within this proportion of code.
Summary. MDPERF FUZZ outperformed the state-of-the-art
works by detecting more performance bugs, achieving better
performance slowdown, and covering more code.
VI. S TUDYING PERFORMANCE BUGS IN MORE
MARKDOWN COMPILERS
Many Markdown compilers are implemented in languages
other than C/C++, and they are not supported by MDPERF FUZZ
and other AFL-based fuzzers. To understand if and how
these Markdown compilers suffer from performance bugs, we
construct an extensive dataset and utilize the exploits generated
by M DPERF FUZZ in§V to detect potential bugs in them.
A. Methodology
Dataset. We construct a comprehensive dataset in Table IV,
including a set of other Markdown compilers written not in
C/C++ and another set of relevant real-world applications.
We try to include popular Markdown compilers implemented
in diverse programming languages to understand the effects
of programming languages on performance bugs (if any). In
particular, our dataset covers Markdown compilers writtenin Java, JavaScript, PHP , Python, Go, and Rust. We alsoinclude the ﬁrst two Google search results (StackEdit andDILLINGE) in January 2021 into our dataset. StackEdit is
also in the suggested application list for opening Markdown
documents in Google Drive. We notice that some compilers
(php-commonmark and Parsedown) provide options to enable
additional security mode to mitigate certain bugs. We are
interested in the effects of such security options, thus we
present them separately with an asterisk sufﬁx (*). Regarding
real-world applications, we try to cover two main uses of
Markdown compilers: (1) Markdown document rendering in
code hosting software ( e.g. , GitLab, and BitBucket); and (2)
static web page generation frameworks (e.g. , Hugo and Hexo).
We downloaded the latest stable version of each Markdown
compiler from its ofﬁcial website or GitHub repository in
January 2021. We denote their actual software versions in the
parenthesis if applicable. We install and conﬁgure them with
the default settings.
Experiments. Since MDPERF FUZZ is not capable to detect
performance bugs in the dataset in Table IV, we ﬁrst collect the
exploits generated from MDPERF FUZZ in§V and summarize
them into 45 unique attack patterns. Each pattern exploits one
Markdown syntax feature. We then apply them to evaluate
the software in a black-box manner. Such an approach is
practical and scalable, and enables us to analyze a diverse set
of compilers.
We use the environment as in §V- A to test standalone
Markdown compilers. For the software in the application
category, we empirically identify the entry points for triggering
the Markdown compiler components (e.g. , command-line API
or UI operations). For those that work in the server-client modeland allow self-hosting (i.e., GitLab and BitBucket), we deploy
them on a computer running Debian GNU/Linux 9.12 with
a 4-core Intel Xeon CPU and 16GB RAM. We use another
computer in the same local area network as the client to send
requests and measure the network response time, client-side
CPU time, and server-side CPU time after the client issues a
request. We use such results to detect performance bugs and
further understand whether the performance bugs appear in the
server or the client.
It is hard to instrument the Markdown compilers imple-
mented in diverse programming languages and the Markdown
components in complicated software. Hence we currently are
unable to de-duplicate the reports for the software in the
dataset. Nevertheless, as our test cases especially exploit distinct
Markdown syntax features, we believe they are most likely to
trigger different performance bugs. We will further discuss it
in§VIII.
B. Results
We present the bug detection results in the last column of
Table IV. The performance bugs in Markdown compilers are
prevalent and might have been overlooked by the compiler
developers. In particular, we successfully identiﬁed 168 perfor-
mance bugs in the category of other Markdown compilers .
We can observe that the number of detected performance
bugs varies signiﬁcantly among Markdown compilers. Some
Markdown compilers were particularly vulnerable to perfor-
mance bugs, whereas some did not have any performanceissues. For instance, we detected 27 performance bugs incommonmark.py but only 2 bugs in markdown-it. We do
not observe a distinguishable difference among programming
languages in terms of the number of bugs. The performance
bugs could substantially impact end-user experiences. For
example, the performance bugs in StackEdit and DILLINGE
could lead to data loss once the browser tab was unresponsive
or was forcibly killed.
The Markdown compilers in popular applications are also
vulnerable to performance bugs. We successfully detected 41
performance bugs—28 on the client-side and 13 on the server-
side. In particular, GitLab and BitBucket suffered from server-
side performance bugs, which could be exploited to signiﬁcantly
degrade the server performance. They can be exploited for
launching DoS attacks (see §VII for more details).
Responsibly disclosing the bugs can greatly beneﬁt the
software users and the whole community. We are in the processof contacting the maintainers of the buggy Markdown compilers
and reporting the newly detected performance bugs. At the
time of writing, 24 performance bugs have been acknowledged.
One performance bug in GitLab has been recognized in CVE-
2021-22217 [9].
Though we mainly focused on performance bugs, we also de-
tected memory corruptions in more than 5 Markdown compilersin our research. In particular, the Markdown compilers exhibited
crashes when we fed them the test cases. The crashes happened
in the Markdown compilers implemented in JavaScript, Java,
and Python. For example, we particularly analyzed one crash
in Snarkdown, and found the maximum call stack size was
exceeded when using recursive function calls to process one
type of our testing inputs. There were other memory errors
(e.g. , segmentation faults) when our test cases triggered some
illegal memory read or write.
We also detected several unexpected errors in the application
category. We observed that GitLab and BitBucket could return
HTTP 500 internal server errors when the test cases contained
special Unicode characters, possibly because their Markdown
compilers currently did not support compiling special Unicodecharacters. Though such errors usually affect only the user who
sends documents containing such characters, they still lead to
bad user experiences and shall be ﬁxed.
C. Effects of Security Mode
php-commonmark and Parsedown introduce a security
mode to mitigate certain bugs. Our results show that their
security modes have different effects. As shown in Ta-
ble IV, php-commonmark in its security mode (shown as
php-commonmark*) was not vulnerable to any performancebugs, whereas the security mode of Parsedown (shown as
Parsedown*) did not mitigate any performance bugs.
By reading the relevant documents and the source code,
we ﬁnd that the security mode of Parsedown mainly miti-
gates cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities but does not
consider performance related issues. The security mode of php-
commonmark, on the other hand, applies several strategies to
mitigate performance bugs. For instance, it sets a threshold to
limit the depth of nested structures, escapes HTML blocks in
Fig. 4: Compilation time of Markdown compilers under attack inputs
of the size of 50,000 characters and a 10-second maximum threshold.
The middle lines in the boxes represent the corresponding median
values.
Markdown inputs, and disallows unsafe links. These strategies
together could successfully mitigate all 19 performance bugs
identiﬁed in its default mode. We will further discuss the
countermeasures against performance bugs in §VIII.
VII. I MP ACT ON PERFORMANCE
To better understand the performance degradation caused
by performance bugs, we depict in Figure 4 the compilation
time when the performance bugs are triggered by attack inputs
of50,000 characters. We use such a size as it can roughly
represent the normal uses of Markdown compilers. The results
show that performance bugs can cause signiﬁcant performancedegradation. In general, our attack inputs successfully exploited
the performance bugs by causing over 3-second compilation
time. Different performance bugs could result in different levels
of performance degradation in a compiler. For example, thecompilation time of commonmark.js ranged from 2 secondsup to 10 seconds (the maximum time threshold) due to the
performance bugs. If a threshold was not set, the exploits would
even cause the compilers to run for several hours.
The performance bugs can potentially affect many users if
they reside in server-side applications. Speciﬁcally, we present
two case studies about GitLab—a code hosting software, and
Parsedown—a popular Markdown compiler module in PHP .
We deploy the latest version of GitLab with its default NGINX
web server; we develop a server-side PHP application that calls
Parsedown to compile user-provided Markdown documents.
We randomly choose a common attack input that can trigger
performance issues in both GitLab and Parsedown. We then test
the applications with different numbers of concurrent attacks
(requests). We try at most 8 concurrent requests because our
server has only 8 logical CPU cores.
We depict the server CPU usage under the attacks in Figure 5.
We clearly observe the increase of CPU usage when more
concurrent attack requests were issued. In particular, when 8
requests were sent, the server CPU usage promptly reachedFig. 5: Server-side CPU usage over time under attacks on GitLab
and Parsedown.
almost 100%. Therefore, an attacker can send only a fewattack requests at a very low rate to signiﬁcantly degrade
the performance of a vulnerable server application, making it
unable to responsively serve other legitimate user requests.
VIII. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Mitigating performance bugs. Practical mitigation and
defense techniques against performance bugs are necessary for
protecting vulnerable Markdown compilers and applications.
We have shown that the context-sensitive feature handlers in
Markdown compilers could be abused by attackers in §III-D .
Several security strategies used in the security mode of php-
commonmark (e.g. , enforcing the limits, escaping the HTML
blocks, and disallowing unsafe links) are shown to be effectivein mitigating performance bugs. However, they can break some
functionalities, especially those related to the context-sensitive
features. For example, some HTML blocks cannot be compiledas expected because of the security strategies. Longer legitimate
Markdown documents might also be blocked because of the
limits. A trade-off has to be made to balance functionality and
security. In the future, we hope to port such mechanisms tomitigate attacks exploiting performance bugs in Markdown
compilers.
Bug de-duplication. Trace-based analysis is effective in
triaging bugs [ 29].MDPERF FUZZ thus adopts an execution
trace similarity approach to de-duplicate performance bugs.
Besides the cosine similarity [ 33,46]MDPERF FUZZ employs,
other algorithms (e.g. , those measuring the Euclidean distance
[46]) can potentially be applied as well. Theoretically, the
method can be applied to software implemented in diverseprogramming languages once the run-time CFG edge hit
information is available. However, to the best of our knowledge,
not all programming languages have available instrumentation
tools exactly for such a purpose. It is also time-consuming
and even infeasible to develop our own instrumentation tools
within this work. We thus choose to not apply the method
for the evaluation in §VI. In the future, we plan to further
investigate the feasibility of a language-agnostic method forde-duplicating performance bugs. For example, we want toexplore transforming the software into certain intermediaterepresentations (IRs) and obtain the necessary information
from IRs to de-duplicate performance bugs.
Lessons. We have tested Markdown compilers implemented
in languages other than C/C++ in §VI using the attack patterns
generated by MDPERF FUZZ . Each pattern corresponding to
one Markdown syntax feature could exploit a group of bugs in
different Markdown compilers. For example, one attack pattern
was able to trigger similar performance bugs in 12 different
Markdown compilers implemented in multiple programming
languages. Based on our further analysis and the feedback
from the developers, we learned that compiler developers often
borrow implementation ideas from other similar or relevantprojects. Such a design reuse is risky and has resulted in
similar performance bugs across different implementations. We
conjecture that similarly those compilers might commonly be
subject to other types of bugs.
Prior works have studied performance bugs in the compilers
of general-purpose languages (e.g. , GCC [ 17]) and domain-
speciﬁc languages ( e.g. , Node.js regex engine [ 47,48]).
However, performance bugs in the compilers of many otherdomain-speciﬁc languages such as Latex [
49] and Wikitext
[50] have not been systematically studied yet. We believe
the design and implementation of MDPERF FUZZ can shed
some light on the following research on other domain-speciﬁc
languages. To facilitate future research, we release the source
code of MDPERF FUZZ to help the development of fuzzers
for those languages. For example, researchers can replaceour language model with their own ones in
MDPERF FUZZ .
Further, MDPERF FUZZ could also be easily extended to detect
other types of bugs (e.g. , memory corruptions) in Markdown
compilers.
IX. R ELA TED WORK
Understanding performance bugs. Understanding the char-
acteristics of performance bugs can help design techniques
to detect and ﬁx performance bugs. Existing studies focus on
the performance bugs in programs on the desktop platform[
17,51], mobile platform [ 18], and the web server end [ 17],
etc. For instance, Zaman et al. studied performance bugs in
Firefox and Chrome and provided suggestions to ﬁx the bugs
and to validate the patches [ 51]. Davis et al. and Staicu et al.
analyzed ReDoS problem in npm and pypi ecosystems [ 47,48].
For compilers, Sub et al. studied GCC and LL VM compilers
but did not focus on the performance issues [ 52]. However,
there is little understanding of performance bugs in Markdown
compilers. We further characterize the bug patterns and reveal
the close relationship between the performance bugs and the
context-sensitive Markdown syntaxes.
Detecting performance bugs. The detection of performance
issues has drawn signiﬁcant attention from researchers overthe past years. Prior studies focus on application-layer DoS
vulnerabilities [ 12,53,54], algorithmic complexity DoS vulner-
abilities [ 13,55], and other general performance issues [ 17,18].
Static methods analyze the source code of the applications and
diagnose vulnerable bug patterns, for example, repeated loops
[19, 20].
Dynamic methods are also applied to identify performance
bugs. SlowFuzz [ 24], PerfFuzz [ 25], and HotFuzz [ 41] pro-posed fuzzing solutions to detect the worst-case algorithmic
complexity vulnerabilities. SAFFRON [ 26] also used grammar-
aware fuzzing to ﬁnd worst-case complexity vulnerabilities
in Java programs. Toddler [ 19] detected performance bugs by
identifying loops with similar memory access patterns. Hybrid
approaches [ 15] combining static analysis and fuzzing were
proposed to detect ReDoS in Java programs. Our work is
tailored for Markdown compilers and is equipped with a bug
de-duplication method.
Grammar-aware Fuzzing. To ﬁnd security bugs in compilers,
a number of grammar-aware fuzzing frameworks [ 21,56–
61] have been proposed. Guided by the grammar, fuzzers
can generate syntactically-correct inputs to test the compilers.
In particular, LangFuzz [ 62] modiﬁed existing test cases by
randomly combining JavaScript code fragments to generate new
test cases. Superion [ 28] extended AFL to support additional
grammar-aware mutation strategies via pluggable language
parsers. Several learning-based [ 63,64] fuzzers transformed
inputs into ASTs and performed subtree replacement with neu-
ral network models. Inspired by these works, MDPERF FUZZ
also employs grammar-aware fuzzing to detect performance
bugs in Markdown compilers.
X. C ONCLUSION
Performance bugs in Markdown compilers were previously
understudied. This paper conducted a systematic study to
understand the characteristics of such bugs. We developed
a fuzzing framework, MDPERF FUZZ , to detect performance
bugs in the wild. MDPERF FUZZ signiﬁcantly outperformed
the state-of-the-art works and successfully identiﬁed many new
performance bugs in Markdown compilers and applications.
We demonstrate the performance bugs in Markdown compilers
are not only prevalent but also severe. We hope that our studycould attract more attention to the compilers of domain-speciﬁc
languages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper was partially supported by
a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, China (Project No.: CUHK
14210219).
REFERENCES
[1] GitHub, “Github markdown,” 2021, https://docs.github.
com/en/rest/reference/markdown.
[2] GitLab, “Gitlab markdown api,” 2021, https://docs.gitlab.
com/ee/api/markdown.html.
[3] GitHub, “Github docs: About readmes,” 2021,
https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-
and-archiving-repositories/creating-a-repository-on-
github/about-readmes.
[4] GitLab, “Gitlab ﬂavored markdown,” 2021, https://docs.
gitlab.com/ee/user/markdown.html.
[5] WordPress, “Support–wordpress.com: Markdown block,”
2021, https://wordpress.com/support/wordpress-editor/
blocks/markdown-block/.
[6] Drupal, “Drupal markdown module,” 2021, https://www.
drupal.org/project/markdown.
[7] Alexa, “Alexa top 1 million sites,” 2021, http://s3.
amazonaws.com/alexa-static/top-1m.csv.zip.
[8] B. Schweblin, “Stackedit,” 2021, https://stackedit.io/.
[9] T. M. Corporation, “Cve-2021-22217,” 2021, https://cve.
mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2021-22217.
[10] ——, “Cve-2020-26409,” 2020, https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-
bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2020-26409.
[11] ——, “Cve-2020-14450,” 2020, https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-
bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2020-14450.
[12] W. Meng, C. Qian, S. Hao, K. Borgolte, G. Vigna,
C. Kruegel, and W. Lee, “Rampart: Protecting web ap-
plications from cpu-exhaustion denial-of-service attacks,”
inProceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium
(Security), Baltimore, MD, Aug. 2018.
[13] S. A. Crosby and D. S. Wallach, “Denial of service via
algorithmic complexity attacks,” in Proceedings of the
12th USENIX Security Symposium (Security), Washington,
DC, Aug. 2003.
[14] H. M. Demoulin and I. Pedisich, “Detecting application-
layer denial-of-service attacks with ﬁnelame,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(ATC), Renton, W A, Jul. 2019.
[15] Y . Shen, Y . Jiang, C. Xu, P . Y u, X. Ma, and J. Lu, “Rescue:
Crafting regular expression dos attacks,” in Proceedings
of the 33rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE), Montpellier,
France, Sep. 2018.
[16] V . Wüstholz, O. Olivo, M. J. Heule, and I. Dillig,
“Static detection of dos vulnerabilities in programs that
use regular expressions,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) , Uppsala,
Sweden, Apr. 2017.
[17] G. Jin, L. Song, X. Shi, J. Scherpelz, and S. Lu, “Un-
derstanding and detecting real-world performance bugs,”
inProceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation
(PLDI), Beijing, China, Jun. 2012.
[18] Y . Liu, C. Xu, and S.-C. Cheung, “Characterizing and
detecting performance bugs for smartphone applications,”
inProceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE), Hyderabad, India, May–Jun.
2014.
[19] A. Nistor, L. Song, D. Marinov, and S. Lu, “Toddler:Detecting performance problems via similar memory-
access patterns,” in Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), San Fran-
cisco, CA, May 2013.
[20] A. Nistor, P .-C. Chang, C. Radoi, and S. Lu, “Caramel:
Detecting and ﬁxing performance problems that have non-
intrusive ﬁxes,” in Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), Florence,
Italy, May 2015.
[21] J. Wang, B. Chen, L. Wei, and Y . Liu, “Skyﬁre: Data-driven seed generation for fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the
38th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland),
San Jose, CA, May 2017.
[22] Google, “Oss-fuzz,” 2021, https://google.github.io/oss-
fuzz/.
[23] M. Zalewski, “american fuzzy lop,” 2021, https://github.
com/google/AFL.
[24] T. Petsios, J. Zhao, A. D. Keromytis, and S. Jana,
“Slowfuzz: Automated domain-independent detection of
algorithmic complexity vulnerabilities,” in Proceedings
of the 24th ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security (CCS), Dallas, TX, Oct.–Nov. 2017.
[25] C. Lemieux, R. Padhye, K. Sen, and D. Song, “Perffuzz:
automatically generating pathological inputs,” in Proceed-
ings of the 27th International Symposium on Software
Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) , Amsterdam, Netherlands,
Jul. 2018.
[26] X.-B. D. Le, C. Pasareanu, R. Padhye, D. Lo, W . Visser,
and K. Sen, “Saffron: Adaptive grammar-based fuzzing
for worst-case analysis,” ACM SIGSOFT Software Engi-
neering Notes, 2019.
[27] commonmark.org, “commark-spec,” 2021, https://github.
com/commonmark/commonmark-spec.
[28] J. Wang, B. Chen, L. Wei, and Y . Liu, “Superion:
Grammar-aware greybox fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the
41st International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), Montréal, Canada, May 2019.
[29] R. V asiliev, D. Koznov, G. Chernishev, A. Khvorov,D. Luciv, and N. Povarov, “Tracesim: a method for
calculating stack trace similarity,” in Proceedings of the
4th ACM SIGSOFT International Workshop on Machine-
Learning Techniques for Software-Quality Evaluation,
2020.
[30] K. Mohror and K. L. Karavanic, “Evaluating similarity-
based trace reduction techniques for scalable performance
analysis,” in Proceedings of the conference on high
performance computing networking, storage and analysis ,
2009, pp. 1–12.
[31] Q. Xin, F. Behrang, M. Fazzini, and A. Orso, “Identifying
features of android apps from execution traces,” in
2019 IEEE/ACM 6th International Conference on MobileSoftware Engineering and Systems (MOBILESoft). IEEE,
2019.
[32] R. van Tonder, J. Kotheimer, and C. Le Goues, “Semantic
crash bucketing,” in Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE), Montpellier, France, Sep. 2018.
[33] P . Dangeti, Statistics for machine learning. Packt
Publishing Ltd, 2017.
[34] C. Killian, K. Nagaraj, S. Pervez, R. Braud, J. W.
Anderson, and R. Jhala, “Finding latent performance
bugs in systems implementations,” in Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the F oundations of
Software Engineering (FSE), Santa Fe, NM, Nov. 2010.
[35] V . Chipounov, V . Kuznetsov, and G. Candea, “S2e: Aplatform for in-vivo multi-path analysis of software
systems,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), Newport
Beach, CA, Mar. 2011.
[36] C. Wen, H. Wang, Y . Li, S. Qin, Y . Liu, Z. Xu, H. Chen,
X. Xie, G. Pu, and T. Liu, “Memlock: Memory usage
guided fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), Seoul, Korea,
Jun.–Jul. 2020.
[37] G. E. Morris, “Lessons from the colorado beneﬁts
management system disaster.” 2004, www.ad-mkt-review.
com/publichtml/air/ai200411.html.
[38] andersk, “Parsing «««. . . takes quadratic time,” 2020,
https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it/issues/737.
[39] mity, “Pathological input: Unclosed inline links,” 2017,
https://github.com/commonmark/cmark/issues/218.
[40] nwellnhof, “Quadratic behavior with smart quotes,” 2020,
https://github.com/commonmark/cmark/issues/373.
[41] W. Blair, A. Mambretti, S. Arshad, M. Weissbacher,
W . Robertson, E. Kirda, and M. Egele, “HotFuzz: Discov-
ering algorithmic denial-of-service vulnerabilities through
guided micro-fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Annual
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(NDSS), San Diego, CA, Feb. 2020.
[42] G. Klees, A. Ruef, B. Cooper, S. Wei, and M. Hicks,
“Evaluating fuzz testing,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS), Toronto, Canada, Oct. 2018.
[43] T. J. Parr and R. W. Quong, “Antlr: A predicated-ll (k)parser generator,” Software: Practice and Experience ,
1995.
[44] LL VM, “libfuzzer,” 2021, https://hammer-vlsi.readthedocs.
io/en/stable/LibFuzzer.html.
[45] mrash, “aﬂ-cov - aﬂ fuzzing code coverage,” 2021, https:
//github.com/mrash/aﬂ-cov.
[46] M. Kryszkiewicz, “The cosine similarity in terms of the
euclidean distance,” in Encyclopedia of Business Analytics
and Optimization. IGI Global, 2014.
[47] J. C. Davis, C. A. Coghlan, F. Servant, and D. Lee,
“The impact of regular expression denial of service
(redos) in practice: an empirical study at the ecosystem
scale,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
F oundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), Lake
Buena Vista, FL, Nov. 2018.
[48] C.-A. Staicu and M. Pradel, “Freezing the web: A study
of redos vulnerabilities in javascript-based web servers,”
inProceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium
(Security), Baltimore, MD, Aug. 2018.
[49] S. Checkoway, H. Shacham, and E. Rescorla, “Are text-
only data formats safe? or, use this latex class ﬁle to pwn
your computer.” in 3rd USENIX Workshop on Large-Scale
Exploits and Emergent Threats, 2010.
[50] B. W. Curry, A. Trotman, and M. Albert, “Extricating
meaning from wikimedia article archives,” in 16th Aus-
tralasian Document Computing Symposium, 2010.[51] S. Zaman, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan, “A qualitative
study on performance bugs,” in 2012 9th IEEE working
conference on mining software repositories (MSR), 2012.
[52] C. Sun, V . Le, Q. Zhang, and Z. Su, “Toward understand-
ing compiler bugs in gcc and llvm,” in Proceedings of
the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis (ISSTA), Saarbrücken, Germany, Jul. 2016.
[53] H. H. Jazi, H. Gonzalez, N. Stakhanova, and A. A.Ghorbani, “Detecting http-based application layer dosattacks on web servers in the presence of sampling,”
Computer Networks, 2017.
[54] V . Durcekova, L. Schwartz, and N. Shahmehri, “Sophisti-cated denial of service attacks aimed at application layer,”
in2012 ELEKTRO. IEEE, 2012.
[55] R. Smith, C. Estan, and S. Jha, “Backtracking algorithmic
complexity attacks against a nids,” in Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference
(ACSAC), 2006.
[56] O. Bastani, R. Sharma, A. Aiken, and P . Liang, “Syn-thesizing program input grammars,” in Proceedings of
the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , Barcelona,
Spain, Jun. 2017.
[57] P . Godefroid, A. Kiezun, and M. Y . Levin, “Grammar-
based whitebox fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (PLDI) , Tucson, Arizona, Jun. 2008.
[58] D. Y ang, Y . Zhang, and Q. Liu, “Blendfuzz: A model-based framework for fuzz testing programs with gram-
matical inputs,” in IEEE 11th International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Com-
munications, 2012.
[59] H. Y oo and T. Shon, “Grammar-based adaptive fuzzing:
Evaluation on scada modbus protocol,” in Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communi-
cations (SmartGridComm), 2016.
[60] S. V eggalam, S. Rawat, I. Haller, and H. Bos, “Ifuzzer:
An evolutionary interpreter fuzzer using genetic program-
ming,” in European Symposium on Research in Computer
Security, 2016.
[61] C. Aschermann, T. Frassetto, T. Holz, P . Jauernig, A.-R.
Sadeghi, and D. Teuchert, “Nautilus: Fishing for deep
bugs with grammars,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Annual
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(NDSS), San Diego, CA, Feb. 2019.
[62] C. Holler, K. Herzig, and A. Zeller, “Fuzzing with code
fragments,” in Proceedings of the 21st USENIX Security
Symposium (Security), Bellevue, W A, Aug. 2012.
[63] S. Lee, H. Han, S. K. Cha, and S. Son, “Montage: A
neural network language model-guided javascript engine
fuzzer,” in Proceedings of the 29th USENIX Security
Symposium (Security), Boston, MA, Aug. 2019.
[64] C. Cummins, P . Petoumenos, A. Murray, and H. Leather,
“Compiler fuzzing through deep learning,” in Proceedings
of the 27th International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis (ISSTA), Amsterdam, Netherlands, Jul. 2018.
