Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning
Systems
Junming Cao∗
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, ChinaBihuan Chen∗†
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, ChinaChao Sun∗
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Longjie Hu∗
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, ChinaShuaihong Wu∗
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, ChinaXin Peng∗
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
ABSTRACT
Deep learning (DL) has been widely applied to many domains. Unique
challenges in engineering DL systems are posed by the program-
ming paradigm shift from traditional systems to DL systems, and per-
formance is one of the challenges. Performance problems (PPs) in DL
systems can cause severe consequences such as excessive resource con-
sumption and financial loss. While bugs in DL systems have been ex-
tensively investigated, PPs in DL systems have hardly been explored.
To bridge this gap, we present the first comprehensive study to i) char-
acterize symptoms, root causes, and introducing and exposing stages
of PPs in DL systems developed in TensorFLow andKeras , with 224
PPs collected from 210 StackOverflow posts, and to ii) assess the ca-
pability of existing performance analysis approaches in tackling PPs,
with a constructed benchmark of 58 PPs in DL systems. Our findings
shed light on the implications on developing high-performance DL
systems, and detecting and localizing PPs in DL systems. To demon-
strate the usefulness of our findings, we develop a static checker Deep-
Perf to detect three types of PPs. It has detected 488 new PPs in 130
GitHub projects. 105 and 27 PPs have been confirmed and fixed.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software performance .
KEYWORDS
performance problems, deep learning, performance analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin
Peng. 2022. Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
∗Also with Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, and Shanghai Collaborative
Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing.
†Bihuan Chen is the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549123Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ES-
EC/FSE ’22), November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549123
1 INTRODUCTION
The advances in deep learning (DL) have attracted an increasing in-
terest in applying DL to various applications in both industry and
academia, e.g., image processing, machine translation, speech recog-
nition, medical diagnosis, self-driving cars, and robotics. DL systems
adopt a data-driven programming paradigm, where developers de-
fine a desired neural network that learns the decision logic from a
large amount of training data. Differently, traditional systems follow
alogic-based programming paradigm, where developers directly en-
code the decision logic in the source code. This paradigm shift poses
unique challenges to engineering DL systems [1, 7, 21, 84].
In particular, performance, as an important quality requirement, is
one of the challenges in engineering DL systems [ 84]. It has a signifi-
cant impact on the time and resources (e.g., GPU memory and power)
required during the process pipeline (e.g., training and inference) of
DL systems [ 46]. For example, the language model GPT-3 costs mil-
lions of dollars for a single training run1. Performance problems (PPs)
can slow down DL systems, consume excessive resources, hurt user
experience, cause financial loss, or threaten human lives. For exam-
ple, many users suffered a significant slowdown of their DL systems
after upgrading TensorFlow 1.x to TensorFlow 2.x, and hence de-
cided to switch to PyTorch2. Moreover, performance questions of
DL systems are recognized as the most difficult to answer among all
questions of DL systems on StackOverflow [ 84]. Therefore, it is nec-
essary to study the characteristics of PPs in DL systems.
A lot of efforts have been recently made to extensively investigate
the characteristics (e.g., symptoms, root causes, fixes and taxonomy)
of general bugs [ 27–29,87] and specific bugs [ 8,69,83,86] in DL sys-
tems. However, these studies are not specifically designed for PPs,
and thus only capture some partial characteristics of PPs in DL sys-
tems. In contrast, PPs have been widely studied for traditional sys-
tems, e.g., desktop or server applications [ 31,50,63,80], highly con-
figurable systems [ 24,25], mobile applications [ 40,42], database-
backed web applications [ 78,79], and JavaScript systems [ 60]. How-
ever, PPs in DL systems could be different due to the programming
1https://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3/
2https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58441514/why-is-tensorflow-2-much-slower-
than-tensorflow-1arXiv:2112.01771v2  [cs.SE]  29 Oct 2022ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
paradigm shift from traditional systems to DL systems. In summary,
the characteristics of PPs in DL systems are under-investigated.
To bridge this knowledge gap, we present the first comprehensive
study to characterize PPs in DL systems developed in TensorFlow
andKeras and to assess existing approaches in tackling PPs. To this
end, we first collect 224 PPs from 210 StackOverflow posts, and man-
ually investigate the PPs to characterize their symptoms ( RQ1 ), root
causes ( RQ2 ), and introducing and exposing stages ( RQ3 ). Based on
these 224 PPs, we manually build a benchmark of 58 PPs that cover
most symptoms and root causes, and assess the capability of a pro-
filer in detecting PPs, the capability of a compiler in optimizing PPs,
and the capability of documentation in hinting PPs ( RQ4 ).
•RQ1 Symptom: what are the symptoms of PPs?
•RQ2 Root Cause: what are the root causes of PPs?
•RQ3 Stage: what are the stages of introducing and exposing PPs?
•RQ4 Assessment: how is the capability of existing performance
analysis approaches in tackling PPs?
Through these research question analysis, we aim to provide useful
findings for developers and researchers. For example, more than half
of the PPs slow down DL systems, and nearly one-third of the PPs con-
sume either extremely low or high resources. About half of the PPs
are introduced by API misuses, and root causes related to model, data
and hardware introduce more than one-third of the PPs. The most bug-
prone stages are data preparation, environment setting, model build-
ing and training. The most bug-affecting stages are training and data
preparation. 40% of the PPs are not exposed in the introducing stage.
Existing approaches have a very limited capability in tackling PPs.
Our findings provide implications for developers and researchers on
developing high-performance DL systems and detecting and local-
izing PPs in DL systems, e.g., performance-aware techniques to rec-
ommend DL library APIs and DL models, static techniques to model
and estimate time cost and resource consumption of DL systems,
and rule-based techniques to detect and localize PPs in DL systems.
To demonstrate the usefulness of our findings, we develop a static
checker, named DeepPerf , that supports rule-based detection of three
types of PPs derived from our study. We run DeepPerf against 1,108
GitHub projects with more than 100 stars. DeepPerf has detected 488
new PPs in 130 of these projects with 15 false positives. 105 of these
PPs have already been confirmed by the developers, and 27 of them
have already been fixed. Others are still waiting for confirmation.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions.
•We present the first comprehensive study to characterize 224 PPs
in DL systems written in TensorFlow andKeras , and to assess
existing approaches in tackling a contructed benchmark of 58 PPs.
•We develop a static checker, named DeepPerf , to detect three types
of PPs, and detect 488 new PPs in 130 GitHub projects.
2 EMPIRICAL STUDY METHODOLOGY
We first introduce the design of our study, and then present our data
collection, data labeling, and benchmark construction process.
2.1 Study Design
Our goal is to understand PPs in DL systems. As DL systems can be
built on top of various DL libraries, we limit our scope to DL systems
developed in TensorFlow andKeras . We select TensorFlow as itis the most popular DL library on GitHub. We also include Keras be-
cause it is built on top of and tightly integrated with TensorFlow 2.
We include Keras but do not distinguish between TensorFlow and
Keras in our analysis because i) Keras is a frontend and should be
used with a backend, and TensorFlow is the most popular backend,
and ii) TensorFlow andKeras are often tightly used together.
To achieve this goal, we propose the four research questions as in-
troduced in Sec. 1. Our symptom analysis inRQ1 aims to understand
the observable consequences of PPs. Our findings from RQ1 can char-
acterize the significance of PPs, and provide insights for developing
PP detection approaches. Our root cause analysis inRQ2 aims to char-
acterize the fundamental reasons for the occurrence of PPs. Our find-
ings from RQ2 can provide insights for designing PP localization ap-
proaches. Our stage analysis inRQ3 aims to locate DL pipeline stages
where PPs are introduced and exposed, and measure the distance be-
tween exposing stage and introducing stage. Our findings from RQ3
can locate the bug-prone and bug-affecting stages that should be con-
cerned, and reflect the difficulty of PP localization. Our approach as-
sessment inRQ4 aims to quantitatively evaluate existing approaches
in tackling PPs. Our findings from RQ4 can reveal the necessity of
PP detection and localization approaches. Besides, our findings can
also provide hints to develop high-performance DL systems.
2.2 Data Collection
We collected PPs from a well-known Q&A site StackOverflow, where
world-wide developers can discuss software development problems.
Our PP collection process consists of the following three steps.
Step 1: DL Post Selection. We first selected posts related to DL
libraries TensorFlow andKeras by checking whether the tags of a
post contain the keywords “tensorflow” and “keras”. We also filtered
posts that were created before 2018-01-01 to avoid usage discussions
about old versions of DL libraries that are usually no longer used. At
the time of selection (i.e., 2021-03-01), we obtained 61,169 DL posts.
Then, we excluded posts that did not contain any source code in ques-
tion descriptions for the ease of our manual analysis. To focus on high-
quality posts, we also excluded posts that did not have an accepted
answer or any answer whose votes were greater than two because
questioners often commented that the problems had been solved, but
forgot to accept the answer. After this step, we had 18,730 DL posts.
Step 2: PP Post Selection. Instead of directly using performance-
related keywords from the existing studies on PPs in traditional sys-
tems (e.g., [ 31,50,63,80]), we derived a keyword set in the following
way to achieve a wide and comprehensive coverage of PP posts. We
first randomly sampled 100 posts with a tag of “performance” from
18,730 posts in Step 1. Then, we manually analyzed these posts to ex-
tract performance-related keywords, and added them to the set of key-
words from existing studies. We continued this procedure of random
sampling and manual analysis for another two rounds until no new
keyword was found; i.e., we sampled 300 posts, which achieved 95%
confidence level and 5.6% confidence interval. Finally, we used the
derived keyword set to search question descriptions of the 18,730
posts in Step 1, which resulted in 742 candidate PP posts. We provide
the full set of derived keywords at our replication site.
Step 3: PP Identification. We manually verified the 742 candi-
date PP posts to reduce noise that was not about PPs in DL systems.
For example, some posts might happen to have performance-relatedUnderstanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
keywords, but did not discuss PPs; some posts actually discussed the
accuracy of DL models (because accuracy is often interchangeable
with performance in the DL community, and we align with the SE
community where performance is usually referred to as efficiency); and
some posts indeed discussed performance, but did not have a correct
answer, which could not be used to understand the characteristics of
PPs. In particular, two of the authors separately inspected each can-
didate PP post to identify PPs. We used Cohen’s Kappa coefficient to
measure the agreement, and it reached 0.813. A third author was in-
volved to resolve disagreements. Finally, we identified 224 PPs from
210 PP posts, of which 14 PP posts contained two PPs. This scale is
comparable to previous studies on PPs, e.g., 109 PPs in desktop or server
applications [31] and 70 PPs in mobile applications [42].
2.3 Data Labeling
To answer RQ1 ,RQ2 andRQ3 , two of the authors labeled each of the
224 PPs with respect to three dimensions: symptom, root cause, and
introducing and exposing stages. In particular, they started with the
classification schema, used for labeling, from the existing general DL
bug studies [ 27–29,87] and adapted it by appending new ones and ex-
cluding non-applicable ones. They separately read all post contents,
including the title, question description, comments, answers, and ref-
erence links mentioned during discussion, to carefully label PPs.
Specifically, the symptom of a PP was determined if the ques-
tioner explicitly reported the symptom in the post. Otherwise, it was
conservatively labeled as “ Unknown ”. The root cause of a PP was in-
ferred from the buggy code version in the question and the fixed code
version (always existed) in the valid answer. The introducing stage of
a PP was determined by analyzing where its root cause was located,
while the exposing stage of a PP was decided by analyzing where its
symptom was exhibited. The introducing/exposing stage of a PP was
labeled as “ Unknown ” if there was no clear indication in the post. We
provide actionable code of the final taxonomies for symptoms, root
causes and stages at our replication site.
The Cohen’s Kappa coefficient was 0.906, 0.772, 0.847 and 0.928 for
the labeling of symptom, root cause, introducing stage and exposing
stage. A third author was involved to resolve disagreements. It is
worth mentioning that the manual effort, involved in our data col-
lection and labeling procedure, required six person-months.
2.4 Benchmark Construction
To answer RQ4 , we constructed a benchmark by reproducing PPs.
We reproduced PPs on a machine with a 16-core Intel i7-7820X CPU
(3.60GHz), NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPU, 128GB RAM and 1TB SSD. Dif-
ferent PPs require different TensorFlow versions which further re-
quire different CUDA Toolkit versions to support GPU. It is tricky to
install different CUDA versions in the same physical machine. Thus,
we used TensorFlow Docker images. Only NVIDIA GPU Driver
was installed in the physical machine, and each docker container
had its own CUDA Toolkit version. Finally, TensorFlow Docker im-
ages ranging from version 1.12 to 1.15 and version 2.0 to 2.5 with GPU
support were covered to build our PP benchmark.
We decided to sample some PPs from the 224 PPs instead of trying
to reproduce all 224 PPs due to the large effort in reproducing PPs
from StackOverflow posts. To have a good coverage of symptoms
and root causes, we sampled 50% PPs from each set of PPs that were
PerformanceProblems(224)Time(126)Memory(56)
Processor (16)Unknown (45)SlowExecutionTime (99)SlowInitializationTime (6)ProgramHang (8)IncreasingTimeOverTime (16)MemoryLeak (16)AbnormalGPUMemoryUsage (5)NotUsingGPU (4)AbnormalGPUUtilization (8)AbnormalCPUUtilization (4)Out of Memory (37)Figure 1: Taxonomy of PP Symptoms
caused by each inner category of root causes (see Sec. 3.2) while ex-
hibiting each high-level category of symptoms (see Sec. 3.1). For each
sampled PP, we reproduced it with the following three steps.
Step 1: Decide TensorFlow Version. If the TensorFlow ver-
sion was shown in the post, we used it. If not, we checked whether
APIs specific to TensorFlow 1.x (e.g., tf.Session ) orTensor-
Flow 2.x (e.g., @tf.function ) existed in the post. If yes, we used
the latest TensorFlow version of 1.x (i.e., 1.15) or 2.x (i.e., 2.5). If
not, we used TensorFlow 2.5.
Step 2: Complete Code Snippets. As developers tend to only in-
clude code fragments that are directly related to questions, code snip-
pets in the post are often incomplete. Specifically, if the buggy (or
fixed) version was executable, we completed the fixed (or buggy) ver-
sion based on it. Otherwise, we wrote missing code fragments for
buggy and fixed versions based on question description and answer.
Step 3: Reproduce Symptoms. We executed the buggy and fixed
version to reproduce symptoms reported in the post. We may change
input data size, model parameters, etc. to reproduce described symp-
toms as our hardware environment might be different from the post.
For PPs with out of memory errors, we set the maximum GPU mem-
ory limit with tf.GPUOptions such that the out of memory errors
could be reproduced even on GPUs with a larger memory.
We successfully reproduced 58 PPs from 112 sampled PPs with
four person-months effort. The main reasons for failed reproduc-
tion are: i) developers provide very incomplete code snippets in the
posts, making it difficult for us to complete the buggy or fixed ver-
sion, and ii) some PPs require specific hardware environments that
are different from our machine. To foster future research on PPs
in DL systems, we recorded for each PP in our benchmark its en-
vironment configuration, input data, buggy version, fixed version,
performance change after fixing, and reproduction steps.
3 EMPIRICAL STUDY RESULTS
We present the results of the four research questions.
3.1 Symptom Analysis (RQ1)
The taxonomy of PP symptoms is shown in Fig. 1. It is organized into
three high-level categories (i.e., Time ,Memory andProcessor ) and 10
inner categories, which are exhibited by 179 (79.9%) of the 224 PPs.ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
API(115)Library(24)Data(21)Model(50)Hardware(14)Not UsingEfficientAPI (52)Not UsingBatchAPI (18)InefficientAPIUsage (45)Buggy LibraryVersion (15)Mismatched LibraryVersion (9)InefficientDataPreprocessing (3)InefficientDataTransmission (12)ImproperDataInput (6)ConfusionwithComputationGraph (27)InefficientModelStructure (6)ImproperModelParameter (5)ImproperHyperParameter (12)HardwareandLibrary Mismatch (4)ImproperConfiguration (3)HardwareandCode Mismatch (7)PerformanceProblems(224)
Figure 2: Root Causes of PPs in DL Systems
The remaining 45 (20.1%) PPs belong to the Unknown category (de-
fined in Sec. 2.3). Notice that one PP can exhibit multiple symptoms.
Time. This category covers PPs exhibiting high time cost, which
accounts for the largest portion of PPs, i.e., 126 (56.3%). In particular,
99 (44.2%) of the PPs manifest Slow Execution Time during the exe-
cution of DL systems, including data preparation, model building,
training, evaluation, hyper parameter tuning, or prediction. Further,
16 (7.1%) of the PPs exhibit Increasing Time Over Time ; e.g., the pre-
diction time became longer and longer as the model ran3. Moreover,
6 (2.7%) of the PPs manifest Slow Initialization Time when DL sys-
tems are initialized before execution; e.g., it spent more than 80 sec-
onds to import TensorFlow4. DL systems can still work but slowly
when exhibiting the above symptoms. Differently, 8 (3.6%) of the PPs
result in Program Hang that makes DL systems cease to respond to
inputs, which is the most severe symptom.
Memory. This category includes PPs consuming RAM/GPU mem-
ory abnormally, accounting for 56 (25.0%) of the PPs. Specifically, Out
of Memory is the most common as well as the most severe symptom,
covering 37 (16.5%) of the PPs. Memory Leak , manifested in 16 (7.1%)
of the PPs, occurs when the memory usage keeps increasing, and may
finally lead to out of memory errors. Moreover, Abnormal GPU Mem-
ory Usage , i.e., either unexpectedly high or low GPU memory usage,
is exhibited in 5 (2.2%) of the PPs.
Processor. This category consists of PPs with abnormal CPU/GPU
utilization, which accounts for 16 (7.1%) of the PPs. In particular, Ab-
normal GPU Utilization , i.e., either unexpectedly high or low GPU uti-
lization, is manifested in 8 (3.6%) of the PPs. For example, the GPU uti-
lization was only around 15%, while the training time was slow (each
epoch took 40 to 50 seconds)5. Moreover, DL systems may Not Use
GPU, leading to no speedup than when running on CPU, which oc-
curs in 4 (1.8%) of the PPs. In addition, Abnormal CPU Utilization is
also exhibited in 4 (1.8%) of the PPs.
Summary. More than half of the PPs slow down DL systems, and
nearly one-third of the PPs consume either extremely low or high re-
sources like memory and processor. Such severe consequences of PPs
motivate the significance of PPs. Moreover, only four of the ten symp-
toms, as highlighted in dotted rectangles in Fig. 1, are shared with the
3https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60267911/
4https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49053434/
5https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56795642/existing symptom taxonomies for general DL bugs [ 28,87]. In other
words, symptoms of PPs are quite different from those of general DL
bugs, and the existing studies on general DL bugs only capture a par-
tial set of PPs, and thus PPs deserve a comprehensive investigation.
3.2 Root Cause Analysis (RQ2)
The taxonomy of PP root causes is reported in Fig. 2. It is grouped into
five high-level categories (i.e., API,Model ,Library ,Data andEnvi-
ronment ) and 15 inner categories.
API. This category covers PPs caused by library API misuses. This
is the most common category and accounts for 115 (51.3%) of the PPs.
Specifically, TensorFlow andKeras provide efficient APIs for achiev-
ing high performance, e.g., the tf.data API for building efficient in-
put pipelines, and various operation APIs for efficient computation.
However, developers often write their own implementation which is
often less efficient, but do Not Use the corresponding Efficient API di-
rectly, potentially due to the unfamiliarity with APIs. This causes 52
(23.2%) of the PPs. For example, a developer wrote a forloop to per-
form concatenation on a set of images, which could be efficiently
achieved by the mapAPI from tf.data.Dataset6. Moreover, Ten-
sorFlow andKeras provide various batch processing APIs for high
performance, e.g., data loading, training, evaluation or prediction in
a batch mode. However, developers might Not Use a Batch API , and
some even implement batch processing by themselves, which causes
18 (8.0%) of the PPs. For example, a developer loaded a large data set
into GPU memory all at once, causing an out of memory error7. The
flow_from_directory API in Keras can solve this PP by dynami-
cally loading a batch of data from the specified directory. Notice
that Not Using Batch API is a sub-category of Not Using Efficient API ,
and we treat it separately due to its high frequency. In the previous
two root causes, developers are mostly unaware of the efficient or
batch APIs. However, even when developers are aware of some
APIs, they might not fully understand their performance character-
istics, and write Inefficient API Usage , which causes 45 (20.1%) of the
PPs. Fig. 3 shows an example of inefficient API usage, where a devel-
oper called the mapAPI before the batch API, and did not pass the
num_parallel_calls argument to map8, leading to a long training
6https://stackoverflow.com/questions/63002205/
7https://stackoverflow.com/questions/59456128/
8https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53424152/Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
1-def _parser ( record ) :][3]
2+def _batch_parser ( record_batch ):
3- parsed = tf. parse_single_example ( record , _keys_to_map )
4+ parsed = tf. parse_example ( record_batch , _keys_to_map )
5 return parsed [ 'd'], parsed [ 's']
6
7 def init_tfrecord_dataset ():
8 files_train = glob . glob ( DIR_TFRECORDS + '*. tfrecord ')
9 random . shuffle ( files_train )
10
11 with tf. name_scope ( 'tfr_iterator '):
12 # define data from randomly ordered files
13 ds = tf. data . TFRecordDataset ( files_train )
14 # select elements randomly from the buffer
15 ds = ds. shuffle ( buffer_size =10000)
16 - # map them based on tfrecord format
17 - ds = ds. map( _parser )
18 # group elements in batch
19 ds = ds. batch ( BATCH_SIZE , drop_remainder = True )
20 + # map batches based on tfrecord format
21 + ds = ds. map( _batch_parser , num_parallel_calls =4)
22 # iterate infinitely
23 ds = ds. repeat ()
24
25 # initialize the iterator
26 return ds. make_initializable_iterator ()
Figure 3: Inefficient API Usage Before and After Fix
time. To speed up, mapshould be called after batch to reduce the
number of times the mapped function _batch_parser is called,
andnum_parallel_calls should be passed to enable parallelism.
Model. This category consists of PPs that are related to DL mod-
els, which is the second most common category, accounting for 50
(22.3%) of the PPs. In particular, developers may have Confusion with
Computation Graph because of the unfamiliarity with the program-
ming model in TensorFlow andKeras , which causes 27 (12.1%) of the
PPs. A typical confusion is with the programming model of Tensor-
Flow 1.x, which is to first build a dataflow computation graph and then
run it repeatedly with inputs being fed to and outputs being fetched
from the graph. Developers often mix the graph construction into the
graph execution. As a result, nodes are repeatedly added to the graph,
and the graph execution becomes slower and slower. An example9
is shown in Fig. 4, where Line 14–16 builds the graph and should be
moved out of the execution loop to Line 6–8. Another common con-
fusion is with the usage of session, which owns resources like queues
and variables. However, developers repeatedly create a session in the
graph execution loop without reusing, or forget to close the session.
The example in Fig. 4 also forgets to close the session, and the fix is
to use the session as a context manger at Line 11 that will automati-
cally close the session. A typical confusion in TensorFlow 2.x is with
the@tf.function decorator, which accelerates the decorated func-
tion by running it in graph mode instead of in eager mode. However,
developers often do not know where to add the decorator and how to
design the decorated function to get real speedup. Further, develop-
ers design an Inefficient Model Structure (e.g., missing convolution
and pooling layers before the flatten layer to have too many weights)
or set Improper Model Parameter (e.g., a large kernel size in a convo-
lution layer to cause a long training time). These two categories re-
spectively cause 6 (2.7%) and 5 (2.2%) of the PPs. Moreover, develop-
ers also set Improper Hyper Parameter , e.g., a large batch size to cause
an out of memory error or a small batch size to cause a long training
time. This category causes 12 (5.4%) of the PPs.
Library. This category refers to PPs caused by problems of DL li-
braries, accounting for 24 (10.7%) of the PPs. Specifically, 15 (6.7%) of
9https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53137115/1 inp = tf. constant ([[1. ,1.]])
2 out = tf. constant ([[1. ,0.]])
3 weight = tf. Variable ([[1. ,1.] , [1. ,1.]])
4
5 optimizer = tf. train . GradientDescentOptimizer (0.1)
6+ y = tf. matmul (inp , weight )
7+ loss = ( out [0][0] - y [0][0]) *2 + ( out [0][1] - y [0][1]) *2
8+ train = optimizer . minimize ( loss )
9
10 - sess = tf. Session ()
11 + with tf. Session () as sess :
12 sess . run (tf. global_variables_initializer ())
13 for epoch in range (1000) :
14 - y = tf. matmul (inp , weight )
15 - loss = ( out [0][0] - y [0][0]) *2 + ( out [0][1] - y [0][1]) *2
16 - sess . run ( optimizer . minimize ( loss ))
17 + sess . run ( train )
Figure 4: Graph Confusion Before and After Fix
the PPs are caused by Buggy Library Version ; i.e., DL systems them-
selves are correctly written, but trigger the PPs in DL libraries. For
example, repeated calls to model.predict (e.g., in a loop) resulted in
a memory leak10, due to a memory leak persisting across multiple
versions of TensorFlow11. These 15 PPs trigger the PPs in 12 dis-
tinctive APIs. It is non-trivial to detect such PPs as we do not have a
full list of APIs with PPs in each DL library version. Moreover, Mis-
matched Library Version causes 9 (4.0%) of the PPs, as version re-
strictions have to be satisfied for full GPU usage. For example, Ten-
sorFlow 1.x is not fully supported on CUDA 11.1, resulting in a
long time to start the training12.
Data. This category covers PPs related to data processing, ac-
counting for 21 (9.4%) of the PPs. Specifically, developers may write
Inefficient Data Transmission , e.g., loading input data over the net-
work during training but not directly copying them to the local
storage, or storing weight data in CPU which causes the weights
copied to GPU and the gradients copied back to CPU in each train-
ing iteration. This category accounts for 12 (5.4%) of the PPs. Fur-
ther, developers may implement Inefficient Data Preprocessing (e.g.,
lack of image normalization before changing an image to a tensor),
which causes 3 (1.3%) of the PPs. Moreover, Improper Input Data (e.g.,
improper data format or size that consumes excessive resources)
causes 6 (2.7%) of the PPs. For example, images with unnecessarily
high resolution were loaded, causing an out of memory error13.
Hardware. This category covers PPs related to hardware issues,
accounting for 14 (6.3%) of the PPs. Specifically, hardware may only
support part of the DL library versions, and hence Hardware and Li-
brary Mismatch causes 4 (1.8%) of the PPs. For example, a GPU with
compute capability 6.1 is not supported in TensorFlow 2.3 which
requires a GPU with compute capability 7.014. Further, to utilize the
full acceleration capability of TPU, DL systems often need specific
code design. Thus, Hardware and Code Mismatch causes 7 (3.1%) of
the PPs. For example, to use Colab TPU, a DL model need to be ex-
plicitly converted to a TPU compatible version; if not, the training
becomes extremely slow15. Moreover, hardware need proper config-
uration to achieve full utilization, especially for distributed training.
10https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60267911/
11https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/issues/34579/
12https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64462347/
13https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50742757/
14https://stackoverflow.com/questions/63602858/
15https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58670563/ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
(a) Introduced and Exposed PPs in Each Stage
 (b) Distance between Exposing Stage and Introducing Stage
Figure 5: The Exposing Stage and Introducing Stage of PPs and their Distance
(a) Symptoms of the PPs Exposed in Each Stage
 (b) Root Causes of the PPs Introduced in Each Stage
Figure 6: Correlation between Symptoms and Exposing Stages and between Root causes and Introducing Stages
Thus, Improper Configuration causes 3 (1.3%) of the PPs. For exam-
ple, the tf.distribute.Strategy API should be used to properly
configure and allocate multiple GPUs16.
Summary. About half of the PPs are introduced by API misuses.
Model, data and hardware, i.e., the enabling characteristics of DL
systems, introduce more than one-third of the PPs. DL libraries also in-
troduce one-tenth of the PPs. These diverse sources of root causes in-
crease the complexity of PP localization. Moreover, only seven of the
15 root causes, as shown in dotted rectangles in Fig. 2, are the same to
the previous root cause taxonomies for general DL bugs [ 27,28,87].
These differences owe to the fact that our study is focused on the per-
formance of DL systems, while the previous studies are mainly con-
centrated on the functionality of DL systems.
3.3 Stage Analysis (RQ3)
Islam et al. [ 28] classify the pipeline of DL systems into six stages, i.e.,
Data Preparation ,Model Building ,Training ,Evaluation ,Hyper Para-
meter Tuning andPrediction , in their study on general DL bugs. We con-
sider them as the execution stages of DL systems, and add two new
stages, found in our data labeling, before them. The first newly added
stage is Environment Setting , where DL environment like libraries
and hardware are installed and configured. The second one is Initial-
ization , where the DL system is initialized (e.g., importing libraries
and initializing parameters) before starting the execution stages.
16https://stackoverflow.com/questions/59074659/Fig. 5a reports the number of PPs introduced and exposed in each
stage, where the stage name on the 𝑥-axis is simplified to the initial
letters. Data preparation is the most bug-prone stage, which is blamed
in 88 (39.3%) of the PPs. Environment setting, model building and train-
ing are the second most bug-prone stages, respectively causing about
10% of the PPs. Hence, developers should pay more attention to these
stages to avoid the introduction of PPs, while automated PP local-
ization approaches should be specifically developed for these stages.
The other stages are less bug-prone, respectively introducing at most
5% of the PPs. On the other hand, training and data preparation are
the two most bug-affecting stages, where 96 (42.9%) and 40 (17.9%) of
the PPs are respectively exposed. Thus, developers should focus
more efforts on these two stages to optimize their performance,
while automated PP detection approaches should be specifically de-
veloped for these two stages. Around 7% of the PPs are respectively
exposed until the evaluation and prediction stages. The other stages
are less bug-affecting, respectively exposing at most 3% of the PPs.
Further, data preparation introduces more PPs than exposed. This
difference is more severe in the other two earlier pipeline stages, i.e.,
environment setting and model building. About 62% of the PPs are
introduced in the earlier four pipeline stages, about 61% of which are
exposed in the later four pipeline stages. The other way around, train-
ing exposes more PPs than introduced. This difference holds in the
other two later pipeline stages, i.e., evaluation and prediction. Nearly
61% of the PPs are exposed in the later four pipeline stages. Thus, PPs
should be proactively detected and localized before severe conse-
quences occur so as to reduce time cost and resource consumption.Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Besides, for each PP, we measure the distance between its exposing
stage and introducing stage, which is used as an indicator of the diffi-
culty of PP localization. Intuitively, the larger the distance, the more
difficult to localize a PP from its symptom to root cause. As shown in
Fig. 5b, 95 (42.4%) of the PPs are exposed and introduced in the same
stage, while 92 (41.1%) of the PPs cannot be exposed in the introduc-
ing stage. Specifically, 68 (30.4%) of the PPs are exposed two stages
later. Extremely, 4 (1.8%) of the PPs are exposed seven stages later; i.e.,
they are introduced in the first stage but exposed in the last stage.
Hence, PP localization is challenging for a considerable amount of PPs.
Moreover, we investigate the symptom distribution of the PPs ex-
posed in each stage, which is shown in Fig. 6a. This distribution helps
pinpoint the potentially useful performance indicators for detecting
PPs exposed in different stages. For example, time-related indicators
can be valuable to detect PPs exposed in initialization, data prepara-
tion and prediction, because the most common symptom of the PPs
exposed in these stages is under the category of Time . Similarly, we
report the root cause distribution of the PPs introduced in each stage
in Fig. 6b. This distribution helps hint the potential technical solu-
tions to localize PPs introduced in different stages. For example, the
most frequent root cause of the PPs introduced in most stages is
under the category of API, and hence API misuse detection could be
developed to localize PPs introduced in these stages.
Summary. The most bug-prone stages are data preparation, envi-
ronment setting, model building and training, which introduce nearly
70% of the PPs. The most bug-affecting stages are training and data
preparation, which expose around 60% of the PPs. Nearly 40% of the
PPs cannot be exposed in the introducing stage. Moreover, we intro-
duce two new stages that are not covered in the previous stage anal-
ysis for general DL bugs [ 28], and investigate the introducing and ex-
posing stages that are not distinguished in the previous study [ 28].
3.4 Approach Assessment (RQ4)
To the best of our knowledge, there is no PP detection and local-
ization approach for DL systems. Notice that performance analysis
approaches in [ 16,57] can estimate performance metrics (i.e., time
and GPU memory), but cannot directly pinpoint PPs. Based on their
estimation, either automated approaches need to be further de-
signed or developer experience need to be relied on to identify PPs.
Therefore, we do not use them. Thus, we select and assess the follow-
ing three typical performance analysis approaches, which can be used
by developers to improve the performance of DL systems.
•TensorFlow Profiler17: It is built on top of NVIDIA CUDA Profil-
ing Interface to track the performance of TensorFlow models. It
visualizes the time cost and resource consumption of various Ten-
sorFlow operations in the model, finds performance bottlenecks,
and recommends best practices to improve performance. Dif-
ferently, general python profiling tools (e.g., cProfile and mem-
ory_profiler) can only measure performance metrics, but cannot
directly pinpoint PPs. Therefore, we do not use them.
•XLA (Accelerated Linear Algebra)18: It is a domain-specific com-
piler that can accelerate TensorFlow models. Each TensorFlow
operation is executed by a precompiled GPU kernel implementa-
tion. XLA can compile the TensorFlow graph into a sequence of
17https://tensorflow.org/guide/profiler
18https://tensorflow.org/xlacomputation kernels generated specifically for the given model,
and fuse the kernels to avoid memory operations between the ex-
ecution of different kernels to improve the performance [39].
•TensorFlow Documentation: It includes all TensorFlow API doc-
umentation19and performance guide20where developers can find
hints about performance problems and optimization solutions.
Generally, we assess each technique in two dimensions: i) whether
a technique is applicable to a PP (or whether a PP is in the capability
scope of a technique), and ii) whether a technique can solve a PP. The
assessment results on our benchmark (see Sec. 2.4) are shown in the
last five columns in Table 1. The first six columns of Table 1 show the
number of reproduced PPs across root causes and symptoms, where
the number in parentheses is the total number of PPs. They cover all
root causes except for Mismatched Library Version and the three hard-
ware relevant root causes. They cover all high-level symptoms, but
achieve a relatively low coverage of processor relevant symptoms.
As shown in the seventh column of Table 1, TensorFlow Profiler
is only applicable to 15 (25.9%) PPs, but is not applicable to the others
for two reasons. First, TensorFlow Profiler requires a TensorFlow
version of at least 1.14. However, some PPs are reproduced with a
lower version. Second, TensorFlow Profiler requires a full training
or evaluation process to track the performance, which is not always
available for the PPs in our benchmark. Moreover, of these 15 PPs,
TensorFlow Profiler fails to finish profiling because of out of mem-
ory errors for 9 PPs, and does not raise any warning or raises a false
warning for 4 PPs. Hence, we consider these 13 PPs as not solved by
TensorFlow Profiler. For the remaining 2 PPs, TensorFlow Pro-
filer either raises a warning but suggests a fix that achieves a smaller
performance improvement than our fixed version in the benchmark,
or helps detect the PP by reporting the most time-consuming opera-
tion but fails to raise a warning and suggest a fix. Thus, we consider
these 2 PPs as partially solved by TensorFlow Profiler, as reported
in the eighth column of Table 1. These results demonstrate that Ten-
sorFlow Profiler has limited capability in tackling PPs.
As presented in the ninth column of Table 1, XLA is applicable to
24 (41.4%) PPs. There are two reasons that XLA is not applicable to
the others. First, XLA uses just-in-time (JIT) compilation. However,
compilation errors might occur for some PPs in our benchmark. Sec-
ond, XLA is designed for optimizing the performance of Tensor-
Flow models. Thus, it is not applicable to PPs whose root causes are
not related to TensorFlow operations or computation graphs. Fur-
thermore, of these 24 PPs, XLA only improves the performance for 4
PPs but still achieves a smaller performance improvement than our
fixed version in the benchmark. This is reasonable because XLA is
actually not aware of the PPs, but optimizes performance by fusing
nodes in computation graphs, while our fixed version reduces the
number of nodes in computation graphs. Hence, we consider these 4
PPs as partially solved by XLA, as reported in the tenth column of
Table 1. For the other 20 PPs, XLA does not have any performance
improvement because of the small number of nodes in computation
graphs. Thus, we consider these 20 PPs as not solved by XLA. These
results indicate that PPs in DL systems often cannot be eliminated
by the compilation optimization techniques in XLA.
19https://www.tensorflow.org/versions/r2.5/api_docs
20https://www.tensorflow.org/guideESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
Table 1: Benchmark PPs across Root Causes and Symptoms and Assessment Results
Root CauseSymptomTotalProfiler XLA Doc.
Time Memory Processor Unknown App. Par. App. Par. App.
API 18 (54) 4 (23) 0 (10) 10 (38) 32 (115) 6 1 17 3 9
Not Using Efficient API 8 (19) 0 (1) 0 (5) 10 (31) 17 (52) 1 1 14 3 2
Not Using Batch API 1 (6) 2 (9) 0 (1) 0 (2) 3 (18) 2 0 0 0 0
Inefficient API Usage 9 (29) 2 (13) 0 (4) 0 (5) 7 (45) 3 0 3 0 7
Model 10 (30) 7 (19) 0 (0) 2 (5) 17 (50) 8 1 7 1 2
Confusion with Computation Graph 7 (22) 2 (4) 0 (0) 1 (3) 9 (27) 2 0 6 1 0
Inefficient Model Structure 0 (2) 1 (2) 0 (0) 1 (2) 2 (6) 1 0 1 0 0
Improper Model Parameter 2 (2) 3 (4) 0 (0) 0 (0) 4 (5) 4 1 0 0 0
Improper Hyper Parameter 1 (4) 1 (9) 0 (0) 0 (0) 2 (12) 1 0 0 0 2
Library 4 (15) 4 (9) 0 (3) 0 (1) 6 (24) 0 0 0 0 0
Buggy Library Version 4 (8) 4 (8) 0 (0) 0 (1) 6 (15) 0 0 0 0 0
Mismatched Library Version 0 (7) 0 (1) 0 (3) 0 (0) 0 (9) – – – – –
Data 2 (14) 0 (4) 1 (3) 1 (1) 3 (21) 1 0 0 0 1
Inefficient Data Transmission 1 (10) 0 (1) 1 (2) 0 (0) 1 (12) 0 0 0 0 1
Inefficient Data Preprocessing 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (0) 1 (1) 1 (3) 1 0 0 0 0
Improper Data Input 1 (3) 0 (2) 0 (1) 0 (0) 1 (6) 0 0 0 0 0
Hardware 0 (13) 0 (1) 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 (14) – – – – –
Total 34 (126) 15 (56) 1 (16) 13 (45) 58 (224) 15 2 24 4 12
As shown in the last column of Table 1, TensorFlow documenta-
tion is only applicable to 12 (20.7%) PPs. We consider TensorFlow
documentation as applicable as long as the documentation mentions
the optimization solution of a PP. There are two main reasons that
TensorFlow documentation is applicable to a small portion of PPs.
The first is that performance characteristics, especially non-time
characteristics, are hardly described in API documentation. The sec-
ond is that many PPs are caused by inefficient usages of multiple
APIs, but API documentation is often focused on individual API us-
ages. Although performance guide covers usages of multiple APIs,
they only cover limited APIs such as tf.data . We consider these 12
PPs as solved by TensorFlow documentation. These results show
thatTensorFlow documentation provides limited support for PPs.
Summary. Efforts like profiling, compilation optimization and doc-
umentation have been devoted to optimizing the performance of DL
systems from different perspectives. However, they provide limited
capability in tackling PPs, potentially due to the lack of a compre-
hensive understanding of PPs in DL systems.
4 IMPLICATION, APPLICATION AND
THREAT
We discuss the implications for developers and researchers, demon-
strate one application to PP detection, and discuss the threats.
4.1 Implications
Developers. Our study reveals the common symptoms of PPs that
developers could pay attention to when testing and running their DL
systems for detecting potential PPs. Our study also identifies the com-
mon root causes of PPs that can be useful for developers to diagnose,
debug or fix PPs. Our study also captures the most bug-prone or bug-
affecting stages where developers could focus more efforts on to pro-
vide the most benefit for PP introduction avoidance or performance
optimization. Furthermore, our findings provide some development
suggestions. Developers should carefully read the release note andAPI documentation of DL libraries to get familiar with the rich set of
library APIs and their performance characteristics. In this way, PPs
caused by the most common root cause (i.e., API misuses) might be
reduced. Developers should also be systematically trained to have a
comprehensive understanding of computation graph to build effi-
cient DL models. In this way, PPs caused by the second most com-
mon root cause (i.e., model construction) might be reduced.
Researchers. Our findings provide several implications on fu-
ture research in three directions. First, intelligent techniques for high-
performance DL system development are needed. As developers are of-
ten unaware of library APIs that are specifically designed for high per-
formance or unaware of the performance characteristics of library APIs,
DL library API recommendation methods should be developed. To re-
alize performance-aware API recommendation, a knowledge graph
of DL library APIs should be constructed based on release note, API
documentation and StackOverflow discussions with a specific focus
on modeling performance characteristics of APIs and performance
differences across library versions. To locate and replace inefficient
code snippets written from scratch by developers, semantic analysis
techniques should be developed to determine their semantic similar-
ity to existing library APIs. Apart from such intelligent techniques at
the code level, recommendation techniques should be developed to
automatically suggest DL library versions, efficient DL models and
their parameters, and environment configurations.
Second, PP detection techniques are needed. Half of the symptoms
(i.e., Increasing Time Over Time ,Program Hang ,Out of Memory ,Mem-
ory Leak , and Not Using GPU ) can be regarded as a credible oracle for
detecting PPs in DL systems. Therefore, proactive monitoring and
prediction techniques should be developed to detect PPs as early as
possible before these severe symptoms occur. DL systems exhibiting
the other symptoms are not guaranteed to contain PPs as it is often
not clear how much time or resources a DL system should consume
to run without a PP. To solve this performance oracle problem, one
potential way is to design differential testing techniques to compare
the performance of DL systems running with different DL libraries,Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
different DL models, or different hardware configurations. However,
it may incur too much overhead. Hence, another potential way is to
design static techniques to model and estimate time cost or resource
consumption of DL systems so that performance bottlenecks can be
identified in advance before execution. During our manual analysis,
we find that TensorFlow has some built-in mechanism in detecting
PPs and recommending fixes by throwing a warning message, e.g.,
“WARNING: tensorflow: multiprocessing can interact badly with Ten-
sorFlow, causing nondeterministic deadlocks. For high performance
data pipelines tf.data is recommended ”. However, such warning mes-
sages are only raised in 3 of the PPs, indicating the preliminary
support in PP detection due to symptom and root cause diversity.
Hence, built-in mechanisms in DL libraries should be further en-
hanced to detect PPs and recommend fixes.
Third, PP localization techniques are needed. Our study reveals that
the exposing stage of a PP is usually not the introducing stage. For
example, the location that throws the error message of an out of mem-
ory error is usually not the location of the root cause. Therefore, it is
often challenging to localize PPs. During our manual analysis, we
find that developers often use logs as the clue to locate PPs. Hence,
automated log analysis techniques should be developed to smartly
insert log statements into DL systems and locate potential PPs using
log traces. Further, as API misuse is the most common root cause of
PPs, mining techniques should be designed to learn frequent API us-
age sequences and localize potential violations in DL systems. API
usage mining has been widely explored in traditional systems [ 59],
but it is interesting to investigate how they are applicable to PPs
in DL systems. From our experience, there are three challenges to
detect API-related PPs. First, due to the lack of effective type in-
ference tool in Python, it is hard to precisely extract API usages
from Python code. Second, as traditional API usage mining is not
aware of performance characteristics of APIs, it is non-trivial to au-
tomatically determine the performance difference among mined
API sequences. Third, it is difficult to detect PPs caused by Not
Using Efficient APIs , because the inefficient APIs that developers
use are totally different from efficient APIs that should be used.
Last but not the least, rule-based techniques should be developed to
detect and localize PPs, considering the potentially large amount of
PPs on StackOverflow or GitHub. The challenge is to automatically
derive but not manually specify the rules.
4.2 Application
To demonstrate the usefulness of our findings, we implement a rule-
based static checker, named DeepPerf , to detect PPs in DL systems.
DeepPerf is implemented with two static analysis tools, AST21and
Jedi22. It currently supports three types of PPs whose detection rules
are manually derived from our empirical study (Sec. 3).
Checker 1: Repeated Node Creation. Creating the same nodes
repeatedly to a computation graph is one of the common types of PPs
under the root cause category of Confusion with Computation Graph .
DeepPerf is designed to detect node creation APIs that are called in
loops with the same argument values; e.g., the two APIs tf.matmul
andoptimizer.minimize in Fig. 4. Actually, it is similar to Loop In-
variant Computation and Code Motion (LICM) optimization, which
21https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html
22https://github.com/davidhalter/jedi/Table 2: PP Detection Results of DeepPerf
CheckerDetected Confirmed Fixed
PP Proj. FP PP Proj. PP Proj.
Checker 1 77 49 15 20 14 7 4
Checker 2 195 68 0 52 18 0 0
Checker 3 216 66 0 33 18 20 10
Total 488 130 15 105 44 27 13
has been well studied in classic compilers [ 3]. However, Grappler23,
the default graph optimizer in TensorFlow runtime, cannot elimi-
nate this type of PPs although it has the loop optimizer. Notice that
this type of PP has been reported in [ 87]. However, to the best of
knowledge, its detection has not been investigated in prior studies
To implement the checker, we first extract TensorFlow APIs that
may add computation graph nodes by parsing the @tf_export dec-
orators in the source code of TensorFlow Python APIs24. Then, we
manually review these APIs to exclude APIs that actually do not add
nodes (e.g., tf.assign ) or APIs that produce different values given the
same inputs (e.g., tf.random.uniform ). Finally, we obtain 356 APIs.
Our checker determines whether these 356 APIs are called with
same argument values among loop iterations. To this end, it tracks
variables that are changed among loop iterations, including the
loop control variable, variables that are assigned in the loop body
but are defined outside the loop, and any variables that depend
on them. It identifies APIs called without using changed variables
as arguments as PPs. Our analysis is inter-procedural. If there are
functions called in the loop, it passes changed variables to callee
functions, analyzes changed variables in callee functions, and iden-
tifies APIs called without using changed variables as arguments in
callee functions.
Checker 2: Inefficient Order of batch and map.As showed in
Fig. 3, calling mapbefore batch is not efficient, and hence batch is
suggested to be called before mapto reduce the number of times the
mapped function is called. To detect such API misuse of batch and
map, our checker first identifies tf.Dataset object, and then ana-
lyzes the call sites to check whether batch is called after map.
Checker 3: Disabled Parallelism of mapand interleave .As
listed in Fig. 3, calling mapwithout setting its num_parallel_calls
argument disables parallelism. It also holds for interleave . To de-
tect such API misuse of mapandinterleave , our checker identifies
tf.Dataset object, and analyzes the call sites to check whether map
andinterleave are called without setting num_parallel_calls .
Evaluation on Our Benchmark. In our PP benchmark, four, two
and two PPs belong to the PP types targeted by the three checkers.
Three, two and two of them were successfully detected by the three
checkers. The only one false negative of Checker 1 is caused by the
incomplete type inference in Jedi. As reported in Sec. 3.4, Tensor-
Flow Profiler is not applicable to these eight PPs. XLA is applicable
to four, one and one of them, but fails to solve them. TensorFlow
Documentation is applicable to zero, two and two of them by only
hinting the solution in API documentation or performance guide.
Evaluation on GitHub Projects. We used PyGitHub25to crawl
1,108 GitHub repositories that used TensorFlow and Python and
23https://tensorflow.org/guide/graph_optimization
24https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/tree/r1.15/tensorflow/python/ops
25https://github.com/PyGithub/PyGithubESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
had at least 100 stars, and ran DeepPerf on these repositories. We re-
ported detected PPs as issues to developers, and also manually re-
viewed and verified all the detected PPs. As TensorFlow Profiler
and XLA are dynamic analysis tools, it is difficult for us to properly
configure and execute 1,108 GitHub repositories. TensorFlow Doc-
umentation only provides guidance but is not a tool. Thus, we did
not compare our checkers with them in this large-scale evaluation.
The results are shown in Table 2, where the statistics about detected,
confirmed and fixed PPs are reported for each checker.
Specifically, Checker 1 detected 77 PPs in 49 projects. It detected
15 false positives (i.e., the fourth column in Table 2). The reason is
that we use lightweight heuristics to decide loop invariants based on
AST and Jedi, but do not use heavyweight data/control flow analy-
sis, for the scalability of our checker. 20 PPs in 14 projects have been
confirmed by developers, and 7 of them in 4 projects have been fixed.
Checker 2 detected 195 PPs in 68 projects with no false positive. 52
PPs in 18 projects have been confirmed by developers, but none of
them has been fixed. The reason is that the fix requires extra effort in
vectorizing the mapped function (e.g., the _batch_parser function
in Fig. 3), which is non-trivial. In that sense, automated vectoriza-
tion is required in TensorFlow , like auto-vectorization in LLVM26.
Checker 3 detected 216 PPs in 66 projects with no false positive. 33
PPs in 18 projects have been confirmed by developers, while 20 of
them in 10 projects have already been fixed. The projects that have
confirmed/fixed our detected PPs include popular ones like Keras ,
TensorFlow Agents ,TensorFlow Hub andTensorforce . Be-
sides, we randomly sampled 5 PPs from the 7 and 20 fixed PPs for
Check 1 andChecker 3 respectively, and measured the execution
time of the buggy and fixed version. On average, the execution time
was improved by 35.6% and 20.4% after fixing PPs, respectively.
Summary. PP is a widespread problem in DL systems, and rule-
based PP detection is promising. The three checkers in DeepPerf
detected 488 PPs in 130 projects with 15 false positives. 105 PPs in
44 projects have been confirmed by developers, while 27 of them
in 13 projects have been fixed by developers.
4.3 Threats
We discuss the threats to our empirical study, PP benchmark, and de-
tection approach. Our study investigates PPs in DL systems written
with TensorFlow andKeras . Thus, it is not clear whether our find-
ings can generalize to DL systems developed with other DL libraries
likePyTorch . We believe it deserves a separate study to investigate
differences across DL libraries. Further, our study analyzes PPs from
StackOverflow posts. However, GitHub is another valuable source of
PPs. It is interesting to further explore PPs from GitHub to strength
our findings, which in fact requires large manual efforts as we spent
six person-months to analyze 224 PPs. Our PP detection results on
GitHub projects also indicate the potential applicability of our find-
ings. Moreover, our study involves manual analysis on PPs, which
may incur biases. To reduce them, two of the authors separately ana-
lyzed PPs and a third author was involved to resolve disagreements.
Our benchmark consists of 58 PPs, whose size, to be honest, is not
very large. However, considering the large human efforts involved in
constructing the benchmark, we believe it is acceptable. We are still
26https://www.llvm.org/docs/Vectorizers.html#slp-vectorizercontinuously enlarging our benchmark via reproducing those non-
sampled PPs from the 224 PPs and collecting PPs from GitHub.
Our rule-based static checker, DeepPerf , currently only supports
three types of PPs. Here, DeepPerf is not designed to cover all type
of PPs, but to demonstrate the potential of rule-based PP detection
as well as the usefulness of our findings. We plan to manually enrich
the detection rules in DeepPerf to support more PP types. In the
long run, we hope to automatically learn the detection rules.
5 RELATED WORK
We discuss the closely related work in understanding and analyzing
deep learning bugs and performance problems.
5.1 Deep Learning Bugs
The recent success in applying deep learning techniques to a variety
of domains has gained increasing interest in understanding charac-
teristics of bugs in deep learning systems. Zhang et al. [ 87] collected
175 bugs in deep learning systems developed in TensorFlow from
StackOverflow posts and GitHub commits. They analyzed the symp-
toms and root causes of these bugs, and explored the challenges and
strategies in bug detection and localization. Islam et al. [ 28] and Hum-
batova et al. [ 27] expanded the scope of Zhang et al.’s study to in-
clude more deep learning libraries. Islam et al. [ 28] analyzed types,
root causes, impacts and pipeline stages of 970 bugs in deep learning
systems written in Caffe ,Keras ,TensorFlow ,Theano andTorch ,
while Humbatova et al. [ 27] constructed a taxonomy of bugs in deep
learning systems that use TensorFlow ,Keras andPyTorch based
on manual analysis of 375 bugs and interviews with 20 developers.
In their follow-up work, Islam et al. [ 29] analyzed bug fix patterns.
Kim et al. [ 35] built a benchmark of 4,577 bugs from 193 deep learn-
ing systems. Differently, Jia et al. [ 30] explored the symptoms, root
causes and locations of 202 bugs in the TensorFlow library.
Apart from the studies that are focused on a general scope of bugs
in deep learning systems, several recent studies have targeted more
specific bugs. Zhang et al. [ 83] studied failures of deep learning jobs
that are running on a remote, shared platform in Microsoft. Chen et
al. [8] investigated faults related to the deployment of deep learn-
ing models to mobile devices. Zhang et al. [ 86] summarized five
common training problems in deep learning systems, and devel-
oped a tool to automatically detect and repair training problems.
Wan et al. [ 69] studied API misuses when deep learning systems use
cloud AI services, summarized eight misuse patterns, and developed
static checkers to automatically detect some of the misuse patterns.
Huang et al. [26] explored dependency bugs across the DL stack.
Some of these studies reveal some partial characteristics of per-
formance problems in deep learning systems. For example, Zhang
et al. [ 87] and Islam et al. [ 28] respectively recognized low efficiency
and hang as a symptom of deep learning bugs. Zhang et al. [ 83] iden-
tified GPU out of memory as a failure category of deep learning jobs.
Chen et al. [ 8] recognized memory and speed issues as two types of
faults in the inference stage of deployment process. Wan et al. [ 69] de-
rived four performance-related API misuse patterns of cloud AI ser-
vices. Despite these efforts, there still lacks a comprehensive study to
understand characteristics of performance problems in deep learn-
ing systems, and thus our study aims to bridge this knowledge gap
and raise the awareness of performance problems in DL systems.Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Besides, some studies have explored general problems and chal-
lenges in developing and deploying deep learning systems. For ex-
ample, Guo et al. [ 19] measured the accuracy and performance dif-
ferences across four deep learning libraries. Zhang et al. [ 84] identi-
fied seven kinds of frequently asked deep learning questions in Stack-
Overflow, and analyzed their resolution difficulty and root causes.
Han et al. [ 21] explored the topics that developers discuss when de-
veloping deep learning systems. Chen et al. [ 7] built a taxonomy of
challenges in deploying deep learning systems to different platforms
through manual analysis of StackOverflow posts. Pham et al. [ 56]
measured accuracy variance in training deep learning systems. Cum-
maudo et al. [ 11] studied pain-points that developers face when us-
ing cloud services of computer vision by mining StackOverflow posts.
Although these studies are not designed for deep learning bugs, they
shed light on debugging and bug detection in deep learning systems.
Specifically, Guo et al. [ 19] reported performance differences in terms
of time cost and memory consumption when trained deep learning
models are migrated or quantized to different mobile devices and web
browsers, and called for performance optimization and testing tech-
niques. Zhang et al. [ 84] summarized performance as a category of
frequently asked deep learning questions in StackOverflow, and rec-
ognized that performance questions are the most difficult to answer.
Our study is inspired by these studies to systematically characterize
performance problems in deep learning systems.
Moreover, some advances have been made to detect deep learning
bugs. For example, Zhang et al. [ 88] developed a static analysis ap-
proach to detect numerical bugs in neural architectures based on ab-
stract interpretation. Lagouvardos et al. [ 36] proposed a static analy-
sis to detect shape incompatibility errors in TensorFlow programs,
while Verma and Su [ 68] proposed a dynamic abstract interpreter to
catch such errors. Wardat et al. [ 73] developed a dynamic analysis
approach to locate faults in deep neural networks. In addition, great
efforts have been devoted to testing deep learning systems (e.g., [ 34,
44,52,53,65,66,75]) and deep learning libraries (e.g., [ 20,47,55,71,
72,85]) for quality assurance. Zhang et al. [ 82] presented a compre-
hensive survey of work in this direction. However, little attention
has been received to detecting and testing performance problems
in deep learning systems, and our study sheds light on this area.
5.2 Performance Problems
Many empirical studies have characterized performance problems from
different perspectives (e.g., root causes, discovery, diagnosis, fixing
and reporting) for desktop or server applications [ 31,50,63,80,89],
highly configurable systems [ 24,25], mobile applications [ 40,42],
database-backed web applications [ 78,79], and JavaScript systems
[60]. They shed light on potential directions on performance analy-
sis (e.g., detection, profiling and testing). Our study is the first to un-
derstand performance problems in deep learning systems, which dif-
fers from traditional systems on the programming paradigm.
Advances (e.g., [ 2,9,12,22]) have been made to identify general
performance problems with dynamic profiles from production runs.
A large body of work has designed pattern-based methods to detect
specific performance problems, e.g., reusable/cacheable data (e.g., [ 5,
13,48]), inefficient/redundant loops (e.g., [ 14,49,51,64]), and ineffi-
cient collections (e.g., [ 32,61,76]). Besides, a lot of techniques have
been proposed for performance testing, i.e., generating test cases totrigger worst-case performance (e.g., [ 6,38,43,54,74]) and find per-
formance problems (e.g., [ 18,62,67]). Another line of work is perfor-
mance profiling technique to identify hot paths (e.g., [ 4,15,37]) and
fit a performance model to the input size (e.g., [ 10,17,81]). These
performance analysis approaches are designed for traditional sys-
tems, and cannot be directly applied to deep learning systems.
Recently, some performance analysis approaches have been pro-
posed for deep learning systems. For example, Qi et al. [ 57] modeled
and estimated time cost of training deep neural networks, while Gao
et al. [ 16] estimated GPU memory consumption. Such estimation
techniques are useful to find potential performance problems in ad-
vance. Liu et al. [ 41] measured the performance of training deep learn-
ing models on mobile devices, while Ma et al. [ 45] compared time
cost of JavaScript-based deep learning libraries when running deep
learning tasks in browsers. These studies empirically demonstrate
the performance differences. To reduce memory usage of deep neu-
ral networks, Rhu et al. [ 58] developed a dynamic memory manager
to virtualize memory usage, while Wang et al. [70] proposed a dy-
namic GPU memory scheduler. To make deep learning models effi-
cient, Han et al. [ 23] used pruning and quantization to compress
models, Yan et al. [ 77] used a performance model to estimate the
time of distributed model training and find the optimal distributed
configuration, and Menghani [ 46] presented a survey in this area.
These approaches are system-level performance optimization tech-
niques, while DeepPerf is at the source code level. Despite these
efforts, the characteristics of performance problems in deep learn-
ing systems are still unclear, and our study fills this gap.
6 CONCLUSIONS
We present the first comprehensive study to characterize PPs in DL
systems written in TensorFLow andKeras , and build the first bench-
mark of PPs in DL systems to assess existing approaches in tackling
them. Further, we develop a static checker DeepPerf to detect three
types of PPs, and detect many new PPs in GitHub projects.
7 DATA-AVAILABLITY STATEMENT
All the study data and source code of DeepPerf are available at
[33] to foster future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (2021ZD0112903).
REFERENCES
[1]Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall,
Ece Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan, Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann.
2019. Software engineering for machine learning: A case study. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice . 291–300.
[2]Glenn Ammons, Jong-Deok Choi, Manish Gupta, and Nikhil Swamy. 2004. Finding
and removing performance bottlenecks in large systems. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming . 172–196.
[3]David F. Bacon, Susan L. Graham, and Oliver J. Sharp. 1994. Compiler Trans-
formations for High-Performance Computing. ACM Comput. Surv. 26, 4 (1994),
345–420.
[4]Thomas Ball and James R Larus. 1996. Efficient path profiling. In Proceedings of
the 29th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 46–57.
[5]Suparna Bhattacharya, Mangala Gowri Nanda, Kanchi Gopinath, and Manish
Gupta. 2011. Reuse, recycle to de-bloat software. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming . 408–432.ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen, Chao Sun, Longjie Hu, Shuaihong Wu, and Xin Peng
[6]Jacob Burnim, Sudeep Juvekar, and Koushik Sen. 2009. WISE: Automated test
generation for worst-case complexity. In Proceedings of the IEEE 31st International
Conference on Software Engineering . 463–473.
[7]Zhenpeng Chen, Yanbin Cao, Yuanqiang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Tao Xie, and Xuanzhe
Liu. 2020. A comprehensive study on challenges in deploying deep learning based
software. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering .
750–762.
[8]Zhenpeng Chen, Huihan Yao, Yiling Lou, Yanbin Cao, Yuanqiang Liu, Haoyu
Wang, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2021. An empirical study on deployment faults of
deep learning based mobile applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering . 674–685.
[9]Jürgen Cito, Philipp Leitner, Martin Rinard, and Harald C Gall. 2019. Interactive
production performance feedback in the IDE. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
41st International Conference on Software Engineering . 971–981.
[10] Emilio Coppa, Camil Demetrescu, and Irene Finocchi. 2012. Input-Sensitive
Profiling. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation . 89–98.
[11] Alex Cummaudo, Rajesh Vasa, Scott Barnett, John Grundy, and Mohamed Abdel-
razek. 2020. Interpreting Cloud Computer Vision Pain-Points: A Mining Study
of Stack Overflow. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference
on Software Engineering . 1584–1596.
[12] Charlie Curtsinger and Emery D Berger. 2015. Coz: Finding code that counts
with causal profiling. In Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles . 184–197.
[13] Luca Della Toffola, Michael Pradel, and Thomas R. Gross. 2015. Performance
Problems You Can Fix: A Dynamic Analysis of Memoization Opportunities. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications . 607–622.
[14] Monika Dhok and Murali Krishna Ramanathan. 2016. Directed test generation to
detect loop inefficiencies. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering . 895–907.
[15] Evelyn Duesterwald and Vasanth Bala. 2000. Software Profiling for Hot Path
Prediction: Less is More. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems .
202–211.
[16] Yanjie Gao, Yu Liu, Hongyu Zhang, Zhengxian Li, Yonghao Zhu, Haoxiang Lin,
and Mao Yang. 2020. Estimating gpu memory consumption of deep learning
models. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering .
1342–1352.
[17] Simon F Goldsmith, Alex S Aiken, and Daniel S Wilkerson. 2007. Measuring
empirical computational complexity. In Proceedings of the the 6th joint meeting of
the European software engineering conference and the ACM SIGSOFT symposium
on The foundations of software engineering . 395–404.
[18] Mark Grechanik, Chen Fu, and Qing Xie. 2012. Automatically finding performance
problems with feedback-directed learning software testing. In Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Software Engineering . 156–166.
[19] Qianyu Guo, Sen Chen, Xiaofei Xie, Lei Ma, Qiang Hu, Hongtao Liu, Yang Liu,
Jianjun Zhao, and Xiaohong Li. 2019. An empirical study towards character-
izing deep learning development and deployment across different frameworks
and platforms. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering . 810–822.
[20] Qianyu Guo, Xiaofei Xie, Yi Li, Xiaoyu Zhang, Yang Liu, Xiaohong Li, and Chao
Shen. 2020. Audee: Automated testing for deep learning frameworks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering . 486–498.
[21] Junxiao Han, Emad Shihab, Zhiyuan Wan, Shuiguang Deng, and Xin Xia. 2020.
What do programmers discuss about deep learning frameworks. Empirical Soft-
ware Engineering 25, 4 (2020), 2694–2747.
[22] Shi Han, Yingnong Dang, Song Ge, Dongmei Zhang, and Tao Xie. 2012. Perfor-
mance debugging in the large via mining millions of stack traces. In Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Software Engineering . 145–155.
[23] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. 2016. Deep Compression: Compress-
ing Deep Neural Network with Pruning, Trained Quantization and Huffman
Coding. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
[24] Xue Han and Tingting Yu. 2016. An empirical study on performance bugs
for highly configurable software systems. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement .
1–10.
[25] Haochen He, Zhouyang Jia, Shanshan Li, Erci Xu, Tingting Yu, Yue Yu, Ji Wang,
and Xiangke Liao. 2020. CP-detector: using configuration-related performance
properties to expose performance bugs. In Proceedings of 35th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 623–634.
[26] Kaifeng Huang, Bihuan Chen, Susheng Wu, Junmin Cao, Lei Ma, and Xin
Peng. 2022. Demystifying Dependency Bugs in Deep Learning Stack. CoRRabs/2207.10347 (2022).
[27] Nargiz Humbatova, Gunel Jahangirova, Gabriele Bavota, Vincenzo Riccio, Andrea
Stocco, and Paolo Tonella. 2020. Taxonomy of real faults in deep learning sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software
Engineering . 1110–1121.
[28] Md Johirul Islam, Giang Nguyen, Rangeet Pan, and Hridesh Rajan. 2019. A
Comprehensive Study on Deep Learning Bug Characteristics. In Proceedings of
the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 510–520.
[29] Md Johirul Islam, Rangeet Pan, Giang Nguyen, and Hridesh Rajan. 2020. Repairing
deep neural networks: Fix patterns and challenges. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
42nd International Conference on Software Engineering . 1135–1146.
[30] Li Jia, Hao Zhong, Xiaoyin Wang, Linpeng Huang, and Xuansheng Lu. 2020. An
Empirical Study on Bugs Inside TensorFlow. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Database Systems for Advanced Applications . 604–620.
[31] Guoliang Jin, Linhai Song, Xiaoming Shi, Joel Scherpelz, and Shan Lu. 2012. Un-
derstanding and Detecting Real-World Performance Bugs. In Proceedings of the
33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implemen-
tation . 77–88.
[32] Changhee Jung, Silvius Rus, Brian P. Railing, Nathan Clark, and Santosh Pande.
2011. Brainy: Effective Selection of Data Structures. In Proceedings of the 32nd
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation .
86–97.
[33] Chao Sun Longjie Hu Shuaihong Wu Xin Peng Junming Cao, Bihuan Chen.
2022. Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems. Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7060209
[34] Jinhan Kim, Robert Feldt, and Shin Yoo. 2019. Guiding deep learning system
testing using surprise adequacy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering . 1039–1049.
[35] Misoo Kim, Youngkyoung Kim, and Eunseok Lee. 2021. Denchmark: A Bug
Benchmark of Deep Learning-related Software. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
18th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories . 540–544.
[36] Sifis Lagouvardos, Julian Dolby, Neville Grech, Anastasios Antoniadis, and Yan-
nis Smaragdakis. 2020. Static analysis of shape in TensorFlow programs. In
Proceedings of the 34th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming .
1–29.
[37] James R. Larus. 1999. Whole Program Paths. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN
1999 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation . 259–269.
[38] Caroline Lemieux, Rohan Padhye, Koushik Sen, and Dawn Song. 2018. Perffuzz:
Automatically generating pathological inputs. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 254–265.
[39] Mingzhen Li, Yi Liu, Xiaoyan Liu, Qingxiao Sun, Xin You, Hailong Yang, Zhongzhi
Luan, Lin Gan, Guangwen Yang, and Depei Qian. 2021. The Deep Learning
Compiler: A Comprehensive Survey. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems 32, 3 (2021), 708–727.
[40] Mario Linares-Vasquez, Christopher Vendome, Qi Luo, and Denys Poshyvanyk.
2015. How developers detect and fix performance bottlenecks in android apps.
InProceedings of the IEEE international conference on software maintenance and
evolution . 352–361.
[41] Jie Liu, Jiawen Liu, Wan Du, and Dong Li. 2019. Performance analysis and
characterization of training deep learning models on mobile device. In Proceedings
of the IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems . 506–
515.
[42] Yepang Liu, Chang Xu, and Shing-Chi Cheung. 2014. Characterizing and detect-
ing performance bugs for smartphone applications. In Proceedings of the 36th
international conference on software engineering . 1013–1024.
[43] Kasper Luckow, Rody Kersten, and Corina Păsăreanu. 2017. Symbolic com-
plexity analysis using context-preserving histories. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation . 58–68.
[44] Lei Ma, Felix Juefei-Xu, Fuyuan Zhang, Jiyuan Sun, Minhui Xue, Bo Li, Chun-
yang Chen, Ting Su, Li Li, Yang Liu, et al .2018. Deepgauge: Multi-granularity
testing criteria for deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 120–131.
[45] Yun Ma, Dongwei Xiang, Shuyu Zheng, Deyu Tian, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2019.
Moving deep learning into web browser: How far can we go?. In Proceedings of
the World Wide Web Conference . 1234–1244.
[46] Gaurav Menghani. 2021. Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep
Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better. CoRR abs/2106.08962 (2021).
[47] Mahdi Nejadgholi and Jinqiu Yang. 2019. A study of oracle approximations in
testing deep learning libraries. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering . 785–796.
[48] Khanh Nguyen and Guoqing Xu. 2013. Cachetor: Detecting cacheable data to
remove bloat. In Proceedings of the 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering . 268–278.
[49] Adrian Nistor, Po-Chun Chang, Cosmin Radoi, and Shan Lu. 2015. Caramel:
Detecting and fixing performance problems that have non-intrusive fixes. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software
Engineering . 902–912.Understanding Performance Problems in Deep Learning Systems ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
[50] Adrian Nistor, Tian Jiang, and Lin Tan. 2013. Discovering, reporting, and fixing
performance bugs. In Proceedings of the 10th working conference on mining software
repositories . 237–246.
[51] Adrian Nistor, Linhai Song, Darko Marinov, and Shan Lu. 2013. Toddler: Detecting
performance problems via similar memory-access patterns. In Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Software Engineering . 562–571.
[52] Augustus Odena, Catherine Olsson, David Andersen, and Ian Goodfellow. 2019.
Tensorfuzz: Debugging neural networks with coverage-guided fuzzing. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning . 4901–4911.
[53] Kexin Pei, Yinzhi Cao, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana. 2017. Deepxplore: Au-
tomated whitebox testing of deep learning systems. In proceedings of the 26th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . 1–18.
[54] Theofilos Petsios, Jason Zhao, Angelos D Keromytis, and Suman Jana. 2017.
Slowfuzz: Automated domain-independent detection of algorithmic complexity
vulnerabilities. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security . 2155–2168.
[55] Hung Viet Pham, Thibaud Lutellier, Weizhen Qi, and Lin Tan. 2019. CRADLE:
cross-backend validation to detect and localize bugs in deep learning libraries. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering .
1027–1038.
[56] Hung Viet Pham, Shangshu Qian, Jiannan Wang, Thibaud Lutellier, Jonathan
Rosenthal, Lin Tan, Yaoliang Yu, and Nachiappan Nagappan. 2020. Problems and
opportunities in training deep learning software systems: an analysis of vari-
ance. In Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering . 771–783.
[57] Hang Qi, Evan R Sparks, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2016. Paleo: A performance
model for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Learning Representations .
[58] Minsoo Rhu, Natalia Gimelshein, Jason Clemons, Arslan Zulfiqar, and Stephen W
Keckler. 2016. vDNN: Virtualized deep neural networks for scalable, memory-
efficient neural network design. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 1–13.
[59] Martin P Robillard, Eric Bodden, David Kawrykow, Mira Mezini, and Tristan
Ratchford. 2012. Automated API property inference techniques. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 39, 5 (2012), 613–637.
[60] Marija Selakovic and Michael Pradel. 2016. Performance issues and optimizations
in javascript: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
on Software Engineering . 61–72.
[61] Ohad Shacham, Martin Vechev, and Eran Yahav. 2009. Chameleon: Adaptive
Selection of Collections. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation . 408–418.
[62] Du Shen, Qi Luo, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Mark Grechanik. 2015. Automating
performance bottleneck detection using search-based application profiling. In
Proceedings of the 2015 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis .
270–281.
[63] Linhai Song and Shan Lu. 2014. Statistical Debugging for Real-World Performance
Problems. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Conference on Object
Oriented Programming Systems Languages & Applications . 561–578.
[64] Linhai Song and Shan Lu. 2017. Performance diagnosis for inefficient loops. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering .
370–380.
[65] Youcheng Sun, Min Wu, Wenjie Ruan, Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska, and
Daniel Kroening. 2018. Concolic testing for deep neural networks. In Proceedings
of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering .
109–119.
[66] Yuchi Tian, Kexin Pei, Suman Jana, and Baishakhi Ray. 2018. Deeptest: Automated
testing of deep-neural-network-driven autonomous cars. In Proceedings of the
40th international conference on software engineering . 303–314.
[67] Saeid Tizpaz-Niari, Pavol Čern `y, and Ashutosh Trivedi. 2020. Detecting and
understanding real-world differential performance bugs in machine learning
libraries. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis . 189–199.
[68] Sahil Verma and Zhendong Su. 2020. ShapeFlow: Dynamic Shape Interpreter for
TensorFlow. CoRR abs/2011.13452 (2020).
[69] Chengcheng Wan, Shicheng Liu, Henry Hoffmann, Michael Maire, and Shan Lu.
2021. Are Machine Learning Cloud APIs Used Correctly?. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering . 125–137.
[70] Linnan Wang, Jinmian Ye, Yiyang Zhao, Wei Wu, Ang Li, Shuaiwen Leon Song,
Zenglin Xu, and Tim Kraska. 2018. Superneurons: Dynamic GPU memory man-
agement for training deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACMSIGPLAN symposium on principles and practice of parallel programming . 41–53.
[71] Song Wang, Nishtha Shrestha, Abarna Kucheri Subburaman, Junjie Wang, Moshi
Wei, and Nachiappan Nagappan. 2021. Automatic Unit Test Generation for
Machine Learning Libraries: How Far Are We?. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
43rd International Conference on Software Engineering . 1548–1560.
[72] Zan Wang, Ming Yan, Junjie Chen, Shuang Liu, and Dongdi Zhang. 2020. Deep
learning library testing via effective model generation. In Proceedings of the 28th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 788–799.
[73] Mohammad Wardat, Wei Le, and Hridesh Rajan. 2021. DeepLocalize: Fault
Localization for Deep Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering . 251–262.
[74] Jiayi Wei, Jia Chen, Yu Feng, Kostas Ferles, and Isil Dillig. 2018. Singularity:
Pattern fuzzing for worst case complexity. In Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM
Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering . 213–223.
[75] Xiaofei Xie, Lei Ma, Felix Juefei-Xu, Minhui Xue, Hongxu Chen, Yang Liu, Jianjun
Zhao, Bo Li, Jianxiong Yin, and Simon See. 2019. Deephunter: a coverage-guided
fuzz testing framework for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 146–157.
[76] Guoqing Xu and Atanas Rountev. 2010. Detecting Inefficiently-Used Containers to
Avoid Bloat. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation . 160–173.
[77] Feng Yan, Olatunji Ruwase, Yuxiong He, and Trishul Chilimbi. 2015. Performance
modeling and scalability optimization of distributed deep learning systems. In
Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining . 1355–1364.
[78] Junwen Yang, Cong Yan, Pranav Subramaniam, Shan Lu, and Alvin Cheung.
2018. How not to structure your database-backed web applications: a study of
performance bugs in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering . 800–810.
[79] Junwen Yang, Cong Yan, Chengcheng Wan, Shan Lu, and Alvin Cheung. 2019.
View-centric performance optimization for database-backed web applications. In
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering . 994–1004.
[80] Shahed Zaman, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2012. A qualitative study on
performance bugs. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE working conference on mining
software repositories . 199–208.
[81] Dmitrijs Zaparanuks and Matthias Hauswirth. 2012. Algorithmic Profiling. In
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation . 67–76.
[82] Jie M Zhang, Mark Harman, Lei Ma, and Yang Liu. 2020. Machine learning testing:
Survey, landscapes and horizons. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2020).
[83] Ru Zhang, Wencong Xiao, Hongyu Zhang, Yu Liu, Haoxiang Lin, and Mao Yang.
2020. An empirical study on program failures of deep learning jobs. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering . 1159–
1170.
[84] Tianyi Zhang, Cuiyun Gao, Lei Ma, Michael Lyu, and Miryung Kim. 2019. An
empirical study of common challenges in developing deep learning applications.
InProceedings of the IEEE 30th International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering . 104–115.
[85] Xufan Zhang, Ning Sun, Chunrong Fang, Jiawei Liu, Jia Liu, Dong Chai, Jiang
Wang, and Zhenyu Chen. 2021. Predoo: precision testing of deep learning
operators. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis . 400–412.
[86] Xiaoyu Zhang, Juan Zhai, Shiqing Ma, and Chao Shen. 2021. AUTOTRAINER: An
Automatic DNN Training Problem Detection and Repair System. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering . 359–371.
[87] Yuhao Zhang, Yifan Chen, Shing-Chi Cheung, Yingfei Xiong, and Lu Zhang. 2018.
An empirical study on TensorFlow program bugs. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis . 129–140.
[88] Yuhao Zhang, Luyao Ren, Liqian Chen, Yingfei Xiong, Shing-Chi Cheung, and
Tao Xie. 2020. Detecting numerical bugs in neural network architectures. In
Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering . 826–837.
[89] Yutong Zhao, Lu Xiao, Xiao Wang, Lei Sun, Bihuan Chen, Yang Liu, and Andre B
Bondi. 2020. How Are Performance Issues Caused and Resolved?-An Empirical
Study from a Design Perspective. In Proceedings of the ACM/SPEC International
Conference on Performance Engineering . 181–192.