Preserving Privacy in Software Composition Analysis:
A Study of Technical Solutions and Enhancements
Huaijin Wang1, Zhibo Liu1†, Yanbo Dai2, Shuai Wang1, Qiyi Tang3, Sen Nie3, Shi Wu3
1Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,2Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
3Keen Security Lab, Tencent
{hwangdz, zliudc, shuaiw }@cse.ust.hk, ydai851@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {dodgetang, snie, shiwu }@tencent.com
Abstract —Software composition analysis (SCA) denotes the
process of identifying open-source software components in an
input software application. SCA has been extensively developed
and adopted by academia and industry. However, we notice that
the modern SCA techniques in industry scenarios still need to
be improved due to privacy concerns. Overall, SCA requires
the users to upload their applications’ source code to a remote
SCA server, which then inspects the applications and reports
the component usage to users. This process is privacy-sensitive
since the applications may contain sensitive information, such as
proprietary source code, algorithms, trade secrets, and user data.
Privacy concerns have prevented the SCA technology from
being used in real-world scenarios. Therefore, academia and
the industry demand privacy-preserving SCA solutions. For the
first time, we analyze the privacy requirements of SCA and
provide a landscape depicting possible technical solutions with
varying privacy gains and overheads. In particular, given that de
facto SCA frameworks are primarily driven by code similarity-
based techniques, we explore combining several privacy-preserving
protocols to encapsulate the similarity-based SCA framework.
Among all viable solutions, we find that multi-party computation
(MPC) offers the strongest privacy guarantee and plausible
accuracy; it, however, incurs high overhead ( 184×). We optimize
the MPC-based SCA framework by reducing the amount of
crypto protocol transactions using program analysis techniques.
The evaluation results show that our proposed optimizations
can reduce the MPC-based SCA overhead to only 8.5% without
sacrificing SCA’s privacy guarantee or accuracy.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Given a piece of software, software composition analy-
sis (SCA) identifies components borrowed from third-party
and open-source software (OSS) projects. Hence, according
to the component-usage information, developers are aware
of the usage of vulnerable or outdated OSS projects and,
therefore, are able to take further actions to reduce security
risk, ensure license compliance, and promote healthy open-
source project usage. In recent years, the industry [1, 2, 10, 11]
and academia [21, 26, 27, 51, 52, 63, 74, 82, 83, 90, 99–101] have
extensively studied SCA techniques in different settings and
achieved promising results regarding accuracy and efficiency.
Despite the prosperous development and adoption of SCA
techniques, we notice that the accompanying privacy concerns
are hindering the usage of SCA in real-world scenarios.
Indeed, some authors of this paper have been working in
a leading industrial company of SCA solutions, and they are
frequently encountering and handling requests for performing
SCA without disclosing customer’s data in recent years. The
typical pipelines of industrial SCA solutions require a customer
†Corresponding author.to upload the software to a remote server possessed by the SCA
vendor, where the software is analyzed to produce a report that
reveals the potential security and legal risks of the software. The
report usually contains a list of reused OSS projects [16, 19, 43],
some of which may include known vulnerabilities. This process
is privacy-sensitive since the uploaded software may contain
sensitive information, such as trade secrets or personal data.
Moreover, the source code is proprietary and deemed part of the
customer’s intellectual property (IP). In reality, few companies
are willing to provide commercial products’ source code to
another party since it is hazardous to leak valuable IPs [87].
To avoid leaking customers’ privacy, contemporary SCA
vendors may deploy the SCA service in the customer’s in-
house domain. While this alleviates the privacy concerns from
the user side, it requires the SCA vendor to share its IPs (i.e.,
the SCA frameworks, algorithms, and accompanying data) with
the customers. For instance, When the SCA service is deployed
on the customer’s side, the SCA vendor has to release the OSS
database to customers periodically. However, existing SCA
vendors are often unwilling to share the valuable OSS database,
which requires many resources to build. Existing works [44, 90]
show that a comprehensive OSS database with reliable OSS
dependencies has an essential impact on the accuracy of SCA,
and it is not economical for small and medium-sized companies
to build their own databases. For instance, it is disclosed that
BinaryAI [16], an industrial SCA vendor, has spent over three
years, a dozen (senior) engineers, and PB-level disk space to
construct its OSS database. In addition, BinaryAI relies on a
large model that has been trained with ten Nvidia Tesla T4
GPUs for years. Thus, exposing the model’s parameters is
unacceptable.
Since SCA serves as one of the cornerstones of software
security and a paramount part of software engineering, the
industry and academia are demanding a privacy-preserving
SCA solution to promote the practical adoption of SCA in
industry scenarios. Accordingly, this paper targets this practical
need to study the possible technical solutions for privacy-
preserving SCA, and we aim to answer the following two
research questions (RQs):
•RQ1: How can we effectively protect both customers’
and vendors’ privacy in SCA?
•RQ2: How can a privacy-preserving SCA pipeline be
built with satisfactory performance for practical use?
To answer RQ1 , we systematically study existing technical
solutions and their (dis)advantages, exploring and proposing
two novel privacy-preserving SCA frameworks. As shownarXiv:2412.00898v1  [cs.SE]  1 Dec 2024Server
OSS DBOSS repositories
OSS
signaturesopenssl
...
(c) Code 
segmentationClient
InputInput
signatures
Matched 
signatures
with OSS infoReport①
②
③(a) OSS 
collection
(b) (c)(b) Signature
generation
(a) OSS collection
(b) Signature generation
(c) Code segmentationFig. 1: A common SCA pipeline.
in Table I, each studied solution exhibits distinct privacy
guarantees, required resources, overhead, and potential pitfalls.
Furthermore, we concretize the technical solutions and empiri-
cally benchmark their overheads and accuracies. Specifically,
the two novel solutions we proposed involve advanced privacy-
preserving protocols to offer privacy-preserving SCA. One
solution relies on similarity-based bucketization (SBB) [41],
a scale private similarity testing technique; the other depends
on multi-party computation (MPC) [25, 30, 95], which enables
multiple parties to jointly perform computation without reveal-
ing their private data to each other. Sec. V-E demonstrates that
the SBB-based solution, although lightweight, still bears the
risk of potential privacy leakage. In contrast, MPC offers a
much stronger privacy guarantee by shielding both the SCA
customers’ and vendors’ valuable assets, such as code, model,
and data. Overall, our study illustrates the promising potential
of MPC-based SCA.
Nevertheless, the MPC-based SCA pipeline we proposed
incurs excessively high overhead ( 184×), which prohibits its
practical usage. To answer RQ2 , we propose three optimization
strategies with program analysis techniques, which significantly
reduce the amount of crypto protocol transactions. Our opti-
mization strategies, including (1) symbol filter , (2) informative
source function selector , and (3) assembly function selector , can
vastly reduce the time cost of MPC-based SCA from 184×to
23×, and the most time-consuming process, i.e., encrypted
computation with MPC, is reduced to 4.8%, leading to a
practical privacy-preserving SCA solution. In sum, this work
presents the following contributions:
•Observing the privacy concerns of SCA over both the user
and the SCA service provider, we, for the first time, study
the privacy-preserving SCA, whose absence is a crucial
hindrance to the practical adoption of SCA in industry
scenarios.
•We analyze the privacy leakage risks in three typical
SCA solutions and formulate two novel privacy-preserving
SCA frameworks with SBB and MPC, respectively. Each
studied solution exhibits distinct privacy guarantees and
required resources. We then present an empirical evalua-
tion of their overheads and accuracy. We find that MPC
offers high accuracy with the strongest privacy guarantee.
•We design a set of optimizations that can largely reduce
the cost of expensive crypto operations for the MPC-based
SCA solution and without sacrificing accuracy, achieving
the first practical privacy-preserving SCA.
Artifact Availability. We have released our artifact at [9]. We
will maintain it for future research comparison and usage.II. B ACKGROUND
A. A Common SCA Pipeline
This section introduces the common SCA pipeline, which
is widely adopted by state-of-the-art (SoTA) C/C++ SCA
works [16, 44, 76, 90, 91, 94]. As shown in Fig. 1, the pipeline
comprises a server (usually owned by the SCA vendor) and
a client for customers to access the SCA service. To perform
SCA, the server first builds an OSS database (OSS DB) offline
(i.e., (a), (b), and (c)) and then provides an online SCA service
(i.e., edges ①,②, and③) to the client. Accurate SCA analysis
relies on extracting high-quality distinguishable code signatures
that can help identify semantic differences between code
snippets. Recent SCA works [44, 74, 76, 83, 90, 99] generate
signatures with advanced similarity analysis techniques such
as locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [90, 91] and deep learning-
based embeddings [43, 76, 99] to extract features from source
or binary code. Below, we introduce the major steps in SCA.
Moreover, Sec. II-B discusses a concrete example, C ENTRIS .
Offline Analysis. The offline process for building OSS DB
consists of three steps: OSS collection ,signature generation ,
andcode segmentation .
OSS Collection. An extensive OSS DB is inevitable for real-
world SCA tasks. Existing SCA techniques (e.g., CENTRIS [90]
and TPLite [44]) build their OSS DB by downloading reputed
repositories from open-source platforms like GitHub and
GitLab. In this work, we build our OSS database from the
same sources. More details are discussed in Sec. V-A.
Signature Generation. The SCA server dissects an OSS
repository into smaller code pieces with finer granularities
(e.g., functions and source files). Then, the server generates
signatures for each code piece based on specific underlying
SCA techniques. A common practice is to generate function-
level signatures with hash algorithms [90, 91] or embedding
techniques [43, 76, 99]. Therefore, each OSS repository in the
OSS DB has a set of function-level signatures (e.g., hash values
or embedding vectors).
Code Segmentation. A common observation is that an OSS
project often reuses other OSS projects. Therefore, the signa-
tures of an OSS project may overlap with some other projects’
signatures due to the borrowed code. For instance, SDL[15],
a popular media library, borrows code from yuv2rgb [17], an
image conversion library. Thus, some function signatures of
yuv2rgb are also included in SDL’s signatures. The overlapped
signatures likely result in false positives in SCA; e.g., a project
reusing yuv2rgb is likely to be identified as reusing SDL.
Existing works (e.g., CENTRIS [90] and TPLite [44]) segment
the sets of OSS projects’ signatures into non-overlapped sets
to address this issue.
Online Analysis. To conduct SCA, the client first uploads
the input source or binary code to the server and generates
signatures derived from the input ( ➀). Then, the server searches
for similar or identical signatures in the OSS DB and records
the matched signatures with their OSS information ( ➁). Finally,
the server returns the matched information and the SCA report
to the client ( ➂). Details of the three steps are below.➀The client sends the target software’s codebase (e.g., source
or binary code) to the SCA server, which computes the input
signatures in the same way as the offline signature generation.
Precisely, the server dissects the input codebase into smaller
code pieces (e.g., functions) and then generates signatures (with
hash or embedding models) for each code piece.
➁Given the input signatures, the server searches for relevant
signatures in the OSS DB. Since signatures generated from
similar code pieces have short distances, if an input signature
is similar or identical to one signature in the OSS DB, the code
piece is likely borrowed from the corresponding OSS project.
➂Having identified which code snippets are being borrowed
from OSS projects, the server reports the SCA results to the
client, which depict the information on reused OSS projects.
Specifically, the server can warn the client if the reused OSS
projects have known vulnerabilities or license issues.
B.CENTRIS (TLSH)
To better understand the pipeline, we take CENTRIS [90],
a SoTA source-based SCA framework depending on the Trend
Micro Locality Sensitive Hash (TLSH) [72] for signature gen-
eration and OSS identification, as an example. For simplicity,
we refer to it as “ CENTRIS (TLSH)” to distinguish it from
other C ENTRIS variants.
TLSH. TLSH is a locality-sensitive hash algorithm designed for
similarity testing. TLSH generates a hash value for one function
and ensures similar functions result in close hash values. In
practice, if the distance between two hash values is smaller than
a threshold ( δ= 30 ), the two source functions are considered
from the same source with high confidence. Specifically, with
the distance measure function ( dis), the functions fiandfjare
similar if their hash values hiandhjsatisfy dis(hi, hj)< δ.
Offline Analysis. Given the set of collected OSS repositories
O={o1, o2, . . . , o n},CENTRIS first dissects ok∈Ointo a
set of source functions Fk, and then generates TLSH hash
values for each function in Fk, which forms the function hash
value set Hk. After processing all OSS repositories, for each
OSS ok,CENTRIS segments the hash value set Hkinto a
non-overlapped set DBk, which is stored in the OSS DB for
online analysis.
Online Analysis. Assume there are nOSS projects in the
OSS DB, and the function hash value set of the OSS project k
isDBk. First, given the target software’s codebase, CENTRIS
dissects it into source functions and generates TLSH hash
values for each function, resulting in the function hash value
setI. Then, CENTRIS searches for similar hash values and their
original OSS projects in the OSS DB. For each OSS project k,
CENTRIS checks the set of similar hash values between Iand
DBkwith Eq. 1 and gets the set of similar function pairs Sk.
Finally, if|Sk|
|DBk|is greater than a threshold ϵ(set as 0.10 in
CENTRIS ), which denotes that a certain portion of functions
are deemed as reused, CENTRIS reports the OSS project kas
reused. By traversing all OSS projects, CENTRIS can report
all reused OSS projects in the input codebase.
Sk={(hi, hj)|∀(hi, hj)∈I×DBkanddis(hi, hj)< δ}(1)
Embed(𝑤) 𝑝 𝑝′noiseClient Server
oo
ooo
oooo ooDatabase (DB)
Sim(𝑝′, DB)→
B← BFig. 2: Similarity-based bucketization protocol.
C. Privacy-Preserving Protocols
Privacy-preserving protocols allow users to protect their
privacy while maintaining the service without being affected.
In this paper, privacy-preserving protocols aim to protect SCA
consumers’ and vendors’ IPs from being exposed to other
parties while allowing a valid and accurate SCA analysis. This
section introduces the relevant mainstream privacy-preserving
protocols that are relevant to our work.
SBB. Similarity-based bucketization (SBB) [41] provides pri-
vate similarity testing. Compared with expensive cryptographic
protocols, SBB scales well to large databases and does not
sacrifice the correctness of matching. Fig. 3 presents the
framework of SBB. Given a client’s element ( w) to be queried,
the client first embeds the element and get its representation
p. After mutating pwith noises, the mutated result p′is sent
to the server. Then, the server searches for similar elements
with p′(i.e., the red point) in its database and get a bucket
(i.e., B) of similar elements, which is then returned by the
server. After receiving the bucket, the client searches for the
most similar element with the non-mutated p. Since the server
can only get the mutated p′, the client’s privacy is preserved.
Sec. IV-A will discuss the application of SBB in the SCA
scenario. Nevertheless, the mutated p′may still leak some
information to the SCA vendor. Sec. V-E will discuss the SBB
leakage in the SCA scenario.
MPC. Multi-party computation (MPC) is a privacy-preserving
paradigm that allows participating parties to jointly perform
computations over each party’s local data. Following exact
MPC protocols, nothing except for the correct computation
result is revealed to each party. Practical MPC protocols can
be either garbled-circuits-based [95] or secret-sharing-based
methods [25, 30, 50]. We use CrypTen [50], a secret-sharing
method for machine learning, to implement our framework.
SCA involves two parties, including the client and the server.
The secret is split into two shares, one for each party, and the
secret cannot be constructed without the agreement between
the two parties. To facilitate secure computations, CrypTen
implements arithmetic secret sharing and binary secret sharing.
In such cases, private addition between two arithmetically
secret shared values, [z] = [ x] + [y], can be implemented
by having each party locally sum their shares of [x]and[y].
Specifically, each party p∈ P needs to locally compute [z]p=
[x]p+ [y]p. Private multiplication between two arithmetically
secret shared values is implemented with the assistance of
random Beaver triples [23], which consists of ([a],[b],[c])with
c=ab, provided by the trusted third party. Each party computes
[ϵ] = [x]−[a]and[δ] = [y]−[b]and then reconstructs ϵandδ
through exchanging the shares. The result can then be computed
[x][y] = [c] +ϵ[b] +δ[a] +ϵδ.While the application of MPC protocols provides crypto-
graphically guaranteed privacy, they often introduce significant
overhead, which is influenced by the number of parties and the
complexity of the model. There are always two parties in our
scenario, and the model remains unchanged after encryption.
III. P RIVACY CONCERNS IN SCA AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we discuss the assets to be protected
in SCA (Sec. III-A ), the leakage of existing SCA tech-
niques (Sec. III-B ), and the motivation for proposing privacy-
preserving SCA. In the following discussion, we assume the
customer and the vendor hold the client and the server in Fig. 1,
respectively, unless otherwise stated (i.e., private deployment).
A. Assets of Concern in SCA
Valuable Assets. As shown in Fig. 1, the online SCA service
involves three resources, including the client’s input (in source
or binary code format), the SCA report, and the server’s OSS
database (with any embedding models used to establish the
database). We consider those resources (listed in Table I)
as valuable assets to be protected for privacy security. As
aforementioned in Sec. I, the privacy of customers’ code
and vendors’ OSS database and model are essential. As the
importance of protecting customers’ source code and the
vendor’s model is self-evident, and securing the vendor’s
database has been discussed in Sec. I (e.g., BinaryAI [16, 43]
keeps the database private), we discuss the necessity of
protecting the client’s binary code and SCA reports below.
Privacy Concerns for Binary Code. Although the compiled
binary code is less comprehensible than the source code, it still
contains sensitive information that can be reverse-engineered
and disclosed. Therefore, customers are unwilling to share
binaries due to potential security and IP risks [65, 66]. For
instance, leaking an online game’s server executable results
in deploying private servers easily and causing catastrophic
financial loss [18]. Even if a binary is publicly available,
developers may only release the secured binaries to protect
their IP by hindering reverse engineering [22, 31, 47, 61, 62, 86].
For instance, many Android apps are packed and obfuscated
before release. Since reverse engineering on those binaries
is challenging, binary-based SCA works can hardly extract
accurate features [76], resulting in unreliable SCA reports.
Thus, it is necessary to consider binary code as a valuable
asset to be protected.
Privacy Concerns for SCA Reports. Leaking the SCA report
allows a potential attacker to know what OSS is used by the
customer; thus, if the customer uses an OSS with a known
vulnerability (or weakness), the attacker can directly exploit
it instead of searching for vulnerabilities blindly, which is
often a time-consuming step in real-world attacks [29, 73].
Hence, leaking the SCA report can ease the attacker’s effort in
searching and exploiting software vulnerabilities. For example,
once an attacker knows a web server uses the vulnerable
Log4j [79], the attacker can reuse the disclosed attack resources
(e.g., crafted payloads) for other systems depending on the
vulnerable Log4j to attack the target web server.TABLE I: Leaked resources of various settings.
 denotes
resources are leaked. “NA” means the SCA solution does not
rely on a trained model.
SCA SolutionValuable Assets
Tool Customer-side Vendor-side
Src Bin Report Model DB
Source-based
 NA
 CENTRIS (TLSH)
Private deployment
 NA
 CENTRIS (TLSH)
Binary-based
 BinaryAI
SBB-based
 NA
 CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB)
MPC-based
CENTRIS
(DPCNN + CrypTen)
B. Existing SCA Solutions
Based on the input types, we categorize existing SCA
techniques into source-based SCA and binary-based SCA .
Besides, we also observe that some companies deploy the
server of source-based SCA on the customer side (we refer
to it as private deployment ) to protect customers’ proprietary
source code. These representative SCA solutions and their
privacy leakage are summarized in Table I.
Assume a customer develops a software project P; the source
code of PisPsrc, and the compiled (and stripped) binary is
Pbin. The vendor owns an OSS database DB and provides an
SCA service to detect the reused OSS in P. Besides, binary-
based SCA may use an embedding model Mfor signature
generation due to the difficulties in analyzing binaries [43].
Initially, the customer owns PsrcandPbin, and the vendor
owns DB andM. After the analysis, the customer receives
an SCA report R. When Psrc,Pbin, and Rare available to
the vendor, we mark them as
 in Table I. The vendor’s OSS
database DB and model Mare marked as
 if they are leaked
to the customer. The three SCA solutions and their leakages
are discussed separately below.
Source-Based SCA. To perform SCA, the customer’s client
uploads Psrcto the vendor’s server, which then generates the
SCA report Rand sends it back to the client. While OSS DB
is not disclosed to the customer’s client, the SCA server can
access PsrcandR. Therefore, the customer’s PsrcandRare
leaked, while the vendor’s DB is secure.
Private Deployment (of Source-Based SCA). To address the
customer’s privacy concerns, some vendors deploy the SCA
server on the customer side. In this way, the customer has full
control over the SCA client and server, while the vendor needs
to provide the OSS database DB. Hence, the customer’s Psrc,
Pbin, and Rare secure, but the vendor’s DB is leaked.
Binary-Based SCA. The customer’s binary Pbinis uploaded to
the vendor’s server, while the source code Psrcis not disclosed.
After receiving Pbin, the vendor performs reverse engineering
and SCA analysis, generates the SCA report R, and sends it
back to the customer. As a result, the vendor has access to
PbinandR, while its OSS database DB and model Mfor
signature generation are secure.
Source-Based SCA vs. Binary-Based SCA. Binary-based
SCA is mainly proposed for scenarios where source code
is unavailable to the vendor, which can be caused by the
usage of closed-source libraries or by the customer’s privacy
concerns. Compared with source-based SCA, binary-based
SCA only leaks obscure binary code to the vendor. However,as discussed earlier, a binary still exposes sensitive information
when it is reverse-engineered. On the other hand, binary
analysis is difficult [31, 43, 58–60, 76, 81, 89, 98], leading to
a relatively low SCA accuracy. In Sec. V-D, we show that
BinaryAI [16, 43], a commercial binary-based SCA tool, has
relatively low accuracy compared with source-based techniques.
We thus deem binary-based SCA is far from an ideal privacy-
preserving solution.
Motivation. Existing SCA solutions have different privacy
concerns. Source- and binary-based SCA leaks customers’
assets, while private deployment leaks vendors’ assets.
Thus, there is a dilemma between customers’ and vendors’
privacy in SCA, and addressing the dilemma with a privacy-
preserving SCA solution is an urgent need.
IV. P RIVACY -PRESERVING SCA F RAMEWORKS
This section illustrates the privacy-preserving SCA frame-
works, where we expect that neither the client nor the server can
learn the other’s valuable assets (see Sec. III-A ). Specifically,
the vendor cannot learn the client’s source code, binary code,
and the SCA report, while the client cannot learn the vendor’s
database and model (if any). Before introducing their designs
in detail, we first clarify the threat model.
Threat Model. We consider a semi-honest threat model, where
the client and the server are assumed to follow the protocol
specification exactly [41, 56]. However, they are curious about
each other’s private information and record all intermediate
results [37]. We assume the customer and the SCA vendor
are entities with a reputation and are not likely to conduct
maliciously adversarial behaviors.
In order to design privacy-preserving SCA frameworks,
we adapt the privacy protocols to an existing SoTA SCA
solution. Specifically, we enhance CENTRIS [90], which is
introduced in Sec. II-B. We select advanced and representative
privacy-preserving protocols to protect the privacy of the SCA
pipeline in two aspects: (1) protecting the signature matching
process based on similarity algorithm (i.e., ➁in Fig. 1) and
(2) encrypting the package transactions between the client and
the server (i.e., ➀and➂in Fig. 1).
We tentatively adapt SBB to protect the signature match-
ing process, resulting in an SCA framework referred to as
“CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB)”, whose details are presented in
Sec. IV-A . However, we notice that such a solution leaves
SCA reports and OSS DB unprotected (explained in Sec. V-E),
we resort to the other approach that employs MPC to protect
the privacy of different parties with encryption. Specifically, we
enhance CENTRIS with code embedding techniques [40, 70, 71]
(referred to as “ CENTRIS (DPCNN)” in Sec. IV-B ) and then
adapt the popular MPC framework, CrypTen [50], to protect it
(referred to as “ CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen)” in Sec. IV-C ).
A. SBB-Based SCA ( CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB))
Fig. 3 presents the workflow of SBB-based SCA. The client
first dissects the input source repository into functions ( ➀) and
then generates the signatures with TLSH ( ➁). By employing
the SBB protocol to protect the private data, a function’s hash
Client
ReportServer
②Hashing
Hash value 
𝑝Hash value 
𝑝′③Mutation
ℎ଴--𝑂𝑆𝑆௔Functions
oo
ooo
ooooooDatabase (DB)
o
ooo
oo oo
ℎଵ--𝑂𝑆𝑆௕
…ℎଵ--𝑂𝑆𝑆௕Input
The most similar hash
①②③④⑤⑥⑦①
④
⑤
⑥⑦
Protected by SBB protocolFig. 3: Workflow of SBB-based SCA.
value pwill not be sent to the server directly. Instead, the client
mutates the hash value pinto a new hash value p′(➂), and
sends p′to the server ( ➃). The server then searches for similar
signatures of p′(i.e., the red point) in the OSS DB and replies
to the client with a bucket of signatures close to p′(➄). After
receiving the bucket, the client can identify the most similar
signature in the bucket with p(➅). After repeating the process
from➁to➅for all functions, the client can report the SCA
results to the customer ( ➆).
Hyperparameters of SBB. The SBB protocol has two
hyperparameters: the distance threshold γfor mutating the
hash value ptop′, and the bucket size θfor the server to reply
to the client. Intuitively, if γis too small, the mutated hash
value p′is close to p, which discloses the information of the
client’s source code; however, if γis too large, the server has to
use a large θ, which can result in high overhead in identifying
the most similar signature in the bucket ( ➅); otherwise, the
exact similar signatures of pmay be missed in the replied
bucket.
Privacy Concerns of SBB-Based SCA. As shown in Fig. 3,
the SBB protocol protects the client’s private data by mutating
the signatures before sending them to the server. The client
locally generates SCA results according to the embeddings
returned by the server. Thus, the server has no access to the
original signatures of source code and SCA results. However,
the mutated signatures are similar to the original ones and still
disclose some information about the client’s source code. In
Sec. V-E, we demonstrate that the server can infer the client’s
SCA report, given only the mutated signatures. Moreover,
because the server replies to the client with a bucket of similar
signatures (i.e., thousands of signatures) for each query, the
client can efficiently steal the server’s OSS DB by repeatedly
querying the OSS DB. As a result, we mark the customer’s
SCA report and the server’s OSS DB as leaked (
 ) in Table I.
B.CENTRIS (DPCNN)
Since there is no MPC solution for TLSH, we design a variant
ofCENTRIS (TLSH) that replaces TLSH with an embedding
model, which is a deep parallel convolutional neural network
(DPCNN) [46] that maps a source function to an embedding.
We use the Euclidean distance between two embeddings to
evaluate the similarity between two functions.
As mentioned in Sec. II-B,CENTRIS (TLSH) identifies
an OSS project as reused when 10% of its functions are
recognized in the input. An observation is that the threshold
is too high for many OSS projects [44]. Hence, like manyClient
ReportServer
OSS DB②Tokenizetensor
[1, 5, 3, …]
Encrypted
tensor③Encrypt
Encrypted
modelOriginal
model
③Encrypt
Encrypted
tensor
OSS DB⑤Decrypt
tensor
[1, 3, 2, …]⑥Search reused
functionsFunctions
①
①②③④⑤⑥⑦④
Protected 
by CrypTenInput
Fig 4：Try enlarging the fontFig. 4: Workflow of MPC-based SCA.
existing static analysis methods [13, 16, 36, 78, 80], CENTRIS
(TLSH) struggles to avoid false negatives, and lowering the
threshold cause a significant increase in false positives [90].
To further explore unleashing the full potential and achieving
higher accuracy, we consider assigning weights to the source
functions, following the idea of BAT [39] for weighted strings.
Weight Enhancements. Given a function fwith similar
functions in the OSS database, let the number of OSS
repositories with similar functions be N, and the lines of
fbeLoC . We define the weight of fasw=LoC
5N−1. The
intuition behind this formula is that a function with many
similar functions is less representative (e.g., helper functions)
and should consequently have a lower weight. On the other
hand, a longer function usually contains rich semantics and
should have a higher weight. We then score each OSS project in
the OSS DB by the sum of the weights of its similar functions.
If an OSS project’s score exceeds the threshold β, it is identified
as reused. Table II shows the result when β= 100 , which
is the threshold used by BAT. To efficiently search similar
embeddings, we use Faiss [45], an efficient similarity search
library provided by Meta, to build an index for all embeddings.
C. MPC-Based SCA ( CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen))
To adapt MPC to SCA, we build a SCA framework whose
workflow is presented in Fig. 4. Compared with CENTRIS
(DPCNN), the data transaction between the client and the server
is protected by CrypTen. Before the online analysis, the client
first downloads the OSS DB from the server. During online
analysis, the client initially dissects the input source repository
into source functions ( ➀) and then tokenizes and converts each
function into a plaintext tensor ( ➁). The client then encrypts the
tensor with CrypTen ( ➂), and the server encrypts the original
model with CrypTen ( ➂). Then, the client sends the encrypted
tensor to the server for encrypted computation and receives the
encrypted results ( ➃). After decrypting the results, the client
gets the plaintext embedding vectors of the functions ( ➄), with
which the client can search for similar embeddings in the OSS
DB and report the SCA results to the customer ( ➅).
Shared OSS Vector Database. To avoid leaking the customer’s
privacy (e.g., SCA reports) to the SCA vendor, the client needs
to download the OSS DB from the vendor’s server and query
the DB locally. Otherwise, if the vendor takes responsibility for
conducting DB queries, SCA reports will be revealed directly
to the vendor. As summarized in Table I, source- and binary-based SCA have the same issue when the DB is deployed
on the vendor’s server side. Nevertheless, note that the OSS
DB contains only embedded vectors (i.e., signatures) of OSS
projects. Consequently, without the embedding model, which
is exclusive to the client, the client cannot exploit the DB
or hurt the vendor’s privacy, which will be introduced in the
next few paragraphs. On the other hand, downloading the OSS
DB requires additional storage space and network bandwidth.
We clarify that the cost is acceptable since the client only
downloads the OSS vector database (around 10 GBs) instead
of OSS repositories (over 800 GBs).
Privacy Concerns of MPC-Based SCA. From the client’s
perspective, the CrypTen protocol protects the client’s private
data by encrypting the data before sending it to the server.
Thus, the server cannot access the client’s source code and
SCA results. Moreover, no information about the client’s data
is leaked as the MPC protocol guarantees clients’ privacy.
A notable concern from the server’s perspective is that
the server’s OSS DB is exposed to the client. However, we
emphasize that the meaningful information of the OSS database
isstill protected . To clarify, the client uses the OSS database
to search for similar functions from OSS projects. Each record
in the OSS database stores the embedding vector of a function,
and the information about the project to which this function
belongs. To use the OSS database, the client needs access
to the embedding model to embed functions for similarity
search. However, the model itself is notdisclosed to the
client. Consequently, even if the client has downloaded the
OSS database, the client still needs to request the server’s
service to use the database. In this way, the only meaningful
information accessible to clients is the set of included OSS
projects; therefore, the privacy of the OSS database is protected.
Another concern is that the client may approximate the
server’s plaintext model with sufficient query results; we view
this as orthogonal and mostly beyond the consideration of
MPC-based model protection. To understand the mitigation, we
observe that the community has developed various techniques
to alleviate such model stealing attacks [35, 48, 49, 54], such as
limiting the query frequency, updating the model periodically,
and detecting malicious queries. Second, in our context, issuing
sufficient queries is time-consuming due to the MPC protocol’s
overhead. As a proof-of-concept, we studied stealing 1% of
the OSS database to approximate the source model. The result
is not promising (about 0.589 of the plaintext model F1 score),
and it takes about three days to finish all queries.
V. B ENCHMARKING PRIVACY -PRESERVING SCA
In line with the landscape of privacy-preserving SCA
solutions presented in Sec. IV, this section performs empirical
evaluations and discusses the results. We first introduce the
dataset and the OSS database used in our evaluation and then
present the evaluation results. We additionally discuss the
privacy leakage of the SBB-based SCA at the end.
A. OSS Database Construction
Building a large-scale OSS database is inevitable for real-
world SCA tasks. Existing SCA techniques (e.g., CENTRIS [90]and TPLite [44]) build their OSS database by downloading
reputed OSSs from open-source platforms like GitHub and
GitLab. Since prior works [44, 90] do not release their database
or the dependency ground truth due to privacy protection
policies, we establish a new large-scale database in this work.
In particular, we build the database by identifying all C/C++
software with GitHub URL references collected from the CVE
database. Initially, we collected 1,166 C/C++ software that was
referred by a CVE number. After that, we also cloned their
Git submodules recursively and removed repeated repositories.
Eventually, we collected 1,832 C/C++ OSS repositories from
GitHub. Those OSS projects have significantly different sizes
(ranging from 10 KB to 2.3 GB) and are developed for various
purposes (e.g., NumPy for scientific computing and RocksDB
for efficient database). Our database contains many more OSS
repositories than TPLite (1,036 repositories), demonstrating
the comprehensiveness of our setup.
B. Evaluation Dataset
We pick 15 representative OSS projects, each with over
5Git submodules, from our collected OSS database as the
evaluation dataset. We use the Git submodules to ease the
effort of marking the ground truth of reused OSS projects. For
each project, we compile it with GCCwith default compiler flags.
We successfully built 14 projects and formed a test dataset
of 14 binaries. The projects of 14 binaries contain about 37
million LoC with 211 identified OSS dependencies in our OSS
database. Their diverse purposes include but are not limited to
multimedia processing, databases, drivers, and coin miners.
It is worth noting that the ground truth marked with
Git submodules is not perfectly accurate; we still need to
manually check each project’s source and binary code due
to the complex C/C++ software ecosystem [77]. Many OSS
projects are reused in the form of copy, and there may be no
announcement/documents detailing this in the original OSS
projects. To build a reliable ground truth, we first tried to
useCENTRIS , the SoTA source code-based SCA framework,
to detect OSS reuses. However, the results are unsatisfactory
due to imperfect code segmentation and the incapability of
TLSH [72] used by CENTRIS . We then manually refine the
results by searching for URLs, keywords, file names, and
representative function names in the source code. Regarding
directly reused binary code, we manually check libraries that
are statically linked to the binary. Conducting this manual
check took two authors about 40 man-hours. Each author has
an in-depth knowledge of reverse engineering, SCA, and rich
experience in binary code analysis. This ensures the credibility
and accuracy of our dataset to a great extent. Note that to
avoid possible biases in the experiments and be close to the
real-world scenario, we remove these 14 OSS projects from
our OSS database.
C. Experimental Setup
In this section, we elaborate on the setup of CENTRIS and
its variants, and the selection of binary-based SCA tool (i.e.,
BinaryAI [16, 43]).
CENTRIS (TLSH). The official implementation of CEN-
TRIS [14] is not sufficiently efficient to be applied to ourTABLE II: Precision ( P), recall ( R), F1 score ( F1), and time
cost of various SCA tools.
Tool Type1P R F1 Time (s) Overhead
CENTRIS (TLSH) S .555 .592 .573 239.74 -
CENTRIS S &.554 .593 .573 10149.45 4133%(TLSH + SBB) SBB
CENTRIS (DPCNN) S .838 .769 .802 715.21 198%
CENTRIS S &.838 .769 .802 131332.66 54681%2
(DPCNN + CrypTen) MPC
BinaryAI B .881 .477 .619 NA3NA
1Tools are classified into source-based (S), binary-based (B), SBB-based (SBB), and
MPC-based (MPC).
2Compared with C ENTRIS (DPCNN), the overhead is 18283%, nearly 184 ×slower.
3We are unable to measure the time cost of BinaryAI via its official web service.
extensive OSS database since it searches close hash values in
the OSS database one by one. To accelerate the search process,
we equip CENTRIS with the HNSW index algorithm [64] for
TLSH. Other settings of CENTRIS (TLSH) are kept the same
as the official implementation. We present its performance in
Table II as a “lite” SCA solution that can be deployed on a
customer’s side due to its limited requirement for computation
resources and public availability.
CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB). As described in Sec. IV-A , we
propose CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB) as a variant of CENTRIS
(TLSH) with SBB protected. It has two additional parameters
for using the SBB protocol. γis the mutation bias for the
client, and θis the bucket size returned by the server. In the
experiment, we set γ= 50 andθ= 1,000.
CENTRIS (DPCNN). We enhance the native CENTRIS by
replacing TLSH with a well-trained DPCNN model and
improve the OSS identification process by assigning weights
to the source functions. To train the DPCNN model, we
follow the approach of Code2Vec [20] by training the DPCNN
model to predict the name of a function with the function’s
implementation. All source functions collected in our OSS
database (see Sec. V-A) are split into training (80%), validation
(10%), and testing (10%) data. We clarify that we do not
choose widely used CodeBert [34] and Code2Vec due to their
inefficiency and limited support of MPC frameworks.
CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen). As introduced in Sec. IV-C ,
this variant uses CrypTen to encrypt the client’s tensors before
sending them to the server. It uses the same DPCNN model as
CENTRIS (DPCNN). In the experiment, we set up two parties,
the client and the server, and we use the official interface of
CrypTen to encrypt the DPCNN model.
BinaryAI [16, 43] is a commercialized binary-based SCA tool
from the industry. We use its official service in an out-of-
the-box setting. BinaryAI takes stripped binary executables
(without symbols/debug information) as its inputs, which is
reasonable as few closed-source binaries are unstripped.
D. Performance on SCA
Evaluation Metrics. Precision, recall, and F1 scores are used to
evaluate the accuracy of SCA tools. Those metrics are widely
used in the SCA scenario [43, 76, 90, 99]. Moreover, since
privacy protocols like SBB and CrypTen introduce additional
overhead, we also measure the time cost of each SCA tool. In
the experiment, we use the database constructed in Sec. V-A
and the dataset introduced in Sec. V-B for evaluation.
Accuracy. Table II presents the precision, recall, and F1 scores
ofCENTRIS ’s variants and BinaryAI. We observe that CENTRIS(TLSH) and CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB) have similar accuracies.
A similar phenomenon is observed between CENTRIS (DPCNN)
and CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen), denoting that privacy
protocols do not undermine the SCA analysis. We also observed
thatCENTRIS (DPCNN) largely outperforms CENTRIS (TLSH).
We attribute the improvement to the weight enhancements in
CENTRIS (DPCNN) elaborated in Sec. IV-B . Indeed, CENTRIS
(DPCNN) has a similar accuracy to CENTRIS (TLSH) when
the weight enhancement is disabled.
By comparing the industrial binary-based SCA tool, Bina-
ryAI, with the source-based CENTRIS (DPCNN), we observe
that BinaryAI’s precision is surprisingly high, close to CENTRIS
(DPCNN). However, the recall is relatively low, leading to
a lower F1 score. We noticed that BinaryAI is much more
accurate when analyzing binaries with exported symbols,
and BinaryAI’s OSS database already contains the 14 OSS
repositories used as our test dataset. While this indicates certain
“unfairness,” we are unable to modify BinaryAI as it is close-
source. However, as shown in Table II, it still gains relatively
poor accuracy compared to analyzing source code.
Overall, CENTRIS (DPCNN) and CENTRIS (DPCNN +
CrypTen) achieve the best F1 score among all evaluated SCA
tools, indicating that the source-based SCA framework is
accurate and effective, and the privacy-preserving protocols
introduced in Sec. IV do not notably affect the accuracy.
Time Cost. By comparing the time cost of CENTRIS (TLSH)
andCENTRIS (TLSH + SBB), we observe that the time cost is
significantly increased by 41×due to the extra computations
incurred by SBB. Similarly, the time cost of CENTRIS (DPCNN
+ CrypTen) is 184×slower than CENTRIS (DPCNN) due to
the overhead of CrypTen. Thus, we conclude that the privacy-
preserving protocols (i.e., SBB and CrypTen) introduce an
enormous overhead to the SCA tools.
On the other hand, by comparing CENTRIS (TLSH) and
CENTRIS (DPCNN), we observe that the time cost of CENTRIS
(DPCNN) is nearly tripled due to the embedding process.
However, CENTRIS (DPCNN) is still efficient enough for
large-scale SCA tasks, and more efficient hardware can further
reduce the overhead. We view the time cost of using DPCNN
as acceptable for SCA tasks.
E. Leakage of SBB-Based SCA
As mentioned in Sec. IV-A , although the client does not
send the original hash value pto the server, the mutated hash
value p′is still close to the p. Thus, p′may disclose some
information about pto the server. In this section, we uncover
the subtle privacy leakage of SBB-based SCA, i.e., CENTRIS
(TLSH + SBB). The experiment follows the semi-honest threat
model, and we assume the customer (holding the client) and
vendor (holding the server) follow the SBB protocol faithfully.
The vendor stores all mutated function hash values and is
curious about the client’s SCA report.
Following the workflow of SBB-based SCA shown in Fig. 3,
the client first dissects the input ( ➀) and gets the hash value set
I(➁). During the SBB-based analysis, the client mutates the
hash value hi∈Iwith the mutation bias γto get h′
i, which
is sent to the server ( ➂). Thus, the server has access to the set
50 75 100 125 150
100
125
150
175
200/prime
0.57 0.57 0.54 0.03 0.01
0.58 0.57 0.54 0.42 0.02
0.58 0.57 0.54 0.45 0.21
0.58 0.57 0.54 0.45 0.26
0.58 0.57 0.55 0.41 0.22(a) Client-side F1 scores.
50 75 100 125 150
0.56 0.57 0.54 0.06 0.02
0.14 0.31 0.43 0.43 0.07
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
0.00.10.20.30.40.5 (b) Server-side F1 scores.
Fig. 5: SBB-based C ENTRIS ’s F1 according to γandδ′.
of mutated hash values I′, from which the curious vendor can
predict the client’s SCA report.
Formally, let DBkbe the hash value set of the k-th OSS
project, and the function disevaluates the distance between
two hash values. Given the mutated hash values set I′, the
curious vendor can infer whether the k-th OSS project is reused
in the following way. Firstly, the vendor computes a set S′
k
withI′,DBk, and a threshold δ′as Eq. 2.
S′
k={(h′
i, hj)|∀(h′
i, hj)∈I′×DBkanddis(h′
i, hj)< δ′}(2)
Secondly, by iterating all OSS projects and computing S′
k(k∈
[1, n]), the vendor can rank all OSS projects by the size of
S′
k, i.e.,|S′
k|. A larger |S′
k|denotes a higher probability that
the consumer’s software reuses k-th OSS project. Thus, the
curious vendor can infer the client’s privacy. Intuitively, a
larger mutation bias γincreases the uncertainty of the vendor’s
inference. Fig. 5a presents the relations between mutation bias
(γ), vendor’s threshold ( δ′), and F1 scores of a client. Fig. 5b
illustrates the predicted F1 scores of a server. Visually, the
yellow cells in the same positions of Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b)
indicate that the client’s and server’s F1 scores are close and
high, demonstrating the vendor can predict the SCA report,
thereby leaking the OSS projects reused by the client.
When the mutation bias γis relatively small, the SCA service
works functionally, and the client has decent F1 scores, while
a large γleads to a poor F1 score for the client. To ensure the
client’s accuracy and privacy, the client’s γshould be small
(i.e., yellow cells in Fig. 5a), and the vendor’s threshold δ′
should be large (i.e., green cells in Fig. 5b). However, δ′is
selected by the vendor. From the vendor’s perspective, it can
intentionally use a relatively small δ′(e.g., 100 or 125) for
prediction. Thus, the server-side F1 score is close to the client-
side F1 score, which means the vendor could infer the SCA
results as well as the client, posing a serious threat to the
customer privacy protection of SBB-based SCA.
Overall, by observing the different privacy guarantees and
accuracies between CENTRIS (TLSH + SBB) and CENTRIS
(DPCNN + CrypTen) in Table II, we believe that MPC-based
SCA is more suitable for privacy-preserving SCA. Nevertheless,
the MPC-based SCA incurs a high overhead, which we will
address in Sec. VI.
VI. O PTIMIZING MPC-B ASED SCA
The promising result in Sec. V-D of the MPC-based SCA
framework in accuracy and principled privacy guaranteeClient
ReportServer
OSS DBTensorEncrypted
tensor
④EncryptEncrypted
srcmodelSrc
model
④Encrypt
Encrypted
tensor
OSS DB⑥Decrypt
⑦Search reused functionsSource
functions
①⑤
Protected
byCrypT en
Binary
functions
Filter 1
Filter 2 Filter 3Tensor③Tokeniz e
Encrypted
tensorEncrypted
bin modelBin
model
Tensor②
⑧Fig. 6: Workflow of S AFESCA.
pushrbp
pushrax
…
ret
[1,2,…,0.5]
pushrbp
pushrax
…
ret
[1,2,…,0.5]cosine
similarit y①
③②
① ②③Fig. 7: A common pipeline of binary code
similarity analysis (BCSA).
motivates us to build a practical privacy-preserving SCA
framework based on MPC. However, the MPC-based SCA
framework comes with a high overhead. This section optimizes
the standard setup of MPC-based SCA by reducing its cost.
The insight of this optimization is selecting only necessary
data with software analysis approaches for expensive encrypted
computation; thus, we significantly reduce the volume of data
required for server queries and achieve a reasonable overhead
with high accuracy and privacy guarantee.
Assumption. We assume the customers of SAFESCA are
developers, and the client has access to the source code and
the compiled binary executables with debug information. The
assumption is reasonable due to the following reasons: (1) Since
the MPC-based SCA does not disclose any clients’ information,
utilizing both the source and binary code does not harm clients’
privacy. (2) Consequently, SAFESCA can access the developing
environment safely; hence, the developers can easily provide
SAFESCA with the source code and the building products
(i.e., binary executables). (3) Building products with debug
information for testing is a common practice [102], and symbols
are usually available. As a result, by analyzing both the source
and binary code, SAFESCA can leverage the source code to
achieve better accuracy and identify the reused components
without source code, e.g., statically linked libraries.
Workflow. Fig. 6 presents the workflow of SAFESCA . Like
CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen), a client needs to download the
OSS DB first. Given the input binary with debug information,
we preprocess it to extract functions from the source codebase,
i.e., “source functions”, and functions reused without source
code, i.e., “binary functions” ( ➀). Then, the functions are
filtered and selected for expensive encrypted computation ( ➁).
The selected source functions are processed by the source
embedding model, which is the same as the process of CENTRIS
(DPCNN + CrypTen). Similarly, the selected binary functions
are processed by the binary embedding model ( ➂-➅). To
generate the SCA report, the client searches for the reused
functions in the database ( ➆) and combines the reused OSS
knowledge detected by the symbol filter ( ➇).
Compared with the workflow of CENTRIS (DPCNN +
CrypTen) (Fig. 4), the main optimizations are conducted on
the client side. SAFESCA ’s workflow is more complex and
involves an extra binary embedding model (Sec. VI-A ) and
three filters (Sec. VI-C ). Besides, we also accelerate the offline
signature generation process, as will be discussed in Sec. VI-B .A. Binary Embedding Model
Similar to embedding source code for analysis, we need to
embed binary code pieces into embedding vectors. Fortunately,
many existing binary code similarity analysis techniques
(BCSA) can produce function-level embeddings to capture
the semantics of assembly code [31, 55, 68, 84, 85, 88, 96, 97].
Therefore, we can leverage BCSA in SAFESCA ’s workflow.
Fig. 7 presents a frequently used pipeline of binary similarity
analysis frameworks. Given two binary executables, a BCSA
tool disassembles binaries to assembly code and produces the
embedding vectors of assembly functions. The similarity score
is usually computed as the cosine similarity of embeddings.
Following the training pipeline presented by recent research
in relevant topics, GEMINI [93] and SAFE [68], we train
a DPCNN model to embed binary code. We report that
the AUC score, a widely-used metric for binary similarity
works [53, 68, 96, 97], of our binary code embedding model
is 0.935, which is comparable to G EMINI (0.932) and SAFE
(0.990), demonstrating the effectiveness of our setting. We,
however, do not use an existing model due to implementation
difficulties. Existing binary code embedding techniques often
utilize graph structures [24, 31, 33, 81, 93, 96, 103] and recurrent
neural networks [68] to embed assembly code. However, we
find that few (if at all any) existing crypto protocols support
those models due to computation complexity.
B. Improvements in Signature Generation
Existing works (e.g., CENTRIS and TPLite) treat each tag
of a Git repository as a unique version. Given a repository’s
specific version, they analyze its code and generate signatures
with extracted features (e.g., strings, magic numbers, functions,
and file hashes) for the given version. However, since real-
world OSS developers may not treat a tag as a release version,
their approach is impractical for our complex OSS database
due to the huge cost. For instance, ClickHouse [28] generates
a new tag every week, resulting in thousands of versions;
consequently, generating signatures for ClickHouse can take
more than four months, per our estimation.
As a practical setting, we build signatures of a repository
by commits. Given a repository, after generating the signature
for the first version, we focus on the files changed by the
subsequent commits, whereas the unchanged files will not be
analyzed again. This way, the OSS signature generation process
is much more efficient. Following existing works ( CENTRIS
and OSSFP [91]), we extract function-level features. Thus, thechanges between different commits will include newly created
functions, changed functions, and deleted functions. In this
study, a function’s identifier (i.e., ID) is composed of its name
and scope; hence, a newly created ID denotes a new function.
Functions with the same ID but different implementations
between two commits are changed functions. A missing ID
denotes a deleted function. Moreover, we also record the direct
call relations between two functions, which results in a large
call graph for each repository.
C. Client-Side Filters
As shown in Fig. 6, after preprocessing an input binary
and extracting its source and binary functions, the client will
tokenize those functions for expensive encrypted computation.
To reduce the overhead incurred by crypto, we propose three
filters to identify suspect functions on the client side before
tokenization and analysis. Specifically, the symbol filter first
conservatively pinpoints functions copied from OSS projects;
such identified functions do not go through subsequent SCA
analysis. For the remaining functions that are not identified, the
source function filter and assembly function filter are employed
to pick representative functions to be tokenized and embedded
for further SCA analysis.
Filter 1: Symbol Filter. SAFESCA ’s client can safely employ
sensitive information, including symbols since all data is
encrypted before being sent to the server. Therefore, given
the symbols provided by customers, a straightforward idea
is to pinpoint functions that are likely copied from existing
OSS projects by matching their symbols, such as function
names and scopes. To do so, we also collect names and scopes
(usually namespace names) of functions while building the OSS
database. Ideally, given an input function, if it has identical
symbols with one record in the OSS database, it is likely to
be a reused function, and we forward it to further analysis.
However, directly collecting accurate symbol names (includ-
ing scope names) from the source code is difficult due to the
complexity of C/C++ projects. Strictly matching symbols (i.e.,
names and scopes) will likely lead to an extensive amount of
false negatives (FNs). Thus, we add a more flexible rule as a
remedy for symbol matching to reduce FNs. Given that matches
of complex (e.g., over 20 characters) and unique function names
are usually strong indicators of direct function reuses, we view
a function as copied from OSS projects if it has a complex
name and is matched to record in the database. Besides, to
increase the accuracy of name matching, we further check the
function call relationship between potentially matched functions.
A function is identified as reused from an OSS project only
if the function and its matched function have the same call
relationship, i.e., both have the same edge in the call graph.
Our evaluation shows that the proposed symbol filtering
method can reach an F1 score of 0.547. Some reused functions
cannot be recognized with symbol matching because of
modifications in function names and implementations during
code reusing. In order to locate the reused components that are
not matched in this step, we further involve source- and binary-
based embedding models to analyze the remaining functions.Filter 2: Informative Source Function Filter. When the source
code is available, we tokenize and embed source functions
for further similarity-based SCA. Before that, the informative
source filter is used to determine and skip inconsequential
functions. One insight behind this filter is that some trivial
functions hardly contribute to the SCA results. Thus, we can
only consider complex and representative functions for time-
consuming analysis.
Given functions that are not matched by the symbol filter,
we select those that are informative and embed their source
code for SCA analysis. Specifically, we use the maintainability
index [69, 91] to decide if a function is “informative.” In
short, this metric is negatively correlated to the cyclomatic
complexity [75], Halstead volume [38], and the lines of code
in a function. We configure our tool to keep a proportion of
functions of each source file with the least maintainability
indexes for further analysis. For simplicity, we define the
proportion of kept functions as the hyperparameter θ1.
Filter 3: Assembly Function Filter. Similar to Filter 2, when
a binary is provided for SCA, we first disassemble it into
assembly code and then identify representative functions for
embedding and analysis. However, binary code analysis is less
accurate than source code analysis in general. Therefore, the
assembly function filter more strictly restricts the conditions
for picking a function. It selects functions whose names exist
in the collected OSS projects. Also, we avoid selecting overly
long functions due to the limitation of existing binary code
similarity analysis techniques on lengthy input [42, 57, 67, 68].
In particular, to evaluate if an assembly function should be
selected, we use the following equation,
score = 1/(ln(OSS num + 2)∗ln(block num + 2)) (3)
where OSS num is the number of OSS projects containing
the function’s name. block num is the number of basic blocks
in the function. We add 2 to the denominator to avoid zero
division. We also define another hyperparameter θ2to decide
the proportion of functions for embedding and SCA analysis.
D. Privacy Analysis of SAFESCA
Similar to CENTRIS (DPCNN + CrypTen), SAFESCA
protects the client’s privacy with the MPC protocol. The client’s
valuable assets (e.g., source and binary code) are not leaked to
the server. From the server’s perspective, the client downloads
a symbol database to enable the symbol filter (Filter 1), and the
OSS DB also contains the binary embeddings of OSS projects.
However, the symbol database only contains function names
and namespaces. We thus argue that the symbol database is
not a highly valuable asset since it can be easily obtained
by parsing an OSS project. Additionally, merely using the
symbol database cannot achieve a high-quality SCA result (i.e.,
0.547 F1 score as evaluated in Sec. VII-B ). Regarding the
OSS DB, the binary embeddings are used the same way as
the source embeddings; therefore, the OSS DB does not leak
any additional information since the client has no access to
the code embedding model.0 25 50 75 100
0.720.740.760.780.800.820.84
Precision
Recall
F1Fig. 8: Precision, recall, and
F1 score of SAFESCA with
different values of β.
10K 20K 30K 40K 50K
T otal functions1K2KSelected functions
y=0.048x+77Selected-total
RegressionFig. 9: Number of selected
functions of SAFESCA to to-
tal functions of each binary.
VII. E VALUATION
To evaluate SAFESCA , we reuse our large-scale OSS
database described in Sec. V-A and the manually-built evalua-
tion dataset (Sec. V-B). We also reuse the source-based OSS
scoring method and source code embedding model of CENTRIS
(DPCNN) (see Sec. V-D) for SAFESCA . Sec. VII-A shows the
impact of threshold value βon S AFESCA’s performance. To
ensure the efficiency of SAFESCA , we use a small threshold
θ1= 0.02for the informative source function filter, and
θ2= 0.02for the assembly function filter. Due to the space
limit, we present a detailed analysis of the impact of θ1and
θ2on S AFESCA’s performance on our website [9].
A. Performance of SAFESCA
Fig. 8 presents the precision, recall, and F1 score of
SAFESCA with different βvalues. SAFESCA ’s performance
is not sensitive to β’s changes, especially the F1 score (i.e.,
green line). When βis greater than 5, SAFESCA ’s F1 score
is greater than 0.78. The highest F1 score is 0.81 when βis
40. Compared with CENTRIS (DPCNN), SAFESCA achieves a
similar F1 score, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our
proposed three filters. Comparing SAFESCA with and without
optimizations (see Table III), we observe that the proposed
optimizations do not sacrifice accuracy.
Fig. 9 presents the total number of input functions and the
number of functions SAFESCA selected to perform encrypted
computation. The regression line (i.e., orange line) has a
0.048 gradient, indicating that SAFESCA selects less than
5% of functions to generate embeddings for SCA. As shown in
Table III, compared with SAFESCA without optimization (i.e.,
all functions are passed to the embedding models), three filters
reduce the time cost to 8.47%, i.e., 11.8 ×faster. Compared
with naively using MPC protocol in the SCA framework
(184×overhead), SAFESCA ’s overhead is merely 23 ×. In
total, SAFESCA takes 4.6 hours to identify reused OSS
projects of our dataset (i.e., 20 minutes per binary on average),
demonstrating the scalability of SAFESCA . Our dataset’s
largest binary, mod pagespeed [6], whose repository reaches
543 MB without history files, takes 72 minutes for SAFESCA .
B. Impacts of Filters
As we design three filters to accelerate SAFESCA and report
the effects of enabling all of them, we further analyze the
impact of each filter separately. The overhead of each filter is
negligible compared with computing the embedding vectors;
thus, we focus on analyzing the accuracy impacts of each filter.TABLE III: Performance of SAFESCA with different settings.
P R F1 Time cost (s) Cost ratio
SAFESCA (w/o opt)1.802 .780 .791 195125.06 100%
SAFESCA .828 .791 .809 16527.3 8.47%
CENTRIS (DPCNN)2.838 .769 .802 715.2 0.37%
1SAFESCA (w/o opt) denotes S AFESCA without three filters.
2To ease comparison with Table II, we present C ENTRIS (DPCNN).
Filter 1. After extracting functions and their symbols from
an input software, we first analyze the software with the
symbol filter, which is expected to have high precision since we
only consider representative symbols and require their direct
function calls to be matched. In other words, the symbol filter
is conservative and only rules out functions that can be skipped
with high confidence. Our experiments show that applying the
symbol filter alone (i.e., ➀➁➇ of Fig. 6 only; no functions are
analyzed by Filter 2 and Filter 3) achieves 0.918 precision but
0.4 recall, resulting in a 0.547 F1 score. Below, we show that
the following two filters can further improve the SCA accuracy
based on the results of the symbol filter.
Filter 2. After Filter 1, the remaining source functions are sent
to Filter 2 for further analysis with the source embedding model.
To evaluate the effect of Filter 2, Filter 3 and the following
binary embedding model are not used. We report that SCA’s
precision and recall are 0.829 and 0.747 when β= 40 . Similar
to the conclusion in Sec. VII-A , changing βhas little impact
on the F1 score at this step. This filter can effectively improve
the recall (from 0.40 to 0.747), achieving similar accuracy to
analyzing all source functions (i.e., C ENTRIS (DPCNN)).
Filter 3. This filter applies to disassembled assembly functions
when binary is provided as input. Functions selected by this
filter will be embedded into vectors using BCSA techniques.
A function is identified as reused from an OSS project when
its matched symbol and the most similar embedding vector
are both from that OSS repository. This requirement facilitates
SAFESCA in eliminating false positives caused by assembly
function embeddings. Our evaluation reveals that it improves
the recall from 0.747 to 0.791. While the improvement is
limited due to the difficulty of analyzing binary code, we view
it as a critical replenishment when binary is the only input.
C. False Positives (FPs) and False Negatives (FNs)
Static security analyzers can hardly avoid FPs and
FNs [13, 16, 36, 78, 80, 92]. Nevertheless, as shown in Table III,
SAFESCA has already achieved the best F1 score with
acceptable overhead compared with existing SCA solutions
(without privacy-preserving). SAFESCA ’s embedding-based
analysis is the major root cause of FPs and FNs. To reduce
them, we advocate for the privacy community to better support
more advanced embedding techniques (e.g., more powerful
models). Also, our manual analysis finds that the imperfect
OSS database also contributes to FPs and FNs.
Missed OSS Projects. Although we have collected over 1,800
OSS projects by going through the references of CVEs, our
OSS database still misses some OSS projects. For instance,
libunwind [5] is not included in our OSS experiment, but
it is reused by crashpad [3]. When we perform SCA on
mod pagespeed [6],crashpad is an FP since mod pagespeed
shares libunwind ’s functions with crashpad . To form thecurrent OSS database in this research, we have already spent a
significant amount of time and resources (over 800 GB of OSS
repositories); industrial audiences of this paper may consider
putting more effort into augmenting the OSS database and
reducing FPs and FNs.
Generative Code Reuse. Following previous studies (e.g.,
CENTRIS and TPLite), this work considers four types of OSS
reuses, i.e., exact reuse, partial reuse, structural-changed reuse,
and code-changed reuse [90]. While these four categories cover
most cases, this study finds a new rare type of reuse, i.e.,
generative code reuse. This type of reused code is generated
dynamically by a script; thus, the generated code is not analyzed
during OSS signature generation. For instance, yuzu [12] and
raylib [8] reuse code generated by glad [4]. Therefore, when
analyzing programs compiled from yuzu , the code borrowed
from glad inyuzu is identified as part of code from raylib ,
resulting in an FN (i.e., missing glad ) and an FP (i.e., raylib
is identified as a component of yuzu ).
VIII. R ELATED WORK
Recent SCA works target different programming languages
and different types of software. However, these tools do not
naturally offer a privacy-preserving solution. Conventional
binary-based SCA tools [32, 39, 44] primarily rely on string-
level signatures. B2SFinder [98] additionally uses if/else
and switch structures. However, these signatures may not
exist in some OSS projects (e.g., RapidJson [7]) and are not
robust to code changes. Recent binary-based SCA [16, 76, 94]
also explores using embedding techniques, which are often
limited by the hurdles of reverse engineering. Source-based
SCA tools [74, 90, 91] for C/C++ software usually rely on code-
block- and function-level signatures. [74] uses code-block-level
signatures and is relatively time-consuming. Recent works use
function-level signatures. CENTRIS [90] uses code segmentation
to reduce FPs and leverages redundancy elimination to reduce
the size of the OSS database. OSSFP [91] employs the
maintainability index to reduce the OSS database’s size and
improve SCA scalability. Our work also uses the maintainability
index to reduce the expensive encrypted computation.
IX. C ONCLUSION
We have presented the first study on privacy-preserving SCA.
We review SCA privacy requirements and depict viable tech-
nical solutions with varying privacy gains and overheads. We
also empirically benchmark the proposed solutions and discuss
issues in privacy leakage and cost. Accordingly, we optimize
the MPC-based SCA by reducing its overhead significantly
without sacrificing the privacy guarantee or accuracy. This
work provides guides for researchers and users who aim to use
and improve SCA in practice.
X. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by CCF-Tencent Open
Research Fund. We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers
for their valuable comments.REFERENCES
[1]“Black Duck Binary Analysis,” https://www.synopsys.com/
software-integrity/security-testing/software-composition-analysis/
binary-analysis.html.
[2]“CODESentry: Binary Software Composition Analysis,” https://www.
grammatech.com/binary-software-composition-analysis-sca.
[3] “crashpad,” https://chromium.googlesource.com/crashpad.
[4] “glad,” https://github.com/Dav1dde/glad.
[5] “libunwind,” https://www.nongnu.org/libunwind/.
[6]“mod pagespeed,” https://github.com/apache/
incubator-pagespeed-mod.
[7] “RapidJSON,” https://github.com/Tencent/rapidjson/.
[8] “raylib,” https://github.com/raysan5/raylib.
[9] “SafeSCA,” https://sites.google.com/view/safesca.
[10] “Snyk,” https://snyk.io/what-is-snyk/.
[11] “Whitesource,” https://www.whitesourcesoftware.com/
product-overview/.
[12] “yuzu,” https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu.
[13] “Black Duck Binary Analysis,” https://community.synopsys.com/s/
black-duck-binary-analysis, 2023.
[14] “Centris,” https://github.com/wooseunghoon/Centris-public, 2023.
[15] “SDL,” https://github.com/libsdl-org/SDL, 2023.
[16] “Tencent BinaryAI,” https://www.binaryai.cn/, 2023.
[17] “yuv2rgb,” https://github.com/descampsa/yuv2rgb, 2023.
[18] “Private server lawsuit of maplestory,” https:
//maplenewsnetwork.wordpress.com/2012/04/24/
nexon-awarded-3-6-million-in-private-server-lawsuit/, 2024.
[19] A. C. D. Agency, “Software bill of materials,”
https://www.cisa.gov/sbom, 2024.
[20] U. Alon, M. Zilberstein, O. Levy, and E. Yahav, “Code2Vec: Learning
distributed representations of code,” Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , vol. 3,
no. POPL, Jan. 2019.
[21] M. Backes, S. Bugiel, and E. Derr, “Reliable third-party library detection
in android and its security applications,” in ACM CCS , 2016, pp. 356–
367.
[22] S. Banescu, C. Collberg, V . Ganesh, Z. Newsham, and A. Pretschner,
“Code obfuscation against symbolic execution attacks,” in Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Conference on Computer Security Applications ,
2016, pp. 189–200.
[23] D. Beaver, “Efficient multiparty protocols using circuit randomization,”
inAdvances in Cryptology—CRYPTO’91: Proceedings 11 . Springer,
1992, pp. 420–432.
[24] T. Ben-Nun, A. S. Jakobovits, and T. Hoefler, “Neural code comprehen-
sion: A learnable representation of code semantics,” ser. NIPS, 2018.
[25] R. Bendlin, I. Damg ˚ard, C. Orlandi, and S. Zakarias, “Semi-
homomorphic encryption and multiparty computation,” in Annual Inter-
national Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
Techniques . Springer, 2011, pp. 169–188.
[26] Y . Chen, A. E. Santosa, A. Sharma, and D. Lo, “Automated identification
of libraries from vulnerability data,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
42nd International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice , 2020, pp. 90–99.
[27] Y . Chen, A. E. Santosa, A. M. Yi, A. Sharma, A. Sharma, and D. Lo, “A
machine learning approach for vulnerability curation,” in Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories ,
2020, pp. 32–42.
[28] ClickHouse, “Clickhouse,” https://clickhouse.com/, 2023.
[29] S. A. Crosby and D. S. Wallach, “Denial of service via algorithmic
complexity attacks,” in 12th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 03) , 2003.
[30] I. Damg ˚ard, V . Pastro, N. Smart, and S. Zakarias, “Multiparty compu-
tation from somewhat homomorphic encryption,” in Annual Cryptology
Conference . Springer, 2012, pp. 643–662.
[31] S. H. Ding, B. M. Fung, and P. Charland, “Asm2Vec: Boosting
static representation robustness for binary clone search against code
obfuscation and compiler optimization,” in IEEE S&P , 2019.
[32] R. Duan, A. Bijlani, M. Xu, T. Kim, and W. Lee, “Identifying open-
source license violation and 1-day security risk at large scale,” in
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on computer and
communications security , 2017, pp. 2169–2185.
[33] Y . Duan, X. Li, J. Wang, and H. Yin, “DEEPBINDIFF: Learning
program-wide code representations for binary diffing,” 2020.[34] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou,
B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang et al. , “Codebert: A pre-trained model for
programming and natural languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155 ,
2020.
[35] M. A. Q. Flooding-Based, “Monitoring-based differential privacy
mechanism against query flooding-based model extraction attack,” 2021.
[36] M. . GitHub, “CodeQL,” https://codeql.github.com/, 2021.
[37] O. Goldreich, Foundations of Cryptography, Volume 2 . Cambridge
university press Cambridge, 2004.
[38] T. Hariprasad, G. Vidhyagaran, K. Seenu, and C. Thirumalai, “Software
complexity analysis using halstead metrics,” in International Conference
on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICEI) , 2017, pp. 1109–1113.
[39] A. Hemel, K. T. Kalleberg, R. Vermaas, and E. Dolstra, “Finding
software license violations through binary code clone detection,” in
Proceedings of the 8th Working Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , 2011, pp. 63–72.
[40] J. Henkel, S. K. Lahiri, B. Liblit, and T. Reps, “Code vectors:
understanding programs through embedded abstracted symbolic traces,”
inProceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering , 2018, pp. 163–174.
[41] Y . Hua, A. Namavari, K. Cheng, M. Naaman, and T. Ristenpart,
“Increasing adversarial uncertainty to scale private similarity testing,” in
31st USENIX Security Symposium , 2022, pp. 1777–1794.
[42] A. Jia, M. Fan, W. Jin, X. Xu, Z. Zhou, Q. Tang, S. Nie, S. Wu, and
T. Liu, “1-to-1 or 1-to-n? investigating the effect of function inlining on
binary similarity analysis,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , vol. 32,
no. 4, pp. 1–26, 2023.
[43] L. Jiang, J. An, H. Huang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, S. Wu, and Y . Zhang, “Bina-
ryai: Binary software composition analysis via intelligent binary source
code matching,” Proceedings of the 46th International Conference on
Software Engineering , 2024.
[44] L. Jiang, H. Yuan, Q. Tang, S. Nie, S. Wu, and Y . Zhang, “Third-party
library dependency for large-scale sca in the c/c++ ecosystem: How
far are we?” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2023, pp. 1383–1395.
[45] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. J ´egou, “Billion-scale similarity search
with GPUs,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 535–547,
2019.
[46] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Deep pyramid convolutional neural networks
for text categorization,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
2017, pp. 562–570.
[47] P. Junod, J. Rinaldini, J. Wehrli, and J. Michielin, “Obfuscator-LLVM:
Software protection for the masses,” ser. SPRO, 2015.
[48] M. Juuti, S. Szyller, S. Marchal, and N. Asokan, “Prada: protecting
against dnn model stealing attacks,” in 2019 IEEE European Symposium
on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 512–527.
[49] M. Kesarwani, B. Mukhoty, V . Arya, and S. Mehta, “Model extraction
warning in mlaas paradigm,” in Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference , 2018, pp. 371–380.
[50] B. Knott, S. Venkataraman, A. Hannun, S. Sengupta, M. Ibrahim, and
L. van der Maaten, “Crypten: Secure multi-party computation meets
machine learning,” in arXiv 2109.00984 , 2021.
[51] M. Li, P. Wang, W. Wang, S. Wang, D. Wu, J. Liu, R. Xue, W. Huo, and
W. Zou, “Large-scale third-party library detection in android markets,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 981–
1003, 2018.
[52] M. Li, W. Wang, P. Wang, S. Wang, D. Wu, J. Liu, R. Xue, and
W. Huo, “Libd: Scalable and precise third-party library detection in
android markets,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference
on Software Engineering , 2017, pp. 335–346.
[53] X. Li, Y . Qu, and H. Yin, “Palmtree: Learning an assembly language
model for instruction embedding,” in ACM CCS , 2021, pp. 3236–3251.
[54] Y . Li, L. Zhu, X. Jia, Y . Jiang, S.-T. Xia, and X. Cao, “Defending
against model stealing via verifying embedded external features,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 36,
no. 2, 2022, pp. 1464–1472.
[55] Z. Li, P. Ma, H. Wang, S. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, and S. Wu,
“Unleashing the power of compiler intermediate representation to
enhance neural program embeddings,” in Proceedings of the 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 2253–
2265.[56] Y . Lindell, “How to simulate it–a tutorial on the simulation proof
technique,” Tutorials on the Foundations of Cryptography: Dedicated
to Oded Goldreich , pp. 277–346, 2017.
[57] B. Liu, W. Huo, C. Zhang, W. Li, F. Li, A. Piao, and W. Zou, “ αdiff:
cross-version binary code similarity detection with dnn,” in Proceedings
of the 33rd ACM/IEEE international conference on automated software
engineering , 2018, pp. 667–678.
[58] Z. Liu and S. Wang, “How far we have come: Testing decompilation
correctness of c decompilers,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2020, pp.
475–487.
[59] Z. Liu, Y . Yuan, S. Wang, and Y . Bao, “Sok: Demystifying binary lifters
through the lens of downstream applications,” in 2022 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2022, pp. 1100–1119.
[60] Z. Liu, Y . Yuan, S. Wang, X. Xie, and L. Ma, “Decompiling x86 deep
neural network executables,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 23) , 2023, pp. 7357–7374.
[61] L. Luo, J. Ming, D. Wu, P. Liu, and S. Zhu, “Semantics-based
obfuscation-resilient binary code similarity comparison with applica-
tions to software plagiarism detection,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on foundations of software
engineering , 2014, pp. 389–400.
[62] ——, “Semantics-based obfuscation-resilient binary code similarity
comparison with applications to software and algorithm plagiarism
detection,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 43, no. 12,
pp. 1157–1177, 2017.
[63] Z. Ma, H. Wang, Y . Guo, and X. Chen, “Libradar: fast and accurate
detection of third-party libraries in android apps,” in Proceedings of
the 38th international conference on software engineering companion ,
2016, pp. 653–656.
[64] Y . A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and robust approximate
nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs,”
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 42,
no. 4, pp. 824–836, 2018.
[65] P. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, Measuring a system’s attack surface .
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh,
PA, USA, 2004.
[66] P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An attack surface metric,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 371–386,
2010.
[67] A. Marcelli, M. Graziano, X. Ugarte-Pedrero, Y . Fratantonio, M. Man-
souri, and D. Balzarotti, “How machine learning is solving the binary
function similarity problem,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 22) , 2022, pp. 2099–2116.
[68] L. Massarelli, G. A. D. Luna, F. Petroni, R. Baldoni, and L. Querzoni,
“Safe: Self-attentive function embeddings for binary similarity,” in
International Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and
Vulnerability Assessment . Springer, 2019, pp. 309–329.
[69] Microsoft, “Code metrics - maintainability index range and
meaning,” https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/code-quality/
code-metrics-maintainability-index-range-and-meaning, 2023.
[70] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 ,
2013.
[71] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Dis-
tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,”
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 26, 2013.
[72] J. Oliver, C. Cheng, and Y . Chen, “Tlsh–a locality sensitive hash,” in
2013 Fourth Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop , 2013,
pp. 7–13.
[73] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “Ddos attacks at the application layer:
Challenges and research perspectives for safeguarding web applications,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 661–685,
2018.
[74] H. Sajnani, V . Saini, J. Svajlenko, C. K. Roy, and C. V . Lopes,
“Sourcerercc: Scaling code clone detection to big-code,” in Proceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2016,
pp. 1157–1168.
[75] M. Shepperd, “A critique of cyclomatic complexity as a software metric,”
Software Engineering Journal , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 30–36, 1988.
[76] W. Tang, Y . Wang, H. Zhang, S. Han, P. Luo, and D. Zhang,
“Libdb: An effective and efficient framework for detecting third-party
libraries in binaries,” 19th International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories , 2022.[77] W. Tang, Z. Xu, C. Liu, J. Wu, S. Yang, Y . Li, P. Luo, and
Y . Liu, “Towards understanding third-party library dependency in c/c++
ecosystem,” in 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 1–12.
[78] T. J. Team, “Joern,” https://joern.io, 2021.
[79] The Apache Software Foundation, “Apache log4j,”
https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/, 2024.
[80] C. Wang, W. Wang, P. Yao, Q. Shi, J. Zhou, X. Xiao, and C. Zhang,
“Anchor: Fast and precise value-flow analysis for containers via memory
orientation,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. , vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
66:1–66:39, 2023.
[81] H. Wang, W. Qu, G. Katz, W. Zhu, Z. Gao, H. Qiu, J. Zhuge, and
C. Zhang, “jtrans: Jump-aware transformer for binary code similarity,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12713 , 2022.
[82] H. Wang, Y . Guo, Z. Ma, and X. Chen, “Wukong: A scalable and
accurate two-phase approach to android app clone detection,” in
Proceedings of the 2015 International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis , 2015, pp. 71–82.
[83] H. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Y . Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, and S. Wu, “Are
we there yet? filling the gap between binary similarity analysis and
binary software composition analysis,” in 2024 IEEE 9th European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (Euro S&P) , 2024, pp. 506–523.
[84] H. Wang, P. Ma, S. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, and S. Wu, “sem2vec:
Semantics-aware assembly tracelet embedding,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol. , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1–34, 2023.
[85] H. Wang, P. Ma, Y . Yuan, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, and
S. Wu, “Enhancing DNN-based binary code function search with low-
cost equivalence checking,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 226–250, 2022.
[86] H. Wang, S. Wang, D. Xu, X. Zhang, and X. Liu, “Generating effective
software obfuscation sequences with reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , vol. 19, no. 3, pp.
1900–1917, 2020.
[87] Z. Wang, P. Ma, H. Wang, and S. Wang, “PP-CSA: Practical privacy-
preserving software call stack analysis,” Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages , vol. 8, no. OOPSLA1, pp. 1264–1293, 2024.
[88] W. K. Wong, H. Wang, Z. Li, and S. Wang, “BinAug: Enhancing binary
similarity analysis with low-cost input repairing,” in Proceedings of
the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE) , 2024, pp. 1–13.
[89] W. K. Wong, H. Wang, P. Ma, S. Wang, M. Jiang, T. Y . Chen, Q. Tang,
S. Nie, and S. Wu, “Deceiving deep neural networks-based binary
code matching with adversarial programs,” in 2022 IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution , 2022, pp. 117–128.
[90] S. Woo, S. Park, S. Kim, H. Lee, and H. Oh, “Centris: A precise
and scalable approach for identifying modified open-source software
reuse,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software
Engineering , 2021, pp. 860–872.
[91] J. Wu, Z. Xu, W. Tang, L. Zhang, Y . Wu, C. Liu, K. Sun, L. Zhao, and
Y . Liu, “Ossfp: Precise and scalable c/c++ third-party library detectionusing fingerprinting functions,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering , 2023, pp. 270–282.
[92] R. Wu, Y . He, J. Huang, C. Wang, W. Tang, Q. Shi, X. Xiao,
and C. Zhang, “Libalchemy: A two-layer persistent summary design
for taming third-party libraries in static bug-finding systems,” in
Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 105:1–105:13.
[93] X. Xu, C. Liu, Q. Feng, H. Yin, L. Song, and D. Song, “Neural network-
based graph embedding for cross-platform binary code similarity
detection,” in CCS, 2017.
[94] C. Yang, Z. Xu, H. Chen, Y . Liu, X. Gong, and B. Liu, “Modx:
binary level partially imported third-party library detection via program
modularization and semantic matching,” in Proceedings of the 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 1393–
1405.
[95] A. C.-C. Yao, “How to generate and exchange secrets,” in 27th annual
symposium on foundations of computer science , 1986, pp. 162–167.
[96] Z. Yu, R. Cao, Q. Tang, S. Nie, J. Huang, and S. Wu, “Order matters:
Semantic-aware neural networks for binary code similarity detection,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 34,
no. 01, 2020, pp. 1145–1152.
[97] Z. Yu, W. Zheng, J. Wang, Q. Tang, S. Nie, and S. Wu, “Codecmr:
Cross-modal retrieval for function-level binary source code matching,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, pp. 3872–
3883, 2020.
[98] Z. Yuan, M. Feng, F. Li, G. Ban, Y . Xiao, S. Wang, Q. Tang, H. Su,
C. Yu, J. Xu et al. , “B2sfinder: detecting open-source software reuse
in cots software,” in 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , 2019, pp. 1038–1049.
[99] X. Zhan, L. Fan, S. Chen, F. Wu, T. Liu, X. Luo, and Y . Liu,
“Atvhunter: Reliable version detection of third-party libraries for
vulnerability identification in android applications,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM
43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2021,
pp. 1695–1707.
[100] J. Zhang, A. R. Beresford, and S. A. Kollmann, “Libid: reliable
identification of obfuscated third-party android libraries,” in Proceedings
of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis , 2019, pp. 55–65.
[101] Y . Zhang, J. Dai, X. Zhang, S. Huang, Z. Yang, M. Yang, and
H. Chen, “Detecting third-party libraries in android applications with
high precision and recall,” in 2018 IEEE 25th International Conference
on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) , 2018, pp.
141–152.
[102] A. Zhou, C. Ye, H. Huang, Y . Cai, and C. Zhang, “Plankton: Reconciling
binary code and debug information,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , 2024, pp. 912–928.
[103] F. Zuo, X. Li, P. Young, L. Luo, Q. Zeng, and Z. Zhang, “Neural
machine translation inspired binary code similarity comparison beyond
function pairs,” in NDSS , 2019.