We’ll Fix It in Post: What Do Bug Fixes in Video
Game Update Notes Tell Us?
Andrew Truelove
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
truelova@uci.eduEduardo Santana de Almeida
Federal University of Bahia
Salvador, Brazil
esa@rise.com.brIftekhar Ahmed
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
iftekha@uci.edu
Abstract —Bugs that persist into releases of video games can
have negative impacts on both developers and users, but particu-
lar aspects of testing in game development can lead to difﬁculties
in effectively catching these missed bugs. It has become common
practice for developers to apply updates to games in order to
ﬁx missed bugs. These updates are often accompanied by notes
that describe the changes to the game included in the update.
However, some bugs reappear even after an update attempts to
ﬁx them. In this paper, we develop a taxonomy for bug types in
games that is based on prior work. We examine 12,122 bug ﬁxes
from 723 updates for 30 popular games on the Steam platform.
We label the bug ﬁxes included in these updates to identify the
frequency of these different bug types, the rate at which bug
types recur over multiple updates, and which bug types are
treated as more severe. Additionally, we survey game developers
regarding their experience with different bug types and what
aspects of game development they most strongly associate with
bug appearance. We ﬁnd that Information bugs appear the most
frequently in updates, while Crash bugs recur the most frequently
and are often treated as more severe than other bug types.
Finally, we ﬁnd that challenges in testing, code quality, and bug
reproduction have a close association with bug persistence. These
ﬁndings should help developers identify which aspects of game
development could beneﬁt from greater attention in order to
prevent bugs. Researchers can use our results in devising tools
and methods to better identify and address certain bug types.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Similar to any regular software, the presence of bugs
in video games can cause considerable problems for game
developers, including lost sales, damaged public image, and
even lawsuits [16], [20]. These bugs can also impact the users–
and their ability to enjoy the full range of game features–in a
variety of ways. Certain bugs can cause players to lose hours
of progress [14], while others can create misunderstandings
between players that might result in receiving “abuse from
angry teammates” [9]. Despite the negative consequences a
bug can have on developers and users alike, it is common for
games to release with bugs that are ﬁxed through subsequent
updates. In 2014, for example, over a third of big-budget
games “released on Xbox One, Wii U and PS4” received an
update within 24 hours of the game’s initial release [23].
The differences between the development of games and
development of traditional software could explain the appear-
ance of these bugs. Prior research has focused on identifying
these differences [22], [29]. For example, games typically do
not have strict functional requirements [22]. Unlike traditionalsoftware that is usually meant to accomplish a particular task,
generally the primary requirement of a game is to simply
be “fun” [22]. As a result, requirements tend to be more
informal and subject to change as developers continually
reﬁne the game to be more enjoyable [22], [29]. Additionally,
game development teams are often more diverse in terms of
team member background and expertise [22]. For example,
games often contain a large number of graphical assets, which
requires greater participation from designers and artists [22].
One important difference that could explain why bugs may
not get detected before releasing relates to the difﬁculty in
comprehensively testing all aspects of a video game [22], [29].
Developers have difﬁculty writing comprehensive tests, be-
cause games can have a signiﬁcantly large number of possible
user interactions compared to other types of software [29].
Players can act unpredictably when playing games, and au-
tomated testing tools struggle to replicate the full range of
interactions that human players might attempt when playing a
game [29]. As a result, many games release with undiscovered
bugs that only reveal themselves once customers begin playing
the game [23].
One way developers address previously undetected bugs
post-release is by applying updates to their games that ﬁx these
bugs [19]. These updates are usually accompanied by update
notes, a textual description of the changes in the accompanying
update [31]. These update notes are often published as news
items on the game’s website (e.g., [10]) or on an ofﬁcial online
game forum (e.g., [34]). While some updates might include
content changes or additions, other updates might only attempt
to ﬁx a small number of severe bugs [19]. Some of these
smaller updates are referred to as “hotﬁxes”; these updates
are typically meant to remedy more pressing issues or bugs
that need immediate attention [31].
Additionally, some bugs might reappear or recur in multiple
updates. There exist cases in which developers have attempted
to ﬁx a bug in one update, only for that bug to reappear in the
game anyway, necessitating another attempted ﬁx in a later
update [17]. For example, in the game Warframe, the notes
for an update posted in August of 2019 included a bug ﬁx
statement that said, “Fixed inability to complete the Mastery
Rank 12 test if you fall off the starting platform” [13]. In
September of 2019, the notes for a later update also included
an identical line, which implies that the August update did not7362021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00073
successfully ﬁx the bug [12].
Previous research has focused on creating a taxonomy for
video game bugs [18]. While this taxonomy provides a solid
basis for categorizing bugs in games, a cursory examination
of bug ﬁxes described in game update notes indicated that
this taxonomy did not cover all the bugs addressed in these
updates. Since the taxonomy developed by Lewis et al. was
developed primarily by observing videos of game play and
reading articles related to bug complaints from users [18], it
fails to identify the bugs that are more subtle and less readily
noticeable, such as bugs related to background variables that
are not presented to the player.
To address the shortcomings of the existing taxonomy and
to attain a deeper understanding of the types of bugs in games,
in this paper, we expand the taxonomy of bug types. We posit
that improving the taxonomy will improve the chances of
identifying the types of bugs missed in testing and will also
improve the development pipeline in order to better identify
these bugs. This will allow us to gain a deeper understanding
of the association between different bug types to different
game development techniques and processes.
Using this expanded taxonomy, we collect update notes
for 30 popular games on the Steam platform [4], [5] and
categorize the bug ﬁxes present in these updates. We analyze
the frequency at which the different bug types appear in
the update notes and investigate which types of bugs recur
more often over multiple updates. Additionally, we investigate
which types of bugs most frequently appear in urgent updates
or hotﬁxes, as the bugs that appear in these updates are
more likely to have a severe negative impact on users [31].
Finally, we survey game developers on their experience with
these different types of bugs as well as what challenges and
techniques are involved in ﬁxing these bugs.
While past research has investigated the content and timing
of game updates [19], to the best of our knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst to examine the frequency in which certain types
of bugs appear and recur in game updates and the ﬁrst to
investigate the reasons why certain types of bugs appear more
frequently than others. Speciﬁcally, this paper addresses the
following research questions:
RQ1: What are the most frequently ﬁxed types of bugs
through game updates?
RQ2: What are the most frequently recurring types of bugs?
RQ3: Are all types of bugs equally severe in negatively
impacting the game experience?
In addition to answering these research questions, we have
provided our dataset of 12,122 labelled bug ﬁxes and a report
of the survey responses for the purpose of aiding future
research on this topic [33].
II. R ELATED WORK
Prior research on video games have looked into creating
a taxonomy of bugs, identifying design patterns and smells.
Lewis et al. created a taxonomy for video game bugs after
surveying online videos, articles and online communities ded-
icated to video game issues [18]. This taxonomy serves asthe basis for the taxonomy used in our study. As part of a
broader investigation into the relationship between program-
ming languages and software quality, Ray et al. developed
a taxonomy of bugs based on the cause and impact of the
bug [26]. This taxonomy was used by Pascarella et al. when
classifying faults in open source games [24]. However, we
found that this taxonomy was not suitable for our purposes.
For one, it is not speciﬁc to games, which limits their utility for
aiding game developers with the issues that are more particular
to their environment. Secondly, this taxonomy is based on non-
functional characteristics including Performance, Concurrency,
Algorithm, Memory, Programming, and Security, and was
developed by analyzing bug ﬁx commit messages from open
source projects [26]. This type of information is not available
in release notes for popular non-open source games [26].
Ampatzoglou et al. performed a case study on a collection of
open-source Java games to ﬁnd possible correlations between
the application rate of design patterns, the defect frequency and
the debugging efﬁciency [8]. They found that certain patterns
such as the Adapter pattern and Observer pattern exhibited
some correlations with defects and debugging, but could not
identify causal relationships [8]. Borrelli et al. identiﬁed seven
types of bad smells in game projects that were created with the
Unity game engine and presented UnityLinter, a static analysis
tool designed to help Unity developers detect these smells [11].
Some researchers have focused on identifying differences
between game development and development of other soft-
ware. Murphy-Hill et al. conducted surveys and interviews
with game developers [22]. Some of the ﬁndings were related
to difﬁculties with testing; some game developers expressed
difﬁculty in designing tests that could explore the state space
in games, while others indicated that there was a lack of
automated, low-level testing [22]. Santos et al. examined the
particularities of software testing in game development, and,
through the use of case studies and surveys, found a number
of difﬁculties that game developers face while testing their
software, which, in addition to challenges in test automation,
included rapidly changing requirements and impracticality in
testing interactive components [29].
There exists prior research on software release notes. Abebe
et al. investigated the types of content that appear in release
notes for updates to general software. They found six types
of information that are generally in release notes, including a
description of the issues addressed in the release [7].
Lin et al. performed an empirical analysis of urgent updates
for games on the Steam platform–including which types of
games released urgent updates, the timing of these updates,
and the reasons for releasing urgent updates [19]. With respect
to the reasons for releasing urgent updates, the authors created
a taxonomy for these primary reasons [19]. However, this
taxonomy was not tailored speciﬁcally to bugs and included
reasons that were not strictly related to bugs [19]. When
matching their taxonomy to the taxonomy of Lewis et al. some
of the Lewis et al. categories fell under multiple categories
proposed by Lin et al., while one of the Lin et al. categories
was matched to seven of the 11 Lewis et al. categories [18],
737[19]. In this paper, our taxonomy is focused on bug ﬁxes rather
than the general content of updates. Additionally, Lin et al.
did not look into why certain types of bugs appear in updates,
what kind of bugs recur over multiple updates and why, and
how severe these different bug types are in comparison to
each other. Furthermore, they did not survey game developers
about their experience with game updates. These are all major
components of our work.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The methodology for our study included two primary com-
ponents. The ﬁrst source of information encompassed update
notes for popular games. The second source of data were
responses from a survey distributed to game developers.
A. Data Collection
For our dataset, we used update notes from the most
popular games on the Steam platform [4]. We chose the Steam
platform, because Steam is the largest vendor for games on
the PC system [32]. To identify a selection of popular games,
we found Steam’s list of games that had the highest number of
players on June 23, 2020 [5]. We chose the top 30 games from
this list, excluding items that were not really games (e.g., [6]).
The list of games used for this paper can be found in Table I.
This table also identiﬁes the game’s primary genre, based on
the genre tags displayed on the game’s Steam Store page [1].
Once we had our collection of games, we manually ex-
tracted the update notes. For each game, we collected all
update notes in the one-year period leading up to the date of
the game’s most recent update. For example, the most recent
update we collected for the game Counter Strike: Global
Offensive was released on June 22, 2020, which meant the
earliest update we collected for this game was released on July
16, 2019. Another game on the list, Sid Meier’s Civilization
V, was much older, with its most recent update being released
on October 30, 2013, which meant the earliest update we
collected was on March 13, 2013.
Each game on Steam had its own channel that displayed
news and updates about the game, including some update
notes. We found this source was incomplete for many games,
however. Not all of the game’s updates were always posted
to the Steam channel. For instance, smaller updates that only
contained one or two lines–such as hotﬁx updates–seemed less
likely to appear on the Steam channel. For most games, we
used the updates notes from the ofﬁcial game or developer
web site (e.g., [10]) or online forums (e.g., [34]), relying on
the Steam update channel only if there was on other option.
Once we collected the update notes, we used a script to
collect the text from the updates related to bug ﬁxes. The
text of each update note was split into smaller segments of
text based on the line breaks of the source page formatting
(referred to as “lines” going forward). Under this scheme, each
paragraph or list item was treated as an individual line. A
formative analysis of the update notes revealed certain words
or phrases that were frequently present in bug ﬁx lines, such
as “ﬁx” and “corrected”. We applied a simple ﬁltering schemethat scanned through all our update notes and ﬂagged lines
with these terms. Each of these ﬂagged lines was recorded
in our data alongside supplemental information that included
the game the update containing the line came from, the date
of the update, and the ID of the update (for cases in which
multiple updates were released in a single day). The number
of analyzed updates for each game can be seen in Table I. An
update was considered analyzed if it contained at least one
labelled bug ﬁx, as described in the following section.
B. Types of Bugs
The next step was to label the bug ﬁxes in our data. Initially,
our goal was to label the bug ﬁxes based on the 11 bug
types identiﬁed by Lewis et al. [18]. However, we identiﬁed
that there were bug-ﬁxes that did not ﬁt in any one of the
existing types. Hence, two of the authors jointly applied open
coding [30]. First, we generated short descriptions of the initial
11 bug types based on the descriptions from Lewis et al. [18].
As we labelled bug ﬁxes from our data, if we found a bug ﬁx
that did not fall under a currently available label, we created a
new label. Additionally, we would search through previously
labelled bug ﬁxes to check if any of these ﬁxes better ﬁt
under the new label. This step additionally helped remedy
instances in which a bug could conceivably fall under multiple
categories, a problem Lewis et al. also encountered [18]. In
cases like these, we chose which category best described the
core impact of the bug. For example, one bug ﬁx for the game
Black Desert Online said, “ﬁxed the issue where running left
or right was impossible when transformed into an immortal
persimmon knight”. While part of this bug related to incorrect
position of a game object, the inability to perform an action
seemed to be the core problem. Therefore, the Action label
was applied instead of the Position of Object label.
Finally, after labelling the full collection of bug ﬁxes, we
reviewed and consolidated our categories, combining cate-
gories that could be classiﬁed as sub-types of another category.
During this step, we also discarded lines that did not actually
contain bug ﬁxes and lines in which the nature of the bug
was unclear and could not be categorized. During the coding
process, there were no disagreements between the authors.
These bug types are described in Table II. The nine new bug
types are marked in the table with an asterisk (*).
In total, 12,122 lines were labelled under this taxonomy;
these labelled lines came from 723 different updates. The
labelled dataset of these lines is available online [33].
C. Bug Recurrence
The next part of our process required us to identify all
recurring bug ﬁxes that appeared in multiple updates for a
single game. Due to the large number of updates and the large
number of bug ﬁxes, manually searching through the data to
ﬁnd all recurring bugs would be prohibitively time consuming.
At the same time, we discovered a purely automated approach
could also lead to problems. A cursory analysis of repeating
bug ﬁxes in the data revealed that some repeating lines were
generally written; it was unclear whether or not the ﬁx was
738TABLE I
MOST POPULAR STEAM GAMES ON JUNE 23, 2020
Game Title Primary Genre Number of Analyzed Updates
Counter -Strike: Global Offensive Shooter 36
Dota 2 MOB A 16
Destin y 2 Shooter 18
PLAYERUNKNOWN’S BATTLEGROUNDS Survi val 24
Path of Exile RPG 87
Grand Theft Auto V Action 3
Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six Siege Shooter 16
Football Manager 2020 Simulation 7
Team Fortress 2 Shooter 14
ARK: Survival Evolved Survi val 80
Dead by Daylight Survi val 23
Rock et League Sports 10
Terraria Survi val 5
Rust Survi val 14
SidMeier’s Civilization VI Strate gy 3
Warframe Shooter 98
Total War: WARHAMMER II Strate gy 6
PAYDAY 2 Shooter 10
Europa Universalis IV Strate gy 8
The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Special Edition RPG 1
The Elder Scrolls Online RPG 25
Hearts of Iron IV Strate gy 7
SMITE MOB A 12
Unturned Survi val 19
SidMeier’s Civilization V Strate gy 5
Black Desert Online RPG 49
Brawlhalla Fighting 15
War Thunder Simulation 92
Euro Truck Simulator 2 Simulation 3
FINAL FANTASY XIV Online RPG 17
applying to the same bug each time. For example, the game
ARK: Survival Evolved had 5 updates that included the line
“ﬁxed a server crash”. In this case, it was not apparent whether
this line was referring to the same bug each time or different
bugs that each caused crashes. Conversely, two updates for the
game Dead by Daylight both contain the same line: “ﬁxed an
issue that caused a crash when changing the graphic quality
settings during a match in the red forest maps”. Here, the
apparent cause and effect of the bug are identical; changing
certain settings in a certain context causes the game to crash.
In this case, both lines are likely referring to the same bug.
We were skeptical that an automated tool would be able todifferentiate between these two types of recurring bug ﬁxes,
so we chose not to use a purely automated approach either.
We ultimately decided on a hybrid approach. We would
use an automated approach to limit our analysis to a smaller
collection of bug ﬁxes and then manually evaluate these lines
to ﬁnd the true recurring bugs. For this ﬁrst step, we performed
cosine similarity analysis [28] between bug ﬁx lines. For each
bug ﬁx line from a game’s updates, we compared that line
to each line in all subsequent updates for the game. If two
lines had a similarity score of at least 90%, they were treated
as a potential match and grouped together for manual review.
Our small-scale formative analysis showed that a similarity
739TABLE II
TYPES OF BUGS FOUND IN UPDATE NOTES
Category Description Category Description
Action Errors in the ability/inability to per-
form actions.Game Graphics A certain visual aspect of the game
world is being rendered incorrectly.
Artiﬁcial Intelli-
genceAn NPC or AI does not behave in the
intended manner.Implementation
ResponseThere are errors regarding the game’s
interactions with hardware or base
software that ends up affecting perfor-
mance.
Audio* Game audio is not playing correctly. Information Information about the game world is
not conveyed to the player correctly.
Bounds An object exists outside the intended
game space, such as being outside the
game map or in a location that should
not be accessible.Interaction
Between Object
Properties*Two or more object properties do not
behave properly when interacting with
each other.
Camera* There is an issue with game camera
through which the player views the
game world.Interrupted Event An action in game that was previ-
ously operating is terminated abruptly
against expectations, or the action was
not interrupted when it should have
been.
Collision of Ob-
jects*Objects do not behave properly when
they collide or make contact with each
other.Object
Persistence*Game objects do not correctly enter or
exit the game world.
Context State Objects do not enter and exit states
properly.Position of Ob-
jectAn object is not in the correct position
or orientation within the game space
over time.
Crash* The game crashes or is otherwise
forced to close.Triggered Event* Improper triggering of game events
(Event A causes Event B).
Event
OccurrenceDiscrete events do not occur at the
correct rate or order.User Interface* The appearance/position/behavior of
UI elements are incorrect.
Exploit* Players are able to improperly and
unfairly gain game beneﬁts through
behavior unintended by developers.Value An in-game variable is not set to the
correct value.
threshold of 90% was sufﬁcient to minimize false positives.
A line could have multiple matches if it appeared in more
than two updates; all instances of these bugs were grouped
together. Once we collected all potential matches, we manually
inspected them and removed all false positives as well as
those matches in which it was unclear whether the matching
lines were really referring to the same bug. After ﬁltering the
potential matches, we were able to collect information on the
types of bugs that recurred over multiple updates.
D. Bug Severity
To identify which bugs were treated as severe, we used
metrics employed by Lin et al. to identify urgent updates [19].
Under these metrics, updates were considered urgent if they
were: identiﬁed as hotﬁxes within the notes for the update, 0-
day updates (same day as the last update), or deployed sooner
than normal, based on the game’s regular update schedule [19].
In addition to these metrics, we also looked at the length of
the update notes. Based on our own observations of the data,
it appeared as if updates addressing urgent bugs typically hadshorter update notes than regularly scheduled updates. This
is likely because urgent updates are only intended to ﬁx a
small number of critical issues that cannot wait until the next
major update. To ﬁnd the urgent updates in our data, we used
a script to parse through each update in our data to check
the following information: whether the update notes contained
language referring to the update as a hotﬁx, the number of
days between the current update and the last update, and the
number of non-whitespace lines in the update notes.
For the self-identiﬁed hotﬁxes, we searched for updates that
contained the word “hotﬁx” in the ﬁrst twenty lines of the
update text. This was to help avoid false positives, because
updates that self-identiﬁed as hotﬁxes would use the language
near the beginning of the update text. When the word appeared
further into the text, this was typically because the update was
referring to another hotﬁx update, such as a past update or
a planned future update. After running our script, we then
manually reviewed the resulting updates and ﬁltered out any
remaining false positive updates and marked the remaining
updates as urgent. For the 0-day updates, we marked as urgent
740all updates that had a value of 0 days since the last update.
For the last two metrics (number of days and number of non-
whitespace lines), we used Double MAD (Median Absolute
Deviation) [19], [27] to ﬁnd the outliers below the median for
both the days since the last update and for the update size.
Updates that ﬁt either of these criteria were also marked as
urgent. We used the same threshold value of 2 that was used
by Lin et al. in their paper [19].
Once we identiﬁed all the urgent updates in our data, we
ﬂagged all the bug ﬁxes lines from our data that appeared
in an urgent update. An urgent update is generally intended
to ﬁx “problems that are deemed critical enough to not be
left unﬁxed until a regular-cycle update” [19]. As such, the
bug ﬁxes included in these urgent updates are likely to have
severe negative impacts on the game experience that require
more immediate attention. For our purposes then, if a bug ﬁx
was included in an urgent update, we treated it as a severe bug.
We used the ﬁndings from this process to calculate the severity
rate of each bug type, as explained in Part Cof Section IV .
E. Survey
Protocol: We created a 12-minute survey using the Qualtrics
survey system [3] to assess game developer perceptions of the
types of bugs that appear in game update notes. First, the
survey asked participants certain demographic questions, such
as the years of game development experience and the number
of people in their organization. We also asked participants if
they had experience ﬁxing bugs for updates to video games.
The next section asked participants about their experience with
the different bug types in our taxonomy. For each of the twenty
bug types, we asked participants to rate on a 5-point Likert
scale their level of agreement that the bug type was likely
to have a severe negative impact on the game experience.
Participants were then informed of the three most frequent
bug types across all updates and were asked if these results
matched with their own experience. They were also offered
to explain why they believed these bug types (and other bug
types they commonly encounter) appear so frequently in game
updates. Similar questions were also asked for the frequently
recurring bug types. Finally, participants were asked about the
aspects of game development related to bug recurrence and
the challenges in identifying and ﬁxing bugs.
Respondents: To ﬁnd participants, we identiﬁed GitHub [2]
repositories for games and game-related tools that had been
marked as noteworthy by other GitHub users. We sent the sur-
vey to GitHub users who had contributed to these repositories
and who had made their email addresses visible to other users.
Additionally, we sent the survey to developers of the games
examined for this study whose email addresses were publicly
listed on the developers’ web sites. We also made the link to
the survey available to a collection of game developers with
the intention that they would apply snowballing to spread the
survey to other developers [15].
The survey was sent to 630 contacts. 16 of these invitations
were not delivered successfully. Three invitations generated
automatic replies suggesting that the recipient was unable toreceive the survey, and one recipient indicated that he did
not possess a game development background. Overall, 610
survey invites were delivered, and we received 47 applicable
responses. This gave us a response rate of 7.70%. Other im-
portant studies in the software engineering ﬁeld have reported
response rates ranging between 5.7% [25] and 7.9% [21],
indicating that our response rate for this study is satisfactory.
The report of the survey results is available online [33].
IV. R ESULTS
A. Frequent Bug Types in All Updates
Fig. 1. Frequency of Bug Types Across All Updates
Figure 1 shows the frequencies at which each of the 20 bug
types appeared as a ﬁx in any game update from our data.



	Observation 1: The most frequently occurring bug types
were Information, Game Graphics, and Action.
The three least frequent bug types were Camera, Interrupted
Event, and Exploit. All three of the most frequent bug types
were bug types identiﬁed by Lewis et al. [18]. Meanwhile, for
the three least frequent bug types, only Interrupted Event was
one of the bug types identiﬁed by Lewis et al. [18].
The two most frequent bug types, Information andGame
Graphics cover largely non-interactive elements of the game.
This runs somewhat contrary to ﬁndings found by Santos et al.
that suggest some of the difﬁculties in testing games are due
to challenges in testing interactive elements [29]. If the most
frequent bug types are not necessarily interactive in nature,
perhaps automated testing might be more effective at catching
these more common types of bugs.
For each of the three most frequent bug types, survey
respondents were asked if they frequently ﬁxed bugs of that
type in game updates. 57% of respondents said they frequently
ﬁxed Information bugs, 40% said they frequently ﬁxed Game
Graphics bugs, and 67% said they frequently ﬁxed Action
bugs.
741When asked why certain bug types might appear frequently,
respondents gave a variety of responses. For Information bugs,
some respondents referenced priority concerns, such as the one
in the following survey response.
“Developing mechanics is the main focus and usually
information related components are pushed down to the
last of the pipeline and as deadline approaches, they are
not done right. ”
Other respondents noted that the correct information may be
difﬁcult to identify if that information is the result of various
calculations involving “complex states and interactions”. This
information could also be “buried in data ﬁles” that testers
may not be able to locate. Incorrect information might be
missed, because the correct information may not be accessible.


Observation 2: Survey explanations for the frequency of
Information bugs include: low priority compared to other
aspects of the game and difﬁculties in ﬁnding the correct
information.
With respect to Game Graphics bugs, the most cited reason
by respondents to their frequency in updates was due to the
complexity of the subject.
“Computer graphics is one of the most complex disci-
plines to work with and need highly experienced pro-
grammers to make sure that everything just work. ”
Respondents also cited the large number of cases that need
to be tested.
“It’s fairly simple to miss visual corner cases in testing. ”
Additionally, some responses seemed to speak to the difﬁ-
culties in properly assessing the quality of game graphics. One
respondent pointed out that game graphics can be subjective.
What looks like a graphical bug to one tester may not look like
a bug to another tester. Another respondent mentioned that the
correct graphical qualities of the game might be highly speciﬁc
and require ﬁne-tuning to get them right.
“Graphics can be delicate. It can take a lot of tweaking
to get something to look just right”
One response noted that graphics are considered a lower
priority to ﬁx before production than other game elements.


Observation 3: Survey explanations for the frequency of
Game Graphics bugs include: complexity, large size of
testing state space and evaluation of graphics quality.
ForAction bugs, many of the respondents spoke to complex-
ity in testing as a reason these bugs might appear frequently
in updates. Each possible action gives the player a new way
to interact with the game world. As the number of possible
interactions increases, there is a greater chance that these
interactions might conﬂict with each other. Testing all possible
conﬂicts can be difﬁcult to do within the development timeline,
especially when dealing with actions that may or may not be
executable depending on the game state.
“Games often have a large number of available actions,
only some of which are available at a given time; theresults of actions often depend on context (and some-
times randomness); and actions may depend on or be
changed by previously-performed actions. While testing
every possible action might be feasible, testing every
possible sequence of actions in every possible sequence
of contexts is usually combinatorially impossible. ”


Observation 4: Survey explanations for the frequency
ofAction bugs include: increasing complexity with ad-
ditional possible actions and large size of testing state
space.
Respondents were also asked if they frequently ﬁxed bugs of
any other type from our taxonomy and why these bugs might
be frequent. Crash bugs were identiﬁed as frequent by two
respondents, with one respondent attributing this frequency to
“not properly checking for input sanity”. Another respondent
mentioned Exploit bugs, stating “players are good at ﬁnding
them”. Another respondent who worked with multiplayer
games referred to bugs related to desynchronization of players.
Under our taxonomy, this bug would fall under the Implemen-
tation Response label. Another user mentioned Bounds bugs as
a frequent concern, especially for 3D games, explaining that
the collision and physics systems in a game tend to produce
edge cases somewhere that leads to bounds issues.
B. Recurring Bugs
Fig. 2. Frequency of Recurring Bug Types
Figure 2 shows the frequency in which bugs of a certain
type would recur over multiple updates.


Observation 5: The bug types that recurred the most fre-
quently over multiple updates were Crash, Game Graph-
ics, and Triggered Event.
The bug types that recurred over multiple updates the least
frequently were Camera, Event Occurrence , and Interrupted
Event ; none of these bug types had any instances of bugs that
742recurred over multiple updates. One of the most frequently
recurring bug types–Game Graphics–and two of the least
frequently recurring bug types–Interrupted Event and Event
Occurrence–came from the taxonomy of Lewis et al. [18].
Regarding the top three frequently recurring bug types, sur-
vey respondents were asked if they frequently ﬁxed recurring
bugs that fell into each of these categories. 48% of respondents
said they frequently ﬁxed recurring Crash bugs, 21% said they
frequently ﬁxed recurring Game Graphics bugs, and 24% said
they frequently ﬁxed recurring Triggered Event bugs.
For each of these top three bug types, survey respondents
were offered to explain why these bug types recur over
multiple updates more frequently. When it came to Crash bugs,
multiple respondents cited the difﬁculties in identifying the
actual root cause of the crash.
“When ﬁxing a crash bug, it is easier to ﬁnd the single
caller that passed bad data in the crash report than it is
to ensure that all callers pass good data. ”
Other respondents spoke to how other changes to the game
can easily cause the crash to reappear even after ﬁxing it.
“Due to how interconnected most things in games are, it
is easy to reintroduce a crash after initially ﬁxing it”


Observation 6: Survey explanations for the frequent
recurrence of Crash bugs include: reproducing bugs and
reappearance after other changes.
With respect to why Game Graphics bugs would recur
frequently, the responses were more mixed. One respondent
mentioned that game graphics can be “inter-dependent and
cascade through ﬁxes”, while another expressed experience
with having to deal with unforeseen edge cases.
A different respondent reiterated the delicate nature of game
graphics. A previous ﬁx to a graphical component of the game
might not have been sufﬁcient, and further tweaking might be
required to get the graphics just right. Another user pointed
out that “Graphics bugs are the most apparent thing for the
player to notice”. Building off these responses, it is possible
that–since the quality of game graphics can be subjective,
and because players more readily notice the quality of game
graphics–these kinds of bugs recur more frequently because
players are more likely to notice graphics that do not meet
their personal quality standards, which could mean they are
more likely to express this dissatisfaction to developers.


Observation 7: Survey explanations for the frequent
recurrence of Game Graphics bugs include: inter-
dependence of graphics, unforeseen edge cases, and the
speciﬁc nature of graphical components.
Because few respondents claimed to see frequently recurring
Triggered Event bugs, there were not many explanations as to
why these bugs might recur frequently over multiple updates.
Still, some responses speak to the large size of the test space.
“Events can often be triggered in many different ways;
making sure every way works is tricky and time-
consuming. ”

Observation 8: Survey explanations for the frequent
recurrence of Triggered Event bugs include: large size of
testing state space.
When asked if respondents had seen any other frequently
recurring bug types, one respondent pointed to Action bugs,
stating that these bugs recur often for the same reasons as
Crash bugs. Other respondents spoke more broadly, identify-
ing reasons why bugs in general might recur over updates.
“Sometimes bugs recur because some careless guy re-
moves your ﬁx when merging his/her code. ”
“It has to do with whether management allows us the
time for testing before they push out the newest code. ”
C. Bug Severity
Fig. 3. Severity of Bug Types
We calculated the severity of each bug type by ﬁnding the
proportion of bug ﬁxes from the data that appeared in an
update marked as urgent. For each bug type, we divided the
frequency of the bug type in an urgent update by the frequency
of the bug type in all updates, as expressed below:
BugTypeSeverity =BugTypeFreq (UrgentUpdates )
BugTypeFreq (AllUpdates)
(1)
Figure 3 shows the resulting severity rates of each bug type.


Observation 9: Based on the update data, the bug type
with the highest severity was Crash. The next most severe
bug types were Object Persistence andTriggered Event.
Crash bugs appeared 580 times across all updates and 219
times in urgent updates. 38% of the occurrences were in urgent
updates, the greatest proportion for any bug type.
Figure 4 depicts the perceptions of bug severity among
survey participants. For each bug type X, respondents were
asked to state the level of agreement with the statement “X
743Fig. 4. Agreement Level to Whether Selected Bug Types are Likely to Have
a Severe Negative Impact on Game Experience
bugs are likely to have a severe negative impact on the game
experience.”


Observation 10: The bug types that generated the largest
number of Strongly Agree responses were Crash, Action,
andExploit.
With respect to Crash bugs, the results from the update data
and from the survey appear to match; Crash bugs appear to
be the most severe bugs in both data sources. Action bugs,
the second-most severe type from the survey, do not rank
as highly when looking at the mined data seen in Figure 3,
however. Interestingly, Exploit was the bug type that received
the third-most Strongly Agree responses, yet it had the lowest
severity rate from the mined update data. The reason for this
discrepancy is not readily clear. It could be due to a difference
between the perceived impacts of these bugs versus the actual
impact. This may be a worthwhile avenue for future research.
D. Bug Fix Association with Game Development Processes
Survey respondents were asked “In your opinion, what
aspects of game development (i.e. testing, designing, etc.) are
associated with bug recurrence in your current project or in
other game projects in which you participated?” 16 respon-
dents mentioned testing as a component of game development
that had a strong association with bug recurrence. Some of
these responses mentioned how a lack of testing in general
was linked to bug recurrence, while other responses spoke
about the lack of certain kinds of testing, such as automated
testing, integration testing, and cross-platform testing.
“Lack of automated testing deﬁnitely increases bugs in
general”
“The testing only checks the current feature/bugﬁx and
not how it interacts with everything else”
Four respondents claimed that game design had a strong
link to bug recurrence.
“Good design helps avoid bug recurrence in the ﬁrst
place. Testing can be used as a fail-safe”Four respondents pointed to code quality/coding as an
important component connected with bug recurrence.
“Code quality is often a huge factor for bugs. Badly
designed code interacts badly with other pieces of code,
and conﬂicts can result easily, causing bugs. ”
Other aspects of game development provided in the re-
sponses included the game architecture, quality assurance, a
lack of consistency checks, and the addition of new features.
“In my experience, new gameplay features often lead to
bug recurrence, when a previous bug was ”solved” by
addressing the particular feature interaction that caused
the bug rather than making those features more robust in
general. ”


Observation 11: The aspects of game development most
frequently linked to bug recurrence were: testing, game
design, and code quality.
Finally, respondents were asked what they believed were
the main challenges in identifying and ﬁxing bugs in video
game development. Like the previous question, 22 respondents
provided answers. Eight responses pointed to challenges with
conducting adequate testing.
“too many possibilities of interaction/combination to test
them all thoroughly”
Seven responses mentioned difﬁculties in identifying the
origin of bugs or reproducing bugs.
“Reproducing a bug often requires a large time invest-
ment to reach the state in which it is apparent. Games
speciﬁcally are huge loosely connected systems; bugs
often depend on more than one of these systems having
a certain state. ”
Six responses focused on code quality. There was a particu-
lar emphasis on the importance of well-written code that does
not cause conﬂicts elsewhere in the game.
“The hardest part is ﬁnding an appropriate solution to a
bug that isn’t hacky and is future-proof to later additions
to the code that might break the bugﬁx again. ”
Two responses mentioned development schedules.
“Lack of QA, faulty development schedule, low focus on
code quality. ”
Two responses mentioned unforeseen bugs that only appear
in particular situations, such as bugs arising out of speciﬁc
hardware setups.
“Bugs that occur only with some OSes or hardware”
Two responses explained that the choice of programming
language can lead to issues.
“Using languages with a weak memory model such as
C++ makes it hard to identify bugs caused by memory
corruption errors such as use-after-free. ”


Observation 12: The most frequently mentioned main
challenges to identifying and ﬁxing bugs in video games
were: inadequate testing, reproducing bugs, and code
quality.
744V. D ISCUSSION
A. For Researchers
Prioritizing of Bug Types: Our results identify which
types of bugs appear in updates more frequently than others,
which bugs recur over multiple updates more frequently, and
which bug types are more severe in negatively impacting the
game experience for players. When comparing frequency to
severity, these results could help illuminate which types of
bugs researchers might prioritize when devising techniques
to prevent or ﬁx certain types of bugs. For example, though
Information bugs were the most frequently occurring bug type
across all the update notes, this bug type was not as highly
ranked with respect to recurrence and severity, as seen in
Figures 3 and 4. The results seem to indicate that even if
Information bugs are common in game updates, they do not
seem to recur as often as other bugs, and they are not seen
as having as much of a severe negative impact on the game
experience. Our results imply that Crash bugs could probably
use a greater focus from researchers. Though these bugs were
not the most frequent bug type in general, this was the bug type
that had the highest recurrence rate and the highest severity
rate in our data. Additionally, the survey results also indicate
that this bug has a high level of severity. Using the ﬁndings
from this paper, researchers can develop specialized tools and
methods to speciﬁcally target the more problematic bug types.
Our survey results also provide some explanations as to
why some of these certain bug types stand out more than
others. From our results, we have found that some explanations
appear multiple times and in multiple contexts for different bug
types. The large size of the testing state space, for example,
is provided as an explanation for why both Game Graphics
bugs and Action bugs are ﬁxed frequently in game updates and
for why Triggered Event bugs recur frequently over multiple
updates. A deeper investigation into these common causes of
bug issues and approaches into remedying them might be a
worthwhile subject for future research.
Game Development Processes: The ﬁndings regarding bug
frequency, recurrence, and severity also have implications re-
lating to the game development process. Testing, code quality,
game design, and bug reproduction were all aspects of game
development that seemed to have a strong association with
bugs, according to the survey results. While some research
exists on the testing process in game development [29], there is
room to dig even deeper. Multiple respondents cited how issues
could arise when different components of the game interact
with each other in an unintended manner. Researchers could
focus on this issue of testing the interactions between game
components in future research. Additionally, there does not ap-
pear to be much research into the other three processes within
the game development context. Future research can focus on
devising approaches and methods focused on improving these
aspects of the game development process so that they are less
likely to lead to the appearance of bugs.
For example, reproducing bugs was one of the most widely
cited challenges in identifying and ﬁxing bugs in video games.Reproduction is difﬁcult, because bugs might be caused by a
speciﬁc interaction of game states and properties that may
not be evident to whomever experiences the bug. The lack of
information about the bug’s true cause leads to challenges in
ﬁxing the bug and a greater chance that the bug will reappear
in a future release. Indeed, this challenge with reproducing
bugs was one of the major reasons from respondents for why
Crash bugs recur frequently over updates. To combat this
problem, researchers could focus on devising tools to better
collect information about the game state so that developers are
better equipped to ﬁnd the true cause of these bugs.
B. For Practitioners
Prioritizing of Bug Types: The results can help game
developers identify which types of bugs may need more
attention than others. As described above, developers can
evaluate the frequency, recurrence, and severity information
from this paper to decide which bugs may need more attention
when testing or ﬁxing bugs.
Game Development Processes: Similar to researchers,
game developers can take advantage of the results relating
to aspects of the development process that have a link to
the bug occurrence. For instance, the results suggest that
difﬁculties in the testing process are linked with the appearance
of bugs. While the size of the game state space can make
comprehensive testing difﬁcult, the responses also seem to
indicate that testing may also be too narrow in scope. Many
respondents mentioned issues where testing does not involve
broader interactions with other components of the system.
Furthermore, the interactions between system components was
was given as a reason for the recurrence of Crash bugs. These
results suggest that developers might beneﬁt from a greater
focus on multi-component interaction testing. The game space
might be too large to test everything, but developers can
focus on creating more tests targeting high-priority bug types.
Additionally, they could emphasize using tests that incorporate
multiple interacting components of the system, as opposed to
testing components in isolation.
Code quality was also provided both as an aspect of game
design associated with bug recurrence and as a challenge in
identifying and ﬁxing bugs in video games. Poor code quality
increases complexity of the program, and it also can lead
to conﬂicts with other components of the system, ultimately
resulting in bugs. The interaction of code modules in games
seems to be an important component of game development that
is related to both the testing process and the coding process.
Implementing practices to enforce higher code quality could
end up beneﬁting both of these processes.
Our results point to different possible parts of the game
development process associated with bugs. By implementing
practices to improve these processes, developers might be able
to mitigate the rate at which bugs appear or recur.
VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
With the intent to make sure our results could be general-
ized, we tried to collect a large amount of update notes from a
745high number of games. We collected the top 30 games with the
highest player counts on the Steam platform in order to collect
a sample of games that represents the range of video games
currently available. It is possible however, that the games
studied and the update notes analyzed are not representative
to the entire body of game update notes.
It is possible that survey respondents may not have un-
derstood the different bug types when answering questions
regarding their experiences with these bugs. To avoid this, we
provided an explanation of each bug type in the survey that
described the bug and included an example bug ﬁx from the
update notes that belonged to that category.
There was a risk that the bug types in our taxonomy might
be inﬂuenced by bias or that they might not account for all
types of bugs. To reduce this bias, we created a taxonomy that
was based on prior work [18]. Additionally, the large number
of bug ﬁxes (12,122) we analyzed should help ensure that our
ﬁnal taxonomy is complete.
In identifying severe bug ﬁxes in the update notes, there
is a possibility that our mechanisms to identify urgent up-
dates might not have captured the correct number of relevant
updates. Our methods could have been under-inclusive or
over-inclusive. To avoid this, we based our approaches off of
approaches used in prior research [19].
Additionally, our script to identify the bug ﬁxes in our
update notes might not have identiﬁed all bug ﬁxes. From our
own manual analysis, we found common repeating words and
phrases that were used in the lines containing bug ﬁxes. We
accounted for these terms when creating our script. In order to
test the script’s efﬁciency, we inspected the code of our script,
ran tests with the script, and tested the script on update notes
with known results. It is possible, however, that some bug ﬁx
lines may not have included these terms.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we collected the update notes from popular
games on the Steam platform. We created a taxonomy of
bug types that we used to label the bug ﬁxes included in
the update notes. We found that the bug types that appeared
the most frequently in update notes were Information, Game
Graphics, and Action. The bug types that recurred the most
often over multiple updates were Crash, Game Graphics, and
Triggered Event, and the bug types with the highest rate of
severity were Crash, Object Persistence, and Triggered Event.
We surveyed game developers who corroborated that Crash
bugs were likely to have a severe negative impact on the
game experience. The survey responses also suggested that
challenges in testing, bug reproduction, and code quality had
a strong association with the occurrence of bugs in game
updates. In particular, problems arising from the interaction
between different components was a widely cited issue.
These results can help game developers identify which types
of bugs to pay more attention to when testing and ﬁxing bugs.
Developers can also use these results to help adjust practices
related to game development process in order to better prevent,
identify, and ﬁx bugs. In addition, we have made our datasetof labelled bug ﬁxes and survey responses available online to
aid in future research on this topic [33].
Researchers can take advantage of these results in order to
develop tools or methods that can target speciﬁc bug types that
are more likely to severely impact the game. There is room for
future work that can identify aspects of game development that
might beneﬁt from specialized tools or methods that address
some of the challenges provided in the survey. For example,
multi-component interaction testing is one area that could
beneﬁt from future research. Our study takes the ﬁrst step
towards fulﬁlling these goals.
REFERENCES
[1] “Browse steam your way: Introducing steam tags, a powerful new way
to shop for games,” https://store.steampowered.com/tag, accessed: Feb.
5, 2021.
[2] “Github,” https://github.com/, accessed: Aug. 1, 2020.
[3] “Qualtrics,” https://www.qualtrics.com/, accessed: Aug. 5, 2020.
[4] “Steam,” https://store.steampowered.com/, accessed: Jun. 20, 2020.
[5] “Steam & game stats,” https://store.steampowered.com/stats/, accessed:
Jun. 23, 2020.
[6] “Wallpaper engine,” https://store.steampowered.com/app/431960/
WallpaperEngine/, accessed: Jul. 7, 2020.
[7] S. L. Abebe, N. Ali, and A. E. Hassan, “An empirical study of software
release notes,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1107–
1142, 2016.
[8] A. Ampatzoglou, A. Kritikos, E.-M. Arvanitou, A. Gortzis, F. Chatzi-
asimidis, and I. Stamelos, “An empirical investigation on the impact of
design pattern application on computer game defects,” in Proceedings
of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning
Future Media Environments, 2011, pp. 214–221.
[9] M. Beckwith, “Apex legends game breaking revive bug returns in sea-
son 6,” https://gamerant.com/apex-legends-season-6-revive-bug/, Aug.
2020, accessed: Aug. 24, 2020.
[10] Blue Mammoth, “Brawlhalla’s new battle pass sea-
son 1 - patch 4.00,” https://www.brawlhalla.com/news/
brawlhallas-new-battle-pass-season-1-patch-4-00/, May 2020,
accessed: Jul. 2, 2020.
[11] A. Borrelli, V . Nardone, G. A. Di Lucca, G. Canfora, and M. Di Penta,
“Detecting video game-speciﬁc bad smells in unity projects,” in 17th
International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR ’20),
October 5–6, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2020.
[12] [DE]Megan, “Prime vault: Hotﬁx 25.7.5,” https://forums.warframe.com/
topic/1127427-prime-vault-hotﬁx-2575/, Sep. 2019, accessed: Jul. 11,
2020.
[13] ——, “Saint of altra: Update 25.7.0,” https://forums.warframe.com/
topic/1123841-saint-of-altra-update-2570/, Aug. 2019, accessed: Jul.
10, 2020.
[14] R. Gilliam, “Paper mario: The origami king has a game-breaking bug
near the end,” https://tinyurl.com/yydjp7ey, Jul. 2020, accessed: Aug.
28, 2020.
[15] K. Kelley, B. Clark, V . Brown, and J. Sitzia, “Good practice in the
conduct and reporting of survey research,” International Journal for
Quality in health care, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 261–266, 2003.
[16] I. Khan, “Bethesda facing possible class-action lawsuit
over fallout 76,” https://www.gameinformer.com/2018/11/27/
bethesda-facing-possible-class-action-lawsuit-over-fallout-76, Nov.
2018, accessed: Aug. 22, 2020.
[17] S. Lantz, “Call of duty: Warzone demon gun glitch
makes an unfortunate return,” https://gamerant.com/
call-of-duty-warzone-demon-gun-texture-glitch/, Aug. 2020, accessed:
Aug. 25, 2020.
[18] C. Lewis, J. Whitehead, and N. Wardrip-Fruin, “What went wrong: a
taxonomy of video game bugs,” in Proceedings of the ﬁfth international
conference on the foundations of digital games, 2010, pp. 108–115.
[19] D. Lin, C.-P. Bezemer, and A. E. Hassan, “Studying the urgent updates of
popular games on the steam platform,” Empirical Software Engineering,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2095–2126, 2017.
746[20] E. Makuch, “Battleﬁeld 4’s rocky launch ”absolutely” damaged
player trust, producer says,” https://www.gamespot.com/articles/
battleﬁeld-4s-rocky-launch-absolutely-damaged-pla/1100-6422805/,
Oct. 2014, accessed: Aug. 20, 2020.
[21] F. Medeiros, M. Ribeiro, R. Gheyi, S. Apel, C. K ¨astner, B. Ferreira,
L. Carvalho, and B. Fonseca, “Discipline matters: Refactoring of pre-
processor directives in the #ifdef hell,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering , vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 453–469, 2018.
[22] E. Murphy-Hill, T. Zimmermann, and N. Nagappan, “Cowboys, ankle
sprains, and keepers of quality: How is video game development
different from software development?” in Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering , 2014, pp. 1–11.
[23] E. Narcisse, “More than a third of 2014’s big-
budget games got day-one patches,” https://kotaku.com/
more-than-a-third-of-2014-s-big-budget-games-got-day-on-1686398805,
Feb. 2015, accessed: Aug. 27, 2020.
[24] L. Pascarella, F. Palomba, M. Di Penta, and A. Bacchelli, “How is
video game development different from software development in open
source?” in 2018 IEEE/ACM 15th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 392–402.
[25] L. Passos, R. Queiroz, M. Mukelabai, T. Berger, S. Apel, K. Czarnecki,
and J. Padilla, “A study of feature scattering in the linux kernel,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , 2018.
[26] B. Ray, D. Posnett, V . Filkov, and P. Devanbu, “A large scale study of
programming languages and code quality in github,” in Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering , 2014, pp. 155–165.
[27] P. Rosenmai, “Using the median absolute devi-
ation to ﬁnd outliers,” http://eurekastatistics.com/
using-the-median-absolute-deviation-to-ﬁnd-outliers/, Nov. 2013,
accessed: Aug. 17, 2020.
[28] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic
text retrieval,” Information processing & management , vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 513–523, 1988.
[29] R. E. Santos, C. V . Magalh ˜aes, L. F. Capretz, J. S. Correia-Neto,
F. Q. da Silva, and A. Saher, “Computer games are serious business
and so is their quality: particularities of software testing in game
development from the perspective of practitioners,” in Proceedings of
the 12th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement , 2018, pp. 1–10.
[30] C. B. Seaman, “Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software
engineering,” IEEE Transactions on software engineering , vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 557–572, 1999.
[31] J. ˇSvelch, “Resisting the perpetual update: Struggles against protocolog-
ical power in video games,” New Media & Society , vol. 21, no. 7, pp.
1594–1612, 2019.
[32] E. J. Toy, J. V . Kummaragunta, and J. S. Yoo, “Large-scale cross-country
analysis of steam popularity,” in 2018 International Conference on
Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 1054–1058.
[33] A. Truelove, “Additional material for “we’ll ﬁx it in post: What do bug
ﬁxes in video game update notes tell us?”,” https://github.com/truelova/
ICSE 2021 UpdateNotes, Feb. 2021, accessed: Feb. 5, 2021.
[34] ZOS GinaBruno, “Pc/mac patch notes v6.0.5 - greymoor up-
date 26,” https://forums.elderscrollsonline.com/en/discussion/528633/
pc-mac-patch-notes-v6-0-5-greymoor-update-26, May 2020, accessed:
Jul. 8, 2020.
747