How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems?
An Empirical Study of OpenStack
Yuxia Zhang
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Con￿dence
Software Technologies, Ministry of
Education
Beijing, China
yuxiaz@pku.edu.cnMinghui Zhou∗
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Con￿dence
Software Technologies, Ministry of
Education
Beijing, China
zhmh@pku.edu.cnKlaas-Jan Stol
School of Computer Science and
Information Technology
University College Cork
Lero, the Irish Software Research
Centre
Cork, Ireland
klaas-jan.stol@lero.ie
Jianyu Wu
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Con￿dence
Software Technologies, Ministry of
Education
Beijing, China
sswjy@pku.edu.cnZhi Jin
Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Peking University
Key Laboratory of High Con￿dence
Software Technologies, Ministry of
Education
Beijing, China
zhijin@pku.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Open Source Software (OSS) has come to play a critical role in the
software industry. Some large ecosystems enjoy the participation
of large numbers of companies, each of which has its own focus
and goals. Indeed, companies that otherwise compete, may become
collaborators within the OSS ecosystem they participate in. Prior
research has largely focused on commercial involvement in OSS
projects, but there is a scarcity of research focusing on company
collaborations within OSS ecosystems. Some of these ecosystems
have become critical building blocks for organizations worldwide;
hence, a clear understanding of how companies collaborate within
large ecosystems is essential. This paper presents the results of an
empirical study of the OpenStack ecosystem, in which hundreds
of companies collaborate on thousands of project repositories to
deliver cloud distributions. Based on a detailed analysis, we identify
clusters of collaborations, and identify four strategies that compa-
nies adopt to engage with the OpenStack ecosystem. We also￿nd
that companies may engage in intentional or passive collaborations,
or may work in an isolated fashion. Further, we￿ nd that a com-
pany’s position in the collaboration network is positively associated
with its productivity in OpenStack. Our study sheds light on how
∗Corresponding author
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for pro￿t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the￿ rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci￿c permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7121-6/20/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380376large OSS ecosystems work, and in particular on the patterns of
collaboration within one such large ecosystem.
KEYWORDS
Open source software; OpenStack; company participation; OSS
ecosystem; open collaboration; software development
ACM Reference Format:
Yuxia Zhang, Minghui Zhou, Klaas-Jan Stol, Jianyu Wu, and Zhi Jin. 2020.
How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? An Empirical
Study of OpenStack. In 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’20), May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380376
1 INTRODUCTION
It is now widely acknowledged that Open Source Software (OSS)
has had a dramatic in￿uence on the software industry. These virtual
software projects have brought together developers spanning geo-
graphic, language, and time zone di￿erences [ 78]. As open source
adoption has grown signi￿cantly in the last decade or so, many
companies have started participating in OSS projects. Numerous
companies have built business models around OSS ecosystems1to
achieve innovations [ 40], reduce costs [ 90], or generate revenue on
complementary services [ 27]. Many companies achieve their goals
of joining an OSS ecosystem by hiring developers to contribute to
the projects within that ecosystem [ 9,92,98]. Many well-known
OSS ecosystems, such as Linux, Android, and OpenStack, are devel-
oped mainly through collaborations of many di￿erent companies.
For example, over 85 percent of code in the Linux kernel has been
contributed by more than 500 companies in 2017 [ 45]. With such a
signi￿cant level of contribution, companies participating in these
1Similar to Jansen et al. [ 44], we use the term “ecosystem” to represent a group of
software users, developers, organizations, artifacts, and infrastructure interacting as a
system. Operationally, an ecosystem may contain one or more software projects.
11962020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
ecosystems have a very signi￿cant in￿uence on not only their de-
velopment roadmap and future, but also on their sustainability.
Collaboration among companies is of critical importance to the
development of OSS ecosystems. First, many companies are highly
specialized in one speci￿c domain, and their highly specialized
knowledge and expertise add great value to an ecosystem [ 53,80].
Collaboration among di￿erent companies each with speci￿c exper-
tise therefore greatly bene￿ts and facilitates the e￿cient develop-
ment of OSS ecosystems. Second, companies may decide to allocate
developers to projects—or stop contributing—and these decisions
directly a￿ect an OSS ecosystem’ sustainability [ 47,54,98]. Third,
one company’s practices (and behavior) may have a signi￿cant im-
pact on others’ participation in OSS, whether they are volunteers or
companies. For example, a dominating contributing company may
dissuade other companies to participate [ 92]. Given that many Open
Source ecosystems have become a critical part of the infrastructure
that controls our daily lives, it is imperative to understand how
companies interact with and collaborate in these OSS ecosystems.
Previous work has primarily focused on collaboration at the
individual level rather than the company level; examples include
knowledge sharing through developer interactions [ 78,79,82], coor-
dination of work in globally distributed environments [ 17,18], and
investigation on how social characteristics a￿ect their onboarding
and growth [ 12,83,97]. Research on commercial participation has
mainly focused on motivations, business models, and strategies to
engage in OSS ecosystems [ 40,90,93,98]. Only a few studies have
investigated the collaboration between companies [ 38,52,80,86].
While they tend to be limited to social network analysis, with-
out seeking to understand the nature of these collaborations and
the mechanisms associated with them. Hence, our research goal
is to understand how companies collaborate in large open source
ecosystems that comprise hundreds of companies and projects.Speci￿cally, we select the OpenStack ecosystem, which o￿ers a
platform for cloud-computing infrastructure. The OpenStack eco-
system has thousands of repositories that are co-developed by more
than 600 companies in a wide range of domains, including hardware
manufacturers, software vendors, system integrators, and consul-
tancy￿rms.2OpenStack represents a high-potential arena for these
companies to play a role in the rapidly evolving cloud computing
technology.
In addressing our research goal, we focus on three aspects. First,
we are interested in understanding how companies contribute to
speci￿c OpenStack projects within the wider ecosystem. Hence, we
ask: How do companies participate in the projects of OpenStack
(RQ1)? Further, we posit that a relationship exists between com-
panies if they work together on the same project, and we expect
patterns to form. Hence, we ask: What collaboration patterns exist
within the OpenStack ecosystem (RQ2)? Lastly, prior research has
suggested that collaboration may increase developer productiv-
ity [12]. Might company collaboration in ecosystems make compa-
nies more productive (RQ3)?
Answers to these questions are of great interest to companies as
they provide insights into how ecosystems work, and how other
￿rms participate successfully in large ecosystems. For￿ rms aspiring
to engage with OSS ecosystems, such insights are invaluable.
2We use the terms ‘￿rm’ and ‘company’ interchangeably in this paper.To answer these questions, we adopt a mixed-method research
approach (i.e., using both quantitative and qualitative methods [ 16]),
drawing on OpenStack’s commit history and the widely available
online documents and records on OpenStack and the numerous com-
panies that contribute to it. Through a quantitative analysis of the
OpenStack commit history, we create a network that represents the
collaborations between companies as well as the contributions that
companies make to projects. Using cluster analysis, we identify 32
clusters, each representing an ensemble of companies and projects
that are closely related. To characterize the various collaboration
relationships, we de￿ne two dimensions: a company’s businessstrategy (which describes how a company creates business with
OpenStack) and project category (describing the types of function-
ality). We qualitatively identify four recurring business strategies,
each of which is associated with speci￿c project categories. We alsoidentify several patterns of company collaboration. Some collabora-
tions are intentional whereas others are passive. Other companies
are rather isolated within the collaboration network. Finally, using
regression analysis, we￿ nd statistically signi￿cant evidence that
a company’s collaboration position within the network correlates
positively with its productivity in terms of the average number ofcommits its developers make to the OpenStack projects.
This paper makes methodological, substantive, and theoretical
contributions to the literature on￿ rm participation in open source
projects:
•We propose and demonstrate a methodological framework
for studying company participation in OSS projects which
uses two-mode social network analysis, clustering technique,
and characterization of company collaborations.
•We document a set of companies participating in project
combinations, demonstrating di￿erent ways in which￿rms
contribute to OSS projects within an ecosystem. While spe-
ci￿c to the OpenStack, these patterns can provide a theoreti-
cal foundation for studies of other ecosystems.
•We document a set of collaboration patterns between com-
panies, which helps to understand the nature of OSS ecosys-
tems and provides a reference for community management.
•We present quantitative evidence for the relationship be-
tween the extent of￿ rm collaboration and their productivity.
In the remainder of this paper, we review related work in Sec. 2,
outline our multi-method research approach in Sec. 3, and present
the results of our study in Sec. 4. Section 5 discusses the implica-
tions for research and practice, as well as threats to validity with
suggestions for future work. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 RELATED WORK
The traditional notion of OSS projects that are driven by voluntary
developers is now long outdated. Fitzgerald observed that OSS has
become a “commercially viable alternative,” presenting a contem-
porary characterization that he labeled “OSS 2.0” [ 28]. In the last
decade or so, many companies are explicitly de￿ning open source
strategies, and strategically invest and engage in OSS projects [ 39].
Early research on “OSS 2.0” explored why companies adopt open
source [ 18,43]. Compared to individual developers, companies
focus less on social motivations such as reputation and learning
1197How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
bene￿ts but emphasize economic and technological reasons in-
stead [ 6,43]. Some studies focused on business strategies around
￿rm participation in OSS [ 20,21,88]. For example, Da￿ara [ 20]
analyzed 120￿ rms that derive their main revenue stream from
OSS, and classi￿ed them into six business strategies, such as twin
licensing, platform providers, and consulting. Our recent study
discovered eight unique contribution models based on companies’
commercial objectives on OpenStack and found they di￿er in terms
of the extent and focus of contributions to 14 types of projects [ 93].
Other studies have looked at the practices that companies use to
implement their strategies [ 9,10,56]. For example, Butler et al. [ 9]
investigated a variety of work practices used by companies to con-
tribute to eight OSS communities, such as employing core project
developers, making donations, and joining project steering com-
mittees. Further, the impact of commercial participation on OSS
has been studied [ 11,88,92,93,98]. Zhou et al. observed that a
company’s control mechanisms and a high degree of involvement
are linked to a decrease in new developers joining the project but
with improved retention of existing developers [ 98]. Similar to that,
a company’s domination is found to be positively associated with
the productivity of contributors and the quality of issue reports [ 92].
More recently, we observed the diversity of contribution modelsin a project to be associated with the number of volunteers in
OpenStack [93].
Knowing why and how individual companies participate in OSS,
and what impact their participation might bring to an OSS ecosys-
tem is not enough, however, because companies do not operate in
isolation when contributing to OSS ecosystems [ 86]. Company col-
laboration within ecosystems has largely remained an unexplored
topic [ 26]. Early work on collaboration explored whether compa-
nies would collaborate when jointly participating in an OSS eco-
system. Henkel [ 42] found that companies in the embedded Linux
ecosystem revealed a considerable share of their development, and
other companies within the ecosystem bene￿t from their competi-
tors’ publicized contributions. Furthermore, Teixeira et al. [ 84,86]
observed that companies’ competition does not necessarily a￿ect
their collaboration within an OSS ecosystem. Oru ˘cević-Alagićand
Höst used network analysis to study company participation in the
Android project, highlighting the potential issues caused when a
project is dominated by a single company [64].
A few studies address how companies collaborate with each other.
For example, Snarby [ 80] investigated company collaboration in
communication channels (e.g., mailing list), and identi￿ed threepatterns: gatekeeper (i.e., having one person as a representative
to navigate code and information￿ ow), secure channel (i.e., using
private communication channels to discuss sensitive issues), and
open-core collaboration (i.e., contributing all the code they develop
to the OSS project’s public sources). Finally, some studies focuson the impact of company collaboration on the OSS ecosystem.For example, Duc et al. [
25] found that company collaboration
can have a positive in￿uence on the time to close reported issues.
Linåker et al. [ 52] found that company collaboration patterns can
in￿uence the innovation and time-to-market in the Apache Hadoopecosystem. Data mining and social network analysis techniques are
widely used in these studies to explore the collaboration between
companies.Despite these studies on company collaboration, the reasons for
company collaboration (as opposed to mere participation) on spe-
ci￿c projects remain unclear, because prior work has largely ignored
the relationships between companies and the projects they jointly
contribute to. Further, some companies have close collaborations,
while others have little interaction in an OSS ecosystem [ 52,86].
The reasons for this phenomenon have not yet been studied. This
paper bridges that gap by reporting an empirical study of Open-
Stack, a large OSS ecosystem with extensive company participation
and containing thousands of project repositories. In contrast to
prior studies that looked only at companies’ collaboration as a so-
cial network, we also consider the characteristics of the projects.
Moreover, we complement prior studies by uncovering the reasons
underpinning several collaboration patterns among companies. We
also investigate the correlation of companies’ collaboration with
their productivity in OSS. Thus, this study is a￿ rst attempt to sys-
tematically characterize company collaborations and participation
in a large OSS ecosystem.
3 STUDY DESIGN
We adopted a mixed-method approach [ 16] that combines an anal-
ysis of the version control history with an examination of the
peer-reviewed literature and other online documents. This section
introduces OpenStack, which is the ecosystem that we selected for
this study (Sec. 3.1). We outline the data collection and cleaning
procedures in Sec. 3.2 and data analysis procedures in Sec. 3.3.
3.1 Background to the OpenStack Ecosystem
OpenStack, founded in July 2010 by NASA and Rackspace (a large
IT web hosting company [ 32]), is a collection of OSS projects for
building and managing cloud computing platforms for public, hy-
brid, and private clouds. An OpenStack solution (or distribution)
is composed of a number of individual projects to address various
components of cloud computing. OpenStack follows a six-month,
time-based release cycle [ 85]. OpenStack components serve a vari-
ety of functions, including computing, storage, and networking [ 14].
By July 2019, OpenStack comprised over 20 million lines of code,
contributed by more than 100,000 contributors based in 194 coun-
tries, and received support from more than 600 companies [35].
We selected OpenStack for several reasons. First, it is a large
ecosystem with thousands of repositories. Second, it is a highly
active and mature ecosystem that has been actively developed for
almost a decade, ensuring a su￿ciently long commit history. The
commit data are maintained in GitHub publicly [ 61] and o￿er easy
access for research analysis. Finally, the ecosystem involves many
di￿erent types of companies [ 93] for investigating collaboration;
we expected this heterogeneity (i.e., startups, high-tech giants in
di￿erent sectors) to be a fruitful source for discovering diverse
collaborations [ 86]. Furthermore, OpenStack maintains its contrib-
utors’ pro￿les, which can be used to identify companies with high
accuracy [93].
3.2 Data Collection and Cleaning
We used OpenStack’s version control data to quantify company col-
laboration. We describe the data retrieval and preparation process
next.
1198ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
Table 1: Statistics of dataset before and after cleaning
# Projects # Commits # Developers # Companies
Before 1,292 383,664 13,836 n/a
After 1,292 338,035 9,653 602
3.2.1 Version Control Data. OpenStack uses the Git version control
system (VCS). We obtained the commit meta-data from GitHub,
which provides a mirror of OpenStack’s Git repositories [ 61], by
querying GitHub’s REST API. The time span of the dataset is from
OpenStack’s creation date (July 21st, 2010) until January 16, 2019,
covering 18 complete releases of OpenStack.
Each commit in the dataset captures author information (full
name, email) of the local Git repository to which the commit is made.
Prior studies [ 2,51,72,93] suggest that some commits are submitted
by automated bots rather than human developers. We collected
these bot accounts identi￿ed in prior studies [ 2,51,72,93] and
removed commits submitted by these accounts from our dataset (the
list of removed accounts can be found in the online appendix [ 94]),
leaving 338,035 commits for analysis. We cleaned the remaining
data for further analysis following the procedures described below.
Table 1 summarizes the dataset before and after cleaning.
3.2.2 Merging Multiple Identities. It is not uncommon for develop-
ers to have multiple accounts (sometimes with alternative spellings
of their name or email) [ 5,37,58,71,93]. Thus, it is necessary to
merge multiple identi￿es that belong to the same author. Developeridentity merging is a well-known problem [
5,48,71]. We addressed
this problem by using a novel machine-learning method [ 2], which
augments three behavioral ‘￿ngerprints’ including time-zone fre-
quencies, the set of￿ les modi￿ed, and a vector embedding the
commit messages in addition to the author’s name and email ad-
dress. This method has been proved highly-accurate [93].
After applying the technique on 13,836 author identities, 4,183
identities were merged, resulting in 9,653 distinct authors. For the
subsequent analyses, we established a unique identity for each
single author with or without multiple names and email addresses.
3.2.3 Identifying A￿iliations of Developers and Commits. Many
￿rms today have their developers contribute to OSS projects as partof pursuing their business goals [
39,98]. As our study seeks to iden-
tify company contributions that are made by individual developers,
we￿ rst have to accurately identify these developers’ a￿liations.
This is not straightforward because developer a￿liations are not
directly recorded in Git commits. Many OpenStack developers havechanged their jobs and thus their a￿liations over time [
96]. Similar
to our previous work [ 93], we establish developer a￿liation at the
time of each commit they made to OpenStack as follows.
Step 1. Identifying developers’ a￿liations. Developers may have
had several a￿liations during the time they were contributing to
OpenStack. To determine these a￿liations and their ‘start’ and
‘end’ date for each, we used the OpenStack community member
list [ 33], which provides the individual pro￿les of its community
members. Each pro￿le has an “A￿liations”￿ eld, containing all the
companies that employed the developer to work on OpenStack and
the corresponding time periods for those a￿liations.Table 2: Example of a developer’s a￿liations
ID Identities A￿liation Start Date End Date
1 Monty TaylorRed Hat 2016-06-13 2019-01-16
IBM 2015-08-17 2016-06-12
HPE 2011-11-21 2015-08-01
Rackspace 2010-07-06 2011-11-20
We obtained all pro￿les via a crawler script; if the end date
indicated “current,” we replaced it with the date of data collection
to facilitate further analysis. Developers may use multiple names
and email addresses in their commits. We matched a developer
pro￿le to an author ID when the author name matched andat least
one of the email domain matched (with one of the a￿liations in
the pro￿le). We were able to automatically link pro￿le information
to approximately 90% of developers.
For the remaining 10% of developers whose a￿liations could not
be con￿rmed (i.e., they could not be found in the member pro￿les),
we followed the following procedures. First, we considered their
email domains. For example, if the email domain of developers was
“redhat.com,” we considered Red Hat as the a￿liation. Developers
from consumer domains: “gmail.com, ” “outlook.com, ” “hotmail.com, ”
etc., were classi￿ed as “Volunteer. ” Consumer domains were identi-
￿ed based on a publicly available list [ 46], which has been veri￿ed
and has also been used in other studies [ 87]. In this process, we
determined developers’ tenure in each a￿liation by considering the
range of dates of the commits associated with the email account.
Some developers were submitting code using their enterprise email
and personal email over the same period. In such cases, we linked
all commits from both the enterprise and personal account to the
enterprise account, so that the commits made with the personal
account would also count as a company contribution rather than a
volunteer contribution. Table 2 shows an example of a developer
and his a￿liations that we determined.
Step 2. Linking a￿liation to commits. After identifying the a￿li-
ations for developers, along with their start and end date of their
tenure with their a￿liations, we linked the relevant a￿liation to
each commit. Speci￿cally, a commit within the tenure of that author
with a given company is linked to that company. This ensures that
commits are correctly attributed, even when developers are moving
from company to company over time.
The￿ nal and cleaned dataset covers 1,292 Git repositories, in-
volving more than 600 companies and 9,600 developers (see Table 1).
3.3 Characterizing Company Collaboration
Companies collaborate in OSS ecosystems through several chan-
nels, such as mailing lists, issue trackers, and VCS [ 80]. In this study,
we use the commit data produced in VCS to study collaboration,
because it represents a clear audit trail of such collaborations. Col-
laboration exists between two companies if they work together on aproject. Similarly, a relationship between two projects exists if they
are contributed to by the same set of companies. Such a scenario
can be represented as a special kind of two-mode social network
that represents the a￿liations of a set of actors (i.e., nodes in one
1199How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
mode, representing companies) with a set of “social” events (i.e.,
nodes in the other mode, representing OpenStack projects) [ 77]. In
a two-mode social network, relationships among nodes in one mode
are based on linkages established in the other mode. Social network
analysis has been successfully applied to investigate collaboration
in several studies, whether on the individual level [ 5,55,78,83]
or on the organizational level [ 52,80,86]. Hence, we deemed this
approach appropriate to investigate company collaborations. Com-
panies usually select a subset of projects to contribute to, due to their
speci￿c background. For example, SwiftStack [ 81], powering cloud
storage for enterprises, mainly focuses on Swift (a storage project in
OpenStack), and its commits contributed to Swift represent 75% of
its total commits to OpenStack. Furthermore, the technology stack
of OpenStack consists of over one thousand repositories. Some
projects cooperate together to o￿er a complete service, while oth-
ers may have similar functions that di￿er in their usage scenarios.
For example, Swift and Cinder both provide storage services, but
use di￿erent units of storage (e.g. ‘object’ vs. ‘block’) [34].
Given these types of relationships between projects, the two-
mode social network of companies and projects tends to containclusters. That is, companies with similar or related backgrounds
contribute to a group of related projects. Thus, we applied a cluster
detection algorithm to the network to identify these clusters of
closely related companies and projects.
3.3.1 Discovering Company-Project Clusters. We applied the two-
mode social network analysis to demonstrate that hundreds ofcompanies contribute commits to a large number of projects in
the OpenStack ecosystem. In this company-project network, nodes
represent either companies or projects (i.e., two modes); a linkbetween two nodes indicates that a company has contributed to
a project. We retained volunteers as a “company” node in this
network, because some relationships between companies exist only
through volunteer nodes—removing volunteers from the network
would reduce this information, which would lead to an incomplete
network.
The company-project network exhibits the following properties:
•Bipartite: companies and projects represent disjoint and inde-pendent subsets of nodes in the network; each edge connects
nodes from di￿erent subsets. This is because there are no
direct links between two companies or between two projects
in this scenario.
•Undirected: even though it seems intuitive to think of com-
mits as directed edges from companies to projects, in this
speci￿c network we seek to capture the duality of the rela-
tion between the two sets of nodes; that is, we are interested
in both the types of projects companies contribute to, and
the types of companies that contribute to a project.
•Weighted: by putting weights on the edges, we capture in-
formation on how many commits a particular company has
submitted to the same project (for our analysis we need
to take into account not only to which projects companies
contributed, but also their exact commit distribution among
those projects).
More formally, the company-project network can be represented
as a graph G = (C, P, E), where C is the set of companies, P is theset of projects, and E is the set of edges. An edge e
2E betweena company c 2C and a project p 2P exists if c has contributed
commits to p, weighted according to the number of commits.
As groups of companies contribute to speci￿c subsets of projects,
a clustering emerges; within each cluster, the density of links (rep-
resenting the volume of contributions) is higher than the density
of links between nodes in other clusters. To identify those clusters,
we used the Bi-Louvain algorithm, a greedy algorithm based on
network modularity for two-mode graphs [ 95], on the graph G to
group together closely-related nodes.
As companies join and leave an OSS ecosystem over time, the
ecosystem evolves. We selected the commit history generated dur-
ing the production of the 14th release of OpenStack, because this
release has the highest number of participating companies com-
pared to other releases. The generated graph contains a total of
1,067 nodes (of which 250 represent companies and 817 represent
projects). Among those nodes, the 4,264 edges represent contribu-
tion relationships between company nodes and project nodes. Using
the Bi-Louvain algorithm we identi￿ed 32 collaboration clusters.
The modularity of a graph is a measure to quantify the strength of
partitions [ 59]. Its value falls in the range [ 1,1], and is positive
whenever the fraction of edges falling within the same cluster is
higher than expected on the basis of chance. Good modularity val-
ues typically lie in the range between 0.3 to 0.7 [ 59]. The modularity
of our clustering result is 0.51, indicating a good partition.3
3.3.2 Characterizing Company-Project Clusters. For each cluster of
companies and projects, we seek to understand why the companies
contribute to these projects, and how they collaborate with one
another. By investigating earlier studies of company involvement in
OSS, online documents pertaining to OpenStack, and OpenStack’s
version control history, we identi￿ed two dimensions along which
company participation can be positioned: business strategy andproject category. Business strategy always drives companies’ ac-
tions when they participate in OSS ecosystems [
73,93,98]. The
category of projects helps in understanding why companies con-
tribute to projects. We discuss these two dimensions next.
Business strategy. Business strategy refers to a company’s mo-
tivation to join an OSS ecosystem [ 6,43]. To identify the strategy
for a company, we conducted Internet searches (using “OpenStack”
and the company’s name as keywords) and inspected the￿ rst 20
results. We also collected documents from the marketplace page on
the o￿cial OpenStack website [ 35] regarding the products, services,
or solutions o￿ered by companies. We analyzed these records to
identify a series of categories of strategies by using thematic analy-
sis, a widely used technique for identifying and recording “themes”
in textual documents [ 7,8,19]. The process involved the following
steps: (1) initial reading of the records, (2) generating initial codes
for each record, (3) searching for themes among the proposed codes,
(4) reviewing the themes to￿ nd opportunities for merging, and
(5) de￿ning and naming the￿ nal themes. We used MAXQDA to
support these steps. To increase the reliability of this analysis, the
￿rst two authors independently performed steps 1 to 4 [ 74]. After
this, we held a number of meetings to resolve any disagreements
and to￿ nalize the set of themes (step 5). If the￿ rst two authors
3Because measuring small clusters has its uncertainty [ 30], we also applied an alter-
native metric, i.e., conductance [ 50], to quantify the strength of the partitions. The
average conductance is 0.20, indicating a good clustering.
1200ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
failed to reach an agreement on a code or theme, a third author
acted as an arbitrator. This happened on four occasions during the
labeling of the 32 core companies’ business strategies.
Project category. Project category is used to group a set of projects,
which either collaborate with each other to o￿er a complete service
or provide similar functions but di￿er in details regarding usage
scenarios. We manually looked for the documents (created andmaintained by OpenStack Foundation) and the README￿ le of
projects to determine their category. Following the same set of steps
of thematic analysis described above, we identi￿ed the categories
of projects in OpenStack.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Company-Project Clusters in OpenStack
Fig. 1 shows the 32 clusters we detected in the company-project
network based on the commit data produced in the development of
the 14th OpenStack release. The density of edges between nodes
within each cluster is signi￿cantly higher than the density of edges
between nodes belonging to di￿erent clusters. Speci￿cally, the total
weight of edges connecting companies and projects within the
clusters amounts to 23,729 commits, representing over 69% of the
total number of 34,192 commits. This high degree of cohesion and
low coupling suggest a high quality of the resulting clustering. The
size of the clusters varies greatly, ranging from two nodes (one
company, one project) to 235 nodes (60 companies, 175 projects).
For each cluster, we investigated its companies and projects and
their relationships along the two dimensions described in Sec. 3.3.2.
Given the very large number of companies and projects within the
OpenStack ecosystem, we limited our analysis to a sample of them.
Speci￿cally, for each cluster we selected the company that con-
tributed the most commits—together, these companies contributed
83.7% of commits. We refer to these companies as core companies.4
Of the 32 core companies, we identi￿ed four types of business
strategies that motivate them to participate in OpenStack: Full Solu-
tion (FS), Partial Solution (PS), Business Integration (BI), and Com-
plementary Services (CS), which are consistent with the primary
commercial models discovered in our earlier study [ 93]. Table 3
describes these strategies, including representative examples of
companies, and the number of core companies that we classi￿ed
using these four categories. Furthermore, we identi￿ed 26 project
categories based on their functionality which cover the 14 project
types discovered in [ 93] but with an improved granularity. Due to
space constraints, we include 10 representative categories that ac-
count for the most commits in at least one cluster (see Table 4). (Thefull list of the 26 categories is available in the online appendix [
94].)
After investigating the core company (in terms of business strat-
egy) and the projects (functionality category) of each cluster, we
observed several typical company-project combinations in the de-
velopment of an OpenStack release. We discuss these combinations
next.
The most common combination is that companies contribute to
plugins or drivers to integrate their own business with OpenStack
(BI): the projects in 14 among 32 clusters (about 44%) are mostly
4For the only cluster where volunteers contributed the most commits (56%), we selected
the company whose commits (28%) second only to volunteers as its core company.plugins or drivers (which occupy about 79% of projects in a clus-
ter). These clusters are relatively small, with 2 to 13 nodes. Among
them, 12 clusters’ core companies share the BI strategy. Further,
the core companies of the remaining two clusters are small cloud
computing companies (i.e., Axilera and Cloudbase Solutions). One
o￿ers complementary services (CS) to help other companies inte-
grate with OpenStack, whereas the other provides cloud computing
services targeting enterprises using the Windows platform by in-
tegrating OpenStack with Windows-based infrastructures. Thus,
these two companies’ contribution interests coincide with the com-
panies holding the BI strategy. This pattern re￿ects the popularity
of OpenStack and related cloud technologies.
The second typical combination represents companies contribut-
ing to deployment tools. There are eight clusters (25%) in which the
majority of projects are related to deployment tools, and the core
companies share the same strategy (FS), i.e., making pro￿t through
providing cloud computing service based on OpenStack. As pointedout by prior studies [
15,67], a primary problem faced by OpenStack
is how to deploy various cloud services in production environments.
This is a critical feature and might explain why companies make
contributions to deployment tools within the ecosystem.
The third combination is centered on large IT companies in large
size (with over 100 nodes). There are three clusters like that, whichhave IBM, Huawei, and Fujitsu as their core companies, respectively.
These clusters involve many other companies and diverse projects,
re￿ecting the extensive participation of the leading large companies
and their partners or followers. It also suggests that, in addition to
plugins/drivers and deployment tools, there are types of projects
which are closely related to each other and attract a wide range of
companies to participate, forming a sub-collaborative network.
The remaining seven clusters are small, with up to 10 nodes, re-
vealing a pattern in which the core companies make contributions
to a speci￿c project, adding new services to OpenStack beyond
enhancements to deployment, documentation, or plugins/drivers.
In three clusters, the core companies provide partial solutions (PS)
based on a speci￿c project in OpenStack. The projects in these three
clusters (categorized as “Data analytic,” “Networking,” and “Opti-
mization/policy tools,” respectively) are consistent with their core
companies’ business strategy (see Table 4 for brief descriptions of
these categories). For example, the core company of one cluster is
“Tesora, ” a small open source company delivering a database service.
The corresponding project in OpenStack is “Trove,” belonging to
the category “Data Analytic.” In the 14th release, approximately
94% of Tesora’s commits to OpenStack are focused on this project.
Three other clusters (of the seven small ones) have core companies
delivering full solutions (FS) and incubating new services to the
OpenStack ecosystem. For example, Platform9 systems (a cloud
computing company [ 69]) developed “Mors,” which automatically
handles resources that are no longer needed [ 68]. The last cluster
consists of a core company (i.e., CCIN2P3, a small cloud computing
consulting company) delivering complementary services (CS), and
an “Orchestration” project. These observations suggest a phenome-
non of “unconscious” and uncoordinated division of labor in the
OSS ecosystem.
1201How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
     
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
  60 comp anies   
 
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
17 companies 24 companies 
  
 
31 companies 
 
  
 
13 companies6 companies 44 companies 
  
  
  
     
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
175 projects 
129 projects 
117 projects 
71 projects 
56 projects 
72 projects 
57 projects 
  
 Other 25 Clusters
Figure 1: Two-dimensional representation of the company-project network. The position of company and project nodes along
the horizontal axis is set according to the clusters they are assigned to, to avoid edge crossing and to demonstrate the e￿ective-ness of the clustering method. Nodes of the same color belong to the same cluster. The size of nodes is proportional to theirdegree centrality, and the edge thickness is proportional to their associated weight.
Table 3: Four business strategies of company participation in OpenStack projects
Business strategy Description # Companies Example
Full Solutions (FS)Providing full cloud solutions to users, including private/ public/
hybrid cloud services, deployment, and maintenance services, etc.15 Rackspace
Partial Solutions (PS)Providing solutions to users only on the basis of one or two project(s)
in OpenStack.3 Tesora
Business Integration (BI) Integrating OpenStack with their own business 12 Intel
Complementary Services (CS)Providing complementary services, e.g., consulting and training ser-
vices around OpenStack.2 CCIN2P3
Summary for RQ1: Several typical combinations occurred while
companies participate in the projects of OpenStack. Companies
holding the BI strategy often contribute to plugins or driversto integrate their own business with OpenStack. Companies
making pro￿t through FS often contribute to deployment tools.
The clusters centered on large IT companies involves extensive
companies and diverse projects. Companies that select speci￿c
projects to contribute to are driven by their particular business,
focusing their business on the basis of one project, or incubate
new projects.
4.2 Company Collaboration within OpenStack
We found that di￿erent companies contribute to a common set of
projects, appearing in the same company-project cluster. Theremight be special causes of this phenomenon. To get a deeper un-derstanding, we manually looked at the background of the pairs
of companies that appeared in the same cluster, and the functions
of the projects they contributed to jointly. Speci￿cally, of the 32
clusters, 19 have more than one company, ranging from 2 to 60companies. For each of these 19 clusters, we analyzed the collabo-
rations between the cluster’s core company and other companies
within that cluster. In total, we identi￿ed 217 pairs of companies.
In addition to understanding the business strategy of each pair
of companies, we also conducted Internet searches based on their
names, the term “OpenStack, ” and the projects (or project category)
they are involved in. To ensure relevance and reliability of the re-
trieved records, we only included the information released by the
companies or the OpenStack Foundation during the development
of the 14th release. For the remaining 13 clusters that only contain
a single company, we mainly focus on understanding why these
companies do not cooperate with other companies in the same way.
We obtained 67 online records and analyzed them following the
steps for thematic analysis outlined in Sec. 3.3. Some records explic-itly suggested that companies had started collaborations with other
companies, indicating intentional collaboration. We label these col-
laborations as intentional. If we could not￿ nd records for a pair of
companies, we labeled their relationship passive. Furthermore, we
also observed that some companies make isolated contributions to
some projects. We discuss these three categories next.
1202ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
Table 4: Ten categories of projects in the OpenStack ecosystem representing the most commits
Project category Description # Projects Example
Computing To implement services and associated libraries regarding computing. 17 Nova
NetworkingTo provide capabilities for managing dynamic host con￿guration protocol
(DHCP), static Internet protocols, or virtual area networks.73 Neutron
DeploymentTo deploy OpenStack production environments, and make it scalable to
operate and upgrade.328 Kolla
Orchestration To provide interface and tools for the management of OpenStack services. 52 Heat
BillingTo provide billing solution by collecting data generated using cloud services
and applying rating rules to calculate prices.7 Cloudkitty
DocumentsTo document guides which can help users to install and use, and help
contributors to participate; to document the requirements collected from
all the OpenStack users.22openstack-
manuals
Architecture Optimiza-
tionTo optimize the code architecture by developing and sharing common
libraries.39 oslo
Data AnalyticTo implement services and libraries about database, data processing and
searching, to realize workload balancing.20 Trove
Optimization/Policy
ToolsTo provide services for performance analysis and optimization of Open-
Stack.19 Congress
Plugin/DriverTo facilitate integration of OpenStack and other hardware or software
infrastructure.15 Starlingx
4.2.1 Intentional Collaboration. Intentional collaboration refers to
a collaboration between companies that they actively seek out and
pursue. We identi￿ed three patterns: 1) supply and consumption, 2)
distribution-oriented ally, and 3) service delegation.
Supply and Consumption. Companies, using OpenStack in their
production environment, tend to collaborate with their OpenStack
suppliers on the deployment projects, which are incubated and
driven by the supply companies. This pattern was found in eight
pairs of companies from six clusters. For instance, Walmart (a multi-
national retail company) relies on Rackspace for their OpenStack
solution [ 89]. More than 96% (150 out of 156) of Walmart’s commits
to the 14th release of OpenStack are focused on “Ansible, ” which is
funded and dominated by Rackspace [49, 92].
Distribution-oriented Ally. Some companies provide an OpenStack-
based solution by seeking collaboration with one company that
has maintained a widely-used OpenStack distribution. The primary
target of this collaboration pattern is to make one side’s infras-
tructure compatible with the other party’s OpenStack distribution.
This pattern was found in six pairs of companies from four clus-
ters. For instance, OVH (a French company o￿ering web, dedicated,
and cloud hosting solutions [ 65]) has deployed the OpenStack dis-
tribution of Red Hat in its data centres [ 41], therefore it mainly
collaborates with Red Hat on the deployment of Red Hat’s Open-
Stack distribution.
Service Delegation. We also found companies that provide com-
plementary services around OpenStack to promote their partners’
business towards OpenStack. This pattern was found in two pairsof companies from two clusters. For example, Axilera, who provide
system integration services to high tech companies embarking on
the development of networking and internet-connected products,
helps Broadcom to integrate its “Broadview” with OpenStack [ 3].
Hence, all of Axilera’s commits were on “Broadview” related repos-
itories. Another example is the collaboration between Cisco and
OneCloud, i.e., Cisco entrust OneCloud to provide consultation and
training for its OpenStack-based cloud solution [ 60]. Thus, all of
Onecloud’s commits are contributed to “networking-cisco,” which
provides support for Cisco networking in OpenStack [62].
4.2.2 Passive Collaboration. Passive collaboration refers to a col-
laboration consisting of companies contributing to a common set
of projects purely for their own interest without explicit coordi-
nation. Companies may provide or use services based on those
projects. For example, both Intel and IBM o￿er compute services in
their cloud solutions, so they both make contributions to “Nova,”
a computing project in OpenStack. Companies may be users and
providers of an OpenStack service, but a supply chain does not
exist between them. For instance, both HP Enterprise (a large cloud
computing provider) and CERN (a user of OpenStack) contributed
to the “Magnum” project (providing container management servicefor OpenStack), but CERN is not a consumer of HP’s OpenStack so-lution [
4]. Further, we found that the central projects (including the
categories computing, networking, and storage) always attract more
companies with various backgrounds, including cloud providers,
hardware manufacturers, software vendors, system integrators, and
consultancy corporations. Based on the assumption that this project
1203How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
is becoming increasingly better, these companies contribute to im-
prove these core projects and e￿ectively have formed a passive
collaboration.
4.2.3 Isolated Contribution. We also identi￿ed a number of com-
panies that were the sole contributor to a project as introduced in
Sec. 4.1. In other words, these companies do not collaborate (or
very little) with others despite the many collaboration opportuni-
ties o￿ered when being part of a large and active OSS ecosystem
that involves many companies. Of the 32 clusters, 13 fell into this
category. When studying the characteristics of the companies and
projects in those clusters, we observe that these companies have a
very speci￿c and specialized interest in OpenStack, and the projects
that they contribute to are of limited interest to other companies.
The speci￿c interests of a company include: 1) integrating its in-
frastructure with OpenStack and 2) creating a new service. The
projects they work on tend to fall in the category “plugins/drivers. ”
These projects can be quite speci￿c to companies, which is why
other companies may not participate in co-developing these. For
example, the project “fuel-plugin-xenserver,” used to deploy Open-
Stack on XenServer (Citrix’s server virtualization platform [ 1]), is
completely developed by Citrix. Other such projects include new
service projects. Since they tend to be in an initial incubation stage,
their popularity tends to be relatively low, and their sustainability
is highly uncertain. Thus, very few other companies tend to get
involved in these projects. These observations suggest that projects
that are created by companies with speci￿c needs do not attract
contributions from other companies.
Summary of RQ2: Most companies collaborate with others, even
with their competitors. Some collaborations are actively and
intentionally pursued whereas others are passive and inciden-
tal. Some companies may still be the sole contributor to some
projects, in particular when those are speci￿c to that company’s
base product or unique interest.
4.3 Company Collaboration and Productivity
As we suggested in Sec. 4.2, some companies collaborate with oth-
ers to achieve their business strategy of joining OSS. Meanwhile,other companies contribute to speci￿c projects alone and barely
collaborate with others. With limited sta￿ and time resources, all
companies seek to maximize their employees’ productivity [ 70].
Prior studies have found that collaboration can increase the produc-tivity of developers [
12,22,83]. Hence, it is of interest to investigate
the relationship between companies’ productivity and their position
in the company collaboration network.
In this study, we consider companies that contribute to the same
project to be collaborators, whether intentional orpassive as we
have labeled them (see Sec. 4.2). To measure a company’s degreeof collaboration, we transform the company-project network de-
scribed in Sec. 3.3.1 into a company-company network by removingall project nodes and connecting company nodes if they have made
contributions to the same projects. We then measure a company’s
collaborations in the network with degree centrality, which is a
widely used measure to identify nodes that have more in￿uence
than others in a social network [ 24,63]. For each node in the net-
work, its degree centrality (DC) is de￿ned as the number of edges,or links, it has to other nodes, and normalized by dividing by the
maximum possible degree i.e., the number of nodes minus one [ 36].
We de￿ne a company’s productivity as a ratio of the number of
commits submitted by their employees to the number of their em-
ployees that have committed. We applied this measure to each of
the individual release periods and obtained 2,629 observations. A
preliminary investigation of these observations reveals that some
companies submitted an exceptionally large amount of commits
during a release for special reasons, e.g., developers in a company
share an account to submit code [ 80] and companies open their
projects to OpenStack with original commits. Using the Rpackage
boxplot.stats [23] combined with a manual check, we identi￿ed
and removed 265 outliers. The lowest productivity was 1.0 for 559
of the company/release combinations, while the highest was 28.5
for Rackspace in the￿ rst release. The median was 6.22.
Based on previous studies [ 98], we suggest that productivity
may be a￿ected by several factors, and in particular we arguethat productivity may change over time as a company gains ex-perience and builds a reputation and gains credibility within thecommunity, leading to a higher level of productivity. Hence, we
include release (mentioned in Sec. 3.2) as a predictor in the regres-
sion model with the response being the productivity of a company
(Company_Productivity ). Additional considerations regarding con-
ditional independence and suitability of linear models are discussed
in Sec. 5. The￿ nal regression equation is:
Company_Productivity ⇠Degree_Centrality +Release
The results of the￿ tted model are shown in Table 5. The adjusted
R2of the model is 0.19. While this suggests that other factors may
play a role, considering the exploratory nature of this study, thisresult also suggests that degree centrality is a relevant factor inexplaining a company’s productivity within an open source eco-system. The coe￿cient of the predictor Degree_Centrality is 11.8
and is statistically signi￿cant with an extremely small p-value. We
have included the Release (from Release 1 to Release 18, a categori-
cal variable) as a so-called nuisance parameter, since productivity
may vary for each release. We found that none of the releases are
statistically signi￿cant ( p>.05), implying that the time factor has
no signi￿cant e￿ect on the productivity of companies. For illustra-
tion purposes, Table 5 also shows the coe￿cients for two of the 18
releases, i.e., Release 2 and Release 3 (as compared to Release 1).
The positive coe￿cient of Degree_Centrality indicates that a
company collaborating more with other companies tends to have
higher productivity under the same time and sta￿ constraints. A
possible explanation for the observed e￿ect is that company col-laboration allows a company to transfer its needs and resources,
and obtain information and help from other companies in an easier
Table 5: Coe￿cients of the model ( n=2,364). Adjusted R2=19%
Estimate Std.Err Pr(>|t|
(Intercept) 5.14 2.35 0.0288
Degree_Centrality 11.8 0.531 0
Release 2 −5.05 2.80 0.0723
Release 3 −1.10 2.83 0.697
1204ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
way. Therefore, companies can achieve their strategies based on
OpenStack in a more e￿cient way.
Summary for RQ3: The position of companies in the collabora-
tion network is positively associated with their productivity in
OpenStack.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Company Collaboration in OSS Ecosystems
As many open source projects grow in size, importance, and com-
plexity, many come to depend on companies for support and con-
tributions, either￿ nancially or through seconded sta￿[ 29,76]. It is
crucial to understand how companies collaborate with each other
(and volunteers) to make an OSS ecosystem well-behaving.
A company’s contribution strategy is “hidden” in its develop-
ers’ commits, which is mixed in with millions of other commits to
projects within an OSS ecosystem. It is challenging to understand
its intention in the OSS ecosystem, along with the impact that might
have on the ecosystem. In this study, we analyzed how companies
participate in the OpenStack ecosystem by identifying clusters. We
interpret each cluster using two dimensions: a company’s strategy
and a project’s functionality category within the ecosystem. We
obtained several combinations of companies and projects they par-
ticipated in. These company-project combinations o￿er a picture of
how hundreds of companies participate in as many projects, form-
ing an ecosystem that delivers a complex product. We observed that
the companies’ business strategies on OpenStack are also found
in other OSS ecosystems [ 86,98]. This suggests that the identi￿ed
combinations of companies and projects could be used as a refer-
ence for other OSS ecosystems. Furthermore, we also identi￿ed
several collaboration patterns by analyzing the relationship among
“triplets” consisting of two companies and the project they both
participated in. The characteristics of those collaboration patterns
uncover company interactions and expand our understanding of
the nature of OSS ecosystems with company involvement.
The two-mode social network, relevant clustering techniques
that model companies contributing to projects, and the two dimen-
sions we proposed can be used by companies who wish to re￿ect
on their open source engagement and strategy, and if not explicitly
stated, to help articulate such a strategy. For example, a company
that seeks to create business opportunities with OpenStack soft-
ware, i.e., providing packaged software-based solutions, it could
review the way other companies engage within the OpenStack
ecosystem. An OSS foundation works as a collaboration “enabler”
between the OSS community and company contributors [ 66]. For
leaders of an OSS community, such a foundation can identify and
evaluate its projects’ activity level, for example, to establish which
kinds of projects are popular, and which do not attract participation
from companies. Such insights facilitate making strategic decisions
more con￿dently. Awareness of common collaboration patternscan also help companies to participate more e￿ectively in OSS;our￿ ndings o￿er descriptive insights about di￿erent collabora-
tion strategies. Firms can refer to di￿erent ways of co-creating via
collaboration when they participate in such an ecosystem.5.2 Productivity of Companies Involved in OSS
Both time and workforce are essential to companies who continu-
ously seek to achieve their strategic goals with fewer resources. OSScommunities, too, aim to improve developer e￿ciency [
57,96]. This
study presents evidence for a signi￿cant and positive association
between companies’ degree of collaboration and their productivity
(we discuss limitations regarding the operationalization of produc-
tivity in Sec. 5.3). For companies, actively building collaboration
seems to be a good practice when participating in OSS ecosystems.
On the other hand, OSS communities and foundations may wishto regulate company participation at the macro level in order toachieve e￿cient and sustainable development, in particular, pay-
ing more attention to the projects that only singular companies
contribute to. However, the de￿nitive reason for a strong relation-
ship between companies’ collaboration and productivity remains
unclear—developing a better theory that explains this link is an
avenue for future work. For example, additional factors for a re-gression model or conduct qualitative studies at companies that
participate in OSS ecosystems.
Before ecosystems and companies can bene￿t from one another,
it is important to understand how the ecosystem is shaped and how
it evolves. The types of companies that get involved in the ecosys-
tem, the categories of projects that are created in the ecosystem, the
patterns of di￿erent companies participating in di￿erent projects,
and the collaboration patterns among companies, are all key ele-
ments that shape the evolution of the ecosystem, and which could
be monitored to improve the sustainability of OSS ecosystems.
5.3 Threats to Validity
We discuss threats to the validity of our study following common
guidelines for empirical studies [74, 91].
5.3.1 Construct Validity. Establishing measures that re￿ect compa-
nies’ participation to OSS projects remains to be a challenge, and is
a trade-o￿ between what one wishes to measure and what one can
measure. To address this problem, we studied the related literature
and the development process of OpenStack. After much considera-
tion, we decided to use commits as an estimate for several reasons:
(1) they re￿ect a contribution that is “validated” through the peer
review process of the project; (2) many OSS communities enforce
contributors to split up large commits into separate commits with
only one “logical change” [ 31], and the distribution of commit size
in di￿erent companies does not show statistical di￿erences; (3)commits are commonly used for characterizing companies’ con-
tributions; (4) they are simple to calculate [ 93]. A prior study [ 38]
indicates that developers from companies in OpenStack agreed
with this approach to estimate their contributions. Future work
could consider other types of contributions, such as participation in
online discussions, and reviewing code changes. Furthermore, the
collaboration between companies could also be explored by study-
ing other interaction channels, such as IRC, mailing list, and issue
trackers, in addition to submitting commits to the same projects.
This could be a topic for future studies. Finally, measuring produc-
tivity in software engineering is challenging and has been a topic of
much discussion [ 75]. In this study, we de￿ned productivity as the
number of commits submitted per contributing employee from a
company during a release. Despite its widespread use [ 13,79], using
1205How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
this measure has drawbacks [ 96]. For example, the e￿ort required
for commits can vary greatly, from adding a new feature that might
take hundreds of lines of code, to changing a single typographic
error. To gain a deeper understanding of the association of com-
panies’ collaboration and their productivity, future studies could
consider a more precise measurement of productivity.
We investigated the variables’ distribution to￿ t the regression
models for RQ3 to detect outliers. We also attempted to adjust for
a number of factors that could bias our results. One remaining
concern is that observations of company productivity may not be
independent, as they might relate to company background, e.g.,
whether a company is primarily focused on software development,
cloud computing, or even open source development. We￿ t a random
e￿ects model that includes Company-ID (to ensure conditional
independence). The e￿ect of collaboration degree still points in the
same direction and is as signi￿cant. (Details in the appendix [94]).
5.3.2 External Validity. We purposely selected the OpenStack eco-
system as it is a good representative of large and active ecosys-
tems with intense involvement from many companies. We selected
the 14th release of OpenStack to carefully elaborate the company-
project network. Yin [ 91] emphasized that case studies are gen-
eralizable to theoretical propositions and not to populations or
universes. The method we used to investigate commercial collabo-
ration in OSS, e.g., network analysis and two dimensions (one on
company aspect and one on project aspect) can be used to identify
more commercial collaboration patterns in other OSS ecosystems.
Further, companies can re￿ect on their role and position within
OSS ecosystems and draw on the collaboration patterns identi￿ed
in this study to evaluate and further develop their collaboration
network and strategy. The positive association between company
collaboration and their productivity observed in this study may be
a ‘wake-up signal’ for the companies that wish to play a role in OSS
but have limited resources. Collaborating with other companies
may help them to achieve their goals.
6 CONCLUSION
While there is increasing attention for￿ rm participation in OSS
communities, few studies have studied collaboration patterns within
OSS ecosystems that comprise many projects. This paper seeks to
address this gap by presenting the results of an empirical study of
the OpenStack ecosystem which is a highly popular cloud comput-
ing platform. This paper proposes and demonstrates a methodolog-
ical framework for studying company participation and collabora-
tion. We identify di￿erent engagement strategies that companies
employ to participate in the OpenStack, and we characterize com-
pany collaboration patterns. Our study contributes to the under-
standing of how di￿erent companies contribute to di￿erent projects
and collaborate with each other in an OSS ecosystem. As company
participation in OSS ecosystems is becoming the industry norm,
these results may help companies to de￿ne their own OSS strategy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National key R&D Program of China
Grant 2018YFB1004201, the National Basic Research Program of
China Grant 2015CB352200, the National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China Grants 61825201 and 61690200, and Science Founda-
tion Ireland Grant 15/SIRG/3293 and 13/RC/2094.REFERENCES
[1]Gohar Ahmed. 2013. Implementing Citrix XenServer Quickstarter . Packt Publishing
Ltd.
[2]Sadika Amreen, Audris Mockus, Russell Zaretzki, Christopher Bogart, and Yuxia
Zhang. 2020. ALFAA: Active Learning Fingerprint based Anti-Aliasing for cor-
recting developer identity errors in version control systems. Empirical Software
Engineering (03 Jan 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-019-09786-7
[3]Axilera. 2019. A comprehensive o￿ering of software and system integration
service. http://www.axilera.com/projects.html.
[4]Tim Bell, B Bompastor, S Bukowiec, J Castro Leon, MK Denis, J van Eldik, M Fer-
min Lobo, L Fernandez Alvarez, D Fernandez Rodriguez, A Marino, et al .2015.
Scaling the CERN OpenStack cloud. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
Vol. 664. IOP Publishing, 022003.
[5]Christian Bird, Alex Gourley, Prem Devanbu, Michael Gertz, and Anand Swami-
nathan. 2006. Mining email social networks. In Proceedings of the 2006 interna-
tional workshop on Mining software repositories. ACM, 137–143.
[6]Andrea Bonaccorsi and Cristina Rossi. 2006. Comparing motivations of individ-
ual programmers and￿ rms to take part in the open source movement: From
community to business. Knowledge, Technology & Policy 18, 4 (2006), 40–64.
[7]Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.
[8]Virginia Braun, Victoria Clarke, Nikki Hay￿eld, and Gareth Terry. 2019. Thematic
analysis. Handbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences (2019), 843–860.
[9]Simon Butler, Jonas Gamalielsson, Bjorn Lundell, Christo￿er Brax, Johan Sjoberg,
Anders Mattsson, Tomas Gustavsson, Jonas Feist, and Erik Lonroth. 2019. On
Company Contributions to Community Open Source Software Projects. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering (2019).
[10] Simon Butler, Jonas Gamalielsson, Björn Lundell, Per Jonsson, Johan Sjöberg,
Anders Mattsson, Niklas Rickö, Tomas Gustavsson, Jonas Feist, Stefan Landemoo,
et al .2018. An investigation of work practices used by companies making
contributions to established OSS projects. In Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering (SEIP). ACM, 201–210.
[11] Andrea Capiluppi, Klaas-Jan Stol, and Cornelia Boldyre￿. 2012. Exploring the
role of commercial stakeholders in open source software evolution. In IFIP Inter-
national Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer, 178–200.
[12] Casey Casalnuovo, Bogdan Vasilescu, Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov.
2015. Developer onboarding in GitHub: the role of prior social links and languageexperience. In Proceedings of the 2015 10th joint meeting on foundations of software
engineering. ACM, 817–828.
[13] Antonio Cerone. 2013. Learning and activity patterns in OSS communities and
their impact on software quality. Electronic Communications of the EASST 48
(2013).
[14] OpenStack Community. 2019. OpenStack Documentation. https://docs.openstack.
org/.
[15] Hélène Coullon, Christian Perez, and Dimitri Pertin. 2017. Production deployment
tools for IaaSes: an overall model and survey. In 2017 IEEE 5th International
Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud). IEEE, 183–190.
[16] John W Creswell and J David Creswell. 2017. Research design: Qualitative, quan-
titative, and mixed methods approaches. Sage publications.
[17] Kevin Crowston, Hala Annabi, James Howison, and Chengetai Masango. 2005.
E￿ective work practices for FLOSS development: A model and propositions. In
System Sciences, 2005. HICSS’05. Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on. IEEE, 197a–197a.
[18] Kevin Crowston, Kangning Wei, James Howison, and Andrea Wiggins. 2012.
Free/Libre open-source software development. Acm Computing Surveys 44, 2
(2012), 1–35.
[19] Daniela S Cruzes and Tore Dyba. 2011. Recommended steps for thematic synthesis
in software engineering. In 2011 International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement. IEEE, 275–284.
[20] Carlo Da￿ara. 2007. Business models in FLOSS-based companies. (2007).
[21] Linus Dahlander and Mats Magnusson. 2008. How do￿ rms make use of open
source communities? Long range planning 41, 6 (2008), 629–649.
[22] Daniela Damian and James Chisan. 2006. An empirical study of the complex rela-
tionships between requirements engineering processes and other processes that
lead to payo￿s in productivity, quality, and risk management. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 32, 7 (2006), 433–453.
[23] Robert Dawson. 2011. How signi￿cant is a boxplot outlier? Journal of Statistics
Education 19, 2 (2011).
[24] Reinhard Diestel. 2005. Graph theory. 2005. Grad. Texts in Math 101 (2005).
[25] Anh Nguyen Duc, Daniela S Cruzes, Claudia Ayala, and Reidar Conradi. 2011.Impact of stakeholder type and collaboration on issue resolution time in oss
projects. In IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer, 1–16.
[26] Anh Nguyen Duc, Daniela S Cruzes, Geir K Hanssen, Terje Snarby, and Pekka
Abrahamsson. 2017. Coopetition of software￿ rms in Open source software
ecosystems. In International Conference of Software Business. Springer, 146–160.
1206ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea Y. Zhang et al.
[27] Joseph Feller and Brian Fitzgerald. 2000. A framework analysis of the open source
software development paradigm. In Proceedings of the twenty￿ rst international
conference on Information systems. 58–69.
[28] Brian Fitzgerald. 2006. The transformation of open source software. Mis Quarterly
(2006), 587–598.
[29] Darren Forrest, Carlos Jensen, Nitin Mohan, and Jennifer Davidson. 2012. Ex-
ploring the role of outside organizations in Free/Open Source Software projects.
InIFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer, 201–215.
[30] Santo Fortunato and Marc Barthelemy. 2007. Resolution limit in community
detection. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 104, 1 (2007), 36–41.
[31] OpenStack Foundation. 2019. Git Commit Good Practice. https://wiki.openstack.
org/wiki/GitCommitMessages.
[32] OpenStack Foundation. 2019. Introduction: A Bit of OpenStack History. https:
//docs.openstack.org/project-team-guide/introduction.html.
[33] OpenStack Foundation. 2019. OpenStack Foundation: Member Directory. https:
//www.openstack.org/community/members/.
[34] OpenStack Foundation. 2019. OpenStack Services. https://www.openstack.org/
software/project-navigator/openstack-components.
[35] OpenStack Foundation. 2019. OpenStack Website. https://www.openstack.org/.
[36] Linton C Freeman. 1977. A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness.
Sociometry (1977), 35–41.
[37] Mathieu Goeminne and Tom Mens. 2013. A comparison of identity merge
algorithms for software repositories. Science of Computer Programming 78, 8
(2013), 971–986.
[38] Jesus M Gonzalez-Barahona, Daniel Izquierdo-Cortazar, Stefano Ma￿ulli, and
Gregorio Robles. 2013. Understanding how companies interact with free software
communities. IEEE software 30, 5 (2013), 38–45.
[39] Jesus M Gonzalez-Barahona and Gregorio Robles. 2013. Trends in free, libre, open
source software communities: From volunteers to companies. it–Information
Technology it–Information Technology 55, 5 (2013), 173–180.
[40] Dietmar Harho￿, Joachim Henkel, and Eric Von Hippel. 2003. Pro￿ting from
voluntary information spillovers: how users bene￿t by freely revealing their
innovations. Research policy 32, 10 (2003), 1753–1769.
[41] Red Hat. 2017. OVH Named a Red Hat Certi￿ed Cloud and Service
Provider. https://www.redhat.com/en/about/press-releases/ovh-named-red-hat-
certi￿ed-cloud-and-service-provider.
[42] Joachim Henkel. 2003. Software development in embedded Linux—Informal
collaboration of competing￿ rms. In Wirtschaftsinformatik 2003/Band II. Springer,
81–99.
[43] Joachim Henkel. 2006. Selective revealing in open innovation processes: The
case of embedded Linux. Research Policy 35, 7 (2006), 953–969.
[44] Slinger Jansen, Anthony Finkelstein, and Sjaak Brinkkemper. 2009. A sense of
community: A research agenda for software ecosystems. In 2009 31st International
Conference on Software Engineering-Companion Volume. IEEE, 187–190.
[45] Corbet Jonathan and Kroah-Hartman Greg. 2017. 2017 Linux Kernel Development
Report. https://www.linuxfoundation.org/2017-linux-kernel-report-landing-
page/.
[46] Brian T Jones. 2018. free_email_provider_domains.txt. https://gist.github.com/
tbrianjones/5992856/, last accessed 20 Aug 2019.
[47] Nicolas Jullien, Klaas-Jan Stol, and James Herbsleb. 2019. A Preliminary Theory
for Open Source Ecosystem Micro-economics. In Towards Engineering Free/Libre
Open Source Software (FLOSS) Ecosystems for Impact and Sustainability. Springer,
49–68.
[48] Erik Kouters, Bogdan Vasilescu, Alexander Serebrenik, and Mark GJ van denBrand. 2012. Who’s who in Gnome: Using LSA to merge software repository
identities. In 28th IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance. 592–
595.
[49] Nicholas Kuechler. 2015. Build Rackspace Cloud Servers with Ansible in a
Virtualenv. https://nicholaskuechler.com/2015/01/09/build-rackspace-cloud-
servers-ansible-virtualenv/.
[50] Jure Leskovec, Kevin J Lang, and Michael Mahoney. 2010. Empirical compari-
son of algorithms for network community detection. In Proceedings of the 19th
international conference on World wide web. ACM, 631–640.
[51] Bin Lin, Gregorio Robles, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2017. Developer turnover in
global, industrial open source projects: Insights from applying survival analysis.
InIEEE 12th International Conference on Global Software Engineering. 66–75.
[52] Johan Linåker, Patrick Rempel, Björn Regnell, and Patrick Mäder. 2016. How￿rms
adapt and interact in open source ecosystems: analyzing stakeholder in￿uence
and collaboration patterns. In International Working Conference on Requirements
Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality. Springer, 63–81.
[53] Sten R Ludvigsen, Andreas Lund, Ingvill Rasmussen, and Roger Säljö. 2010.
Learning across sites: New tools, infrastructures and practices. Routledge.
[54] Björn Lundell, Jonas Gamalielsson, Stefan Tengblad, Bahram Hooshyar Youse￿,
Thomas Fischer, Gert Johansson, Bengt Rodung, Anders Mattsson, Johan Opp-
mark, Tomas Gustavsson, et al .2017. Addressing Lock-in, Interoperability, and
Long-Term Maintenance Challenges Through Open Source: How Can Companies
Strategically Use Open Source?. In IFIP International Conference on Open SourceSystems. Springer, Cham, 80–88.
[55] Gregory Madey, Vincent Freeh, and Renee Tynan. 2002. The open source software
development phenomenon: An analysis based on social network theory. AMCIS
2002 Proceedings (2002), 247.
[56] Juan Martinez-Romo, Gregorio Robles, Jesus M Gonzalez-Barahona, and Miguel
Ortuño-Perez. 2008. Using social network analysis techniques to study collabora-tion between a FLOSS community and a company. In IFIP International Conference
on Open Source Systems. Springer, 171–186.
[57] Audris Mockus. 2009. Organizational volatility and developer productivity. In
ICSE Workshop on Socio-Technical Congruence.
[58] Audris Mockus. 2014. Engineering big data solutions. In Proceedings of the on
Future of Software Engineering. ACM, 85–99.
[59] Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. 2004. Finding and evaluating community
structure in networks. Physical review E 69, 2 (2004), 026113.
[60] Onecloud. 2016. OneCloud Courses. http://1-cloud.net/onecloud-training-
courses/.
[61] OpenStack. 2019. Mirrors of opendev.org. https://github.com/openstack.[62]
OpenStack. 2019. networking-cisco. https://github.com/openstack/networking-
cisco.
[63] Tore Opsahl, Filip Agneessens, and John Skvoretz. 2010. Node centrality in
weighted networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths. Social networks 32,
3 (2010), 245–251.
[64] Alma Orucevic-Alagic and Martin Höst. 2014. Network analysis of a large scale
open source project. In 2014 40th EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering
and Advanced Applications. IEEE, 25–29.
[65] OVH. 2019. Overview of OVH. https://www.ovh.com/.[66]
Siobhán O’Mahony. 2005. 20 Nonpro￿t Foundations and Their Role in
Community-Firm Software Collaboration. (2005).
[67] Ken Pepple. 2011. Deploying openstack. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[68] Platform9. 2016. Platform9 Blog. https://platform9.com/blog/mors-lease-
manager-openstack/.
[69] Platform9. 2017. Platform9 Website. https://platform9.com.
[70] Ray Reagans and Ezra W Zuckerman. 2001. Networks, diversity, and productivity:
The social capital of corporate R&D teams. Organization science 12, 4 (2001),
502–517.
[71] Gregorio Robles and Jesus M Gonzalez-Barahona. 2005. Developer identi￿cation
methods for integrated data from various sources. In Proceedings of the 2005
international workshop on Mining software repositories. ACM, 1–5.
[72] Gregorio Robles, Jesús M González-Barahona, Carlos Cervigón, Andrea Capiluppi,
and Daniel Izquierdo-Cortázar. 2014. Estimating development e￿ort in free/open
source software projects by mining software repositories: a case study of open-
stack. In Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Reposito-
ries. ACM, 222–231.
[73] Cristina Rossi and Andrea Bonaccorsi. 2005. Why pro￿t-oriented companies
enter the OS￿ eld?: intrinsic vs. extrinsic incentives. In ACM SIGSOFT Software
Engineering Notes, Vol. 30. ACM, 1–5.
[74] Per Runeson and Martin Höst. 2009. Guidelines for conducting and reporting
case study research in software engineering. Empirical software engineering 14, 2
(2009), 131.
[75] Caitlin Sadowski and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019. Rethinking Productivity in
Software Engineering. Springer.
[76] Mario Schaarschmidt and Klaas-Jan Stol. 2018. Company soldiers and gone-natives: role con￿ict and career ambition among￿ rm-employed open source
developers. In 39th International Conference on Information Systems. AIS, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
[77] John Scott. 1988. Social network analysis. Sociology 22, 1 (1988), 109–127.
[78] Param Vir Singh. 2010. The small-world e￿ect: The in￿uence of macro-level
properties of developer collaboration networks on open-source project success.
ACM Trans Softw Engineer Methodol 20, 2 (2010), 6.
[79] Param Vir Singh, Yong Tan, and Nara Youn. 2011. A hidden Markov model
of developer learning dynamics in open source software projects. Information
Systems Research 22, 4 (2011), 790–807.
[80] Terje Snarby. 2013. Collaboration Patterns among Commercial Firms in
Community-Based OSS Projects. Master’s thesis. Institutt for datateknikk og
informasjonsvitenskap.
[81] SwiftStack. 2019. Multi-cloud data storage and management for data-driven
applications and work￿ows. https://www.swiftstack.com/.
[82] Xin Tan and Minghui Zhou. 2019. How to Communicate When SubmittingPatches: An Empirical Study of the Linux Kernel. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput.
Interact. 3, CSCW, Article Article 108 (Nov. 2019), 26 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3359210
[83] Yong Tan, Vijay Mookerjee, and Param Singh. 2007. Social capital, structural
holes and team composition: Collaborative networks of the open source software
community. ICIS 2007 Proceedings (2007), 155.
[84] Jose Teixeira, Gregorio Robles, and Jesús M González-Barahona. 2015. Lessons
learned from applying social network analysis on an industrial Free/Libre/Open
Source Software ecosystem. Journal of Internet Services and Applications 6, 1
(2015), 14.
1207How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems? ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
[85] José Apolinário Teixeira and Helena Karsten. 2019. Managing to release early,
often and on time in the OpenStack software ecosystem. Journal of Internet
Services and Applications 10, 1 (2019), 7.
[86] José Apolinário Teixeira, Salman Qayyum Mian, and Ulla Hytti. 2016. Cooper-
ation among competitors in the open-source arena: The case of OpenStack. In
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS). Association For Informa-
tion System.
[87] Marat Valiev, Bogdan Vasilescu, and James Herbsleb. 2018. Ecosystem-level
determinants of sustained activity in open-source projects: A case study of the
PyPI ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 2018 26th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering. ACM, 644–655.
[88] P Wagstrom, JD Herbsleb, RE Kraut, and A Mockus. 2010. The impact of com-mercial organizations on volunteer participation in an online community. In
Academy of Management Annual Meeting.
[89] Joe Weinman. 2017. The economics of the hybrid multicloud fog. IEEE Cloud
Computing 4, 1 (2017), 16–21.
[90] Joel West and Scott Gallagher. 2006. Challenges of open innovation: the paradox
of￿rm investment in open-source software. R&D Management 36, 3 (2006),
319–331.
[91] Robert K Yin. 2017. Case study research and applications: Design and methods.
Sage publications.[92] Yuxia Zhang, Xin Tan, Minghui Zhou, and Zhi Jin. 2018. Companies’ Domination
in FLOSS Development – An Empirical Study of OpenStack. In ACM/IEEE 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering Companion, May 27-June 3, 2018,
Gothenburg. Gothenburg, Sweden, 440–441.
[93] Yuxia Zhang, Minghui Zhou, Audris Mockus, and Zhi Jin. 2019. Companies’Participation in OSS Development-An Empirical Study of OpenStack. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering (2019).
[94] Yuxia Zhang, Minghui Zhou, Klaas-Jan Stol, Jianyu Wu, and Zhi Jin. 2019. Online
appendix to “How Do Companies Collaborate in Open Source Ecosystems?”.
https://github.com/yuxia-zhang/ICSE2020-Company-Collaboration-in-OSS.
[95] Cangqi Zhou, Liang Feng, and Qianchuan Zhao. 2018. A novel community
detection method in bipartite networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications 492 (2018), 1679–1693.
[96] Minghui Zhou and Audris Mockus. 2010. Developer￿ uency: achieving true
mastery in software projects. In Eighteenth ACM Sigsoft International Symposium
on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, 137–
146.
[97] Minghui Zhou and A Mockus. 2015. Who Will Stay in the FLOSS Community?
Modeling Participant’s Initial Behavior. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
41, 1 (2015), 82–99.
[98] Minghui Zhou, Audris Mockus, Xiujuan Ma, Lu Zhang, and Hong Mei. 2016.
In￿ow and retention in oss communities with commercial involvement: A case
study of three hybrid projects. ACM Trans Softw Engineer Methodol 25, 2 (2016).
1208