Leaving My Fingerprints: Motivations and
Challenges of Contributing to OSS for Social Good
Yu Huang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
yhhy@umich.eduDenae Ford
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA USA
denae@microsoft.comThomas Zimmermann
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA USA
tzimmer@microsoft.com
Abstract —When inspiring software developers to contribute
to open source software, the act is often referenced as an
opportunity to build tools to support the developer community.
However, that is not the only charge that propels contributions—
growing interest in open source has also been attributed to
software developers deciding to use their technical skills to
beneﬁt a common societal good. To understand how developers
identify these projects, their motivations for contributing, and
challenges they face, we conducted 21 semi-structured interviews
with OSS for Social Good (OSS4SG) contributors. From our
interview analysis, we identiﬁed themes of contribution styles
that we wanted to understand at scale by deploying a survey
to over 5765 OSS and Open Source Software for Social Good
contributors. From our quantitative analysis of 517 responses, we
ﬁnd that the majority of contributors demonstrate a distinction
between OSS4SG and OSS. Likewise, contributors described
deﬁnitions based on what societal issue the project was to
mitigate and who the outcomes of the project were going to
beneﬁt. In addition, we ﬁnd that OSS4SG contributors focus
less on beneﬁting themselves by padding their resume with new
technology skills and are more interested in leaving their mark on
society at statistically signiﬁcant levels. We also ﬁnd that OSS4SG
contributors evaluate the owners of the project signiﬁcantly more
than OSS contributors. These ﬁndings inform implications to help
contributors identify high societal impact projects, help project
maintainers reduce barriers to entry, and help organizations
understand why contributors are drawn to these projects to
sustain active participation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Open source software (OSS) has enhanced the tools devel-
opers build and likewise has inspired developers to consider
how the tools they build can support the greater good [1],
[2]. However, when we refer to OSS we often consider the
projects that are building developer tools [3], or extending
libraries to popular programming language projects in Python
like TensorFlow [4] or Javascript like React [5]. Although
contributions to these types of OSS projects are valuable
to the community, there are other galvanizing projects with
broader impacts that inspire developers to contribute to OSS.
Speciﬁcally, projects that can directly beneﬁt society: Projects
such as Little Window [6], which supports domestic violence
victims with resources to leave abusive relationships, Re-
stroomRefuge [7], which helps identify safe restroom access
for transgender and gender nonconforming individuals, or
CommCare [8], which is widely used during the COVID-19
pandemic to support frontline workers in developing countries,seem to be fewer in quantity but powerful in inﬂuence. In
that same vein, there is an emerging number of software
companies which are traditionally proﬁt-driven by building
software for a technological good but are now partnering with
non-proﬁts to promote projects to tackle societal issues and
improve lives [9]–[11].
While all of these projects seem to present non-traditional
software categories, the common property they share is to
support a greater social good . Though without a converged
deﬁnition, the term social good has been introduced from
domains like sociology [12], [13] to Artiﬁcial Intelligence [14]
and software engineering [15] in recent years, but is still a
new concept for the open source community. In this paper, to
the best of our knowledge, we for the ﬁrst time introduce
the notation of Open Source Software for Social Good
(OSS4SG) to refer to these projects above that beneﬁt society.
Although these projects are rarer in open source, they still
manage to ﬁnd contributors that are deeply motivated to offer
their expertise. For instance, the CommCare project has been
supported by open source developers during the COVID-19
pandemic, as it previously did during the Ebola outbreak, with
case reporting, contact tracing, and community education [16].
But is this excitement to contribute to social good projects
any different from the motivations to contribute to other OSS
projects [17]? Prior research in social work presents theoretical
underpinnings of how social good movements can be fueled
by a sense of urgency for broad societal changes—bringing
in new perspectives along the way [12]. Likewise, in the
computer science education ﬁeld projects with broader societal
impacts can also attract a broader range of participation across
minority groups [18]. Is that also the case for OSS4SG? From
GitHub’s Social Impact Report, we identify that there are
several non-proﬁts that are also interested stake holders in
using OSS4SG to make a social impact [19], but ultimately
little is known about the contributors in this community. As the
ﬁrst study to understand the full range of contribution interest
and challenges in OSS4SG, we investigate how OSS4SG
contributors are different from general OSS contributors. In
this paper, we sought out to understand a) differences between
OSS and OSS4SG projects from contributors’ perspectives,
b) why contributors decide to contribute to OSS4SG, c)
how contributors select which OSS4SG project to work on,
and d) what challenges developers face when contributing in
10202021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00096
OSS4SG.
To understand the scope of identiﬁable OSS4SG projects,
we ﬁrst identiﬁed two public third-party software sites,
Ovio [20] and Digital Public Goods [21], as two of the few
curated repositories of nominated OSS4SG projects. We took
an exploratory sequential mixed-methods approach [22] where
we ﬁrst, conducted semi-structured interviews with 21 active
OSS4SG contributors from around the world and second, used
the 17 hours of analyzed interview data to deploy a quantitative
survey to understand differences in project types from both
OSS4SG and general OSS contributors. From our interviews,
we ﬁnd contributors working on interesting projects ranging
from domestic violence support to ﬁnding safe restrooms.
From our interview participants we ﬁnd that there is a distinc-
tion in deﬁning OSS4SG as “It’s complicated because part of
the point comes down to outcome.” Similarly, in our survey we
ﬁnd that over 52% of respondents felt similarly and regarded
OSS4SG to be distinct from OSS. Using the combined results
from our study and prior literature [15], in this study, we deﬁne
open source for social good as follows:
Open source software projects where the outcome distinctly
targets a community of people to overcome a societal issue.
We should note that this deﬁnitions considers both the societal
issue and who the project intends to impact.
We also ﬁnd that, while sharing common features with
OSS, OSS4SG holds unique characteristics. Compared to OSS,
OSS4SG contributors care signiﬁcantly less about beneﬁting
themselves including learning skills and improving portfolios,
but emphasize signiﬁcantly more on addressing societal issues.
OSS4SG contributors also evaluate the trust of owners of
projects with signiﬁcantly more care and are speciﬁcally facing
with more challenges of matching themselves with projects.
The main contributions from this paper are:
1) A contributor informed deﬁnition of Open Source Soft-
ware for Social Good. This deﬁnition also takes into
consideration of how non-OSS4SG contributors describe
social impact.
2) A taxonomy and investigation of motivations, projects
identiﬁcation signals, and challenges for Open Source
Software for Social Good projects and how they vary
from general OSS contributions.
3) Design recommendations for project maintainers and
organizations for how to support OSS contributors who
are interested in projects with societal impacts such as
having an impact statement on contributing guidelines.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
To explore how open source contributors work on projects
with societal impacts, we conducted a mixed-methods study
of semi-structured interviews of OSS4SG contributors and
distributed a survey to a range of OSS contributors. The ethics
for this study were reviewed and approved by the Microsoft
Research Institutional Review Board (MSRIRB), which is an
IRB federally registered with the United States Departmentof Health & Human Services. (Reference: MSRIRB #649
and #718). All study materials can be found online [23]
2/1 1/2021 zenodo.4536791.svg
ﬁle:///Users/denae/Downloads/zenodo.4536791.svg 1 / 1
DOIDOI 10.5281/zenodo.453679110.5281/zenodo.4536791
.
A. Research Questions
We investigated the following research questions:
RQ1 How do contributors deﬁne OSS for Social Good?
RQ2 What motivations do contributors have to contribute
to OSS for Social Good?
RQ3 What factors do contributors consider to select an
OSS for Social Good project?
RQ4 What are the current challenges to work in OSS for
Social Good?
B. Semi-Structured Interviews
To understand the experiences of OSS4SG contributors we
conducted interviews. Since there has been no research on
open source for social good, we ﬁrst had to identify opens
source for social good projects before recruiting participants.
Identifying Open Source for Social Good Projects :As
there are no lists of projects currently hosted by large open
source platforms, we reviewed GitHub’s Social Impact report
from for reliable sources [19]. From there, we identiﬁed two
public third-party software project resources: Ovio [20] and
Digital Public Goods [21], which provide a nomination-based
list of software projects publicly labeled with social good
topics. Ovio uses seven social labels1and Digital Public
Goods adopts the 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs)
from the United Nations [24] as the social good labels for
their projects. We sample OSS4SG interview participants and
survey respondents from these curated lists.
Participants :We recruited 21 interview participants from
437 OSS4SG projects where a valid link to a GitHub project
was available. (1) We purposely sampled 80 projects across 4
quartiles of repository stars (e.g., an indicator of community
interest). (2) Our recruitment strategy to select participants
from the selected projects had a two-pronged approach: ﬁrst,
we emailed authors of the 60 most recent commits as of
June 1, 2020 and second, we picked one contributor randomly
from each quartile of that projects commit history. In total we
emailed 250 contributors and had response rate of 8.4%2. The
repository links and the labels of corresponding social good
topics for all of the 437 projects are available online [23].
Table I lists demographic information of our interview
participants including their gender, the country they contribute
from, and the reported project domains. We also collected
information on race and ethnicity which can be found on
our project website. Among our participants, P21 identiﬁed
themself as a Senior Technical Advisor for their project.
They have a background in Pharmaceuticals and was added
to the contributor team of a social good project on health
management science as a supervisor, but did not personally
1Ovio ’s labels for social good: Civil Tech, Economics, Education, Environ-
ment & Nature, Health & Well-being, Humanitarian, Society & Culture.
2The actual response rate is higher because more contributors contacted us
to participate in the interviews but there were no slots available.
1021TABLE I: Interview Participants
ID GenderSG
ExpOSS
ExpLocation of
ContributionProject
Domains
P1 W 2 2 Mexico Crypto, Security
P2 M 1 1 USA Finance
P3 M 8 8 GermanyEducation, Healthcare,
Disaster Tracking
P4 W 1 1 UKCharity,
Domestic Violence
P5 M 1 3 India Environment
P6 M 0.5 10 Turkey COVID-19 Tracking
P7 M 0.5 0.5 IndiaEducation,
Environment
P8 M 4 5.5 IsraelStructurally-Safe
Buildings
P9 M 8 8 Australia Healthcare, Education
P10 W 2 2 India Healthcare, Education
P11 W 0.5 0.5 India Education
P12 M 2 2 USA COVID-19 Tracking
P13 M 2 6 USAEducation,
Non-proﬁt Tools
P14 NB 8 8 GermanyAnti-Gentriﬁcation,
Safe Restrooms
P15 M 10 10 SpaineGovernment,
Civil Participation
P16 M 0.5 0.5 India Healthcare
P17 M 2 2 India Education
P18 M 1.5 1.5 Romania Local Administration
P19 M 0.5 1 India Healthcare
P20 M 5 15 CanadaManagement for
Government and Charity
P21* M 5 5 USA Healthcare
participate in any open source activities. In the end of this
paper, we will discuss separately on P21’s observations and
comments from the perspective of technical advisors (at the
end of Section III-D). Otherwise, all the reported results of
the interviews are from P1 to P20 who identify as contrib-
utors. The interviews reached theoretical saturation at P20.
Participants reported 3.05 years of experience on OSS4SG on
average ( sd= 2:98) and 4.38 years of experience on OSS in
general ( sd= 4:07).
Protocol :We conducted semi-structured interviews re-
motely ranging from 45-55 minutes. Two of the authors
conducted the interviews. The interviews topics included: con-
tributor background, perceptual differences between OSS4SG,
motivations and factors considered when selecting an OSS4SG
project, experience comparisons in OSS and OSS4SG, and
challenges as well as expectations for OSS4SG. After the
interview, each participant was compensated with a $25 USD
equivalent electronic gift card for their participation. The
format of semi-structured interviews are widely used in soft-
ware engineering studies [25], which allows the ﬂexibility
to dig into more speciﬁc questions based on interviewees’
own experience. All the interviews were recorded and latertranscribed by a third-party transcription service. The ﬁrst two
interviews were conducted as pilot interviews that included a
superset of the questions, based on which we ﬁnalized the
interview questions for the remaining interviews.
Analysis :We conducted inductive thematic analysis [26] on
the interview transcripts over multiple phases using ATLAS.ti .
We ﬁrst generated open codes by labelling notable recurring
statements made by the participants. The ﬁrst two authors
analyzed 2 transcripts independently to identify open codes
and then convened to discuss codes and determine relation-
ships. Once reﬁned the ﬁrst author continued labeling data
based on our iterative and collaborative reﬁnement of our code
book. Next, we collaboratively identiﬁed relationships between
the codes. Finally, we collaboratively organized codes into
meaningful themes. The code book used in our analysis is
available online [23].
C. Survey
To validate and quantify our themes from interviews, we
distributed a survey that include both OSS4SG and the broader
population of open source contributors on GitHub.
Identifying Open Source & Social Good Contributors :
We recruited GitHub contributors from two types of projects.
(1)Set-OSS4SG: Open Source Projects for Social Good. This
is the same set of 437 GitHub projects that are labeled as
for social good (see Section II-B). We had a population of
14,256 contributors, among which 7,500 contributors’ contact
information is publicly available. (2) Set-OSS: Open Source
Projects excluded from Set-OSS4SG. To select a comparable
set of general open source projects to Set-OSS4SG , we ended
up randomly selecting 642 projects from GitHub with no
speciﬁc ﬁltering applied. We had a population of 17,978
contributors in total, among which 9409 contributors’ contact
information were publicly available.
Respondents :To verify that the distributions of contributors
(i.e., team size) in Set-OSS4SG andSet-OSS are comparable,
we conducted a two-tailed T-test ( p= 0:31) and found
no signiﬁcant difference on the distribution of contributors
between Set-OSS4SG andSet-OSS .
Then, we follow a two-step selection process to get 3,000
contributors from each of Set-OSS4SG andSet-OSS to make
sure we have a variety of perspectives included in our analysis:
1) Most recently active contributors: We randomly selected
four contributors from every project in the most recent
60 commits.
2) Additional contributors: Depending on the ﬁnal list of
contributors from Step 1, we then randomly selected a
set of contributors (exclusive from contributors selected
in Step 1) from the entire contributor pool so that we
have a list of 3,000 contributors in total.
Finally, for Set-OSS4SG , we ended up with 1436 active
contributors (from Step 1) and 1564 randomly selected con-
tributors (from Step 2). For Set-OSS , we ended up with 1383
active contributors (from Step 1) and 1617 randomly selected
contributors (from Step 2). We sent out the survey invitation to
5765 reachable emails (some emails are valid but not reachable
1022any more). The proportion of women respondents from Set-
OSS4SG (n= 21 ) is relatively higher than Set-OSS (n= 7).
Likewise, the race/ethnicity distribution of response were also
noticeably higher among Black or African-American in Set-
OSS4SG (n= 14 ) than Set-OSS (n= 3).
Protocol :We used our results from the interviews to design
our 28-question survey. Respondents completed the survey in
about 20 minutes. Topics covered in our survey included but
are not limited to demographics, roles in projects, perceptions
of important factors during selection, and challenges faced.
To remind respondents to answer questions accordingly, we
emboldened text regarding differences between their OSS and
OSS4SG experiences. We also include a set of questions about
the level of impact desired using a trolley problem [27] based
approach to understand interest along the three dimensions
of the construal-level theory of psychological distance which
are spatial, temporal, and social [28]. For our demographic
questions, we followed the FDA’s description of race and
ethnicity [29] and the HCI Guidelines for Gender Equity and
Inclusivity [30]. Most survey questions were listed as optional.
To reduce the risks of participants misunderstanding questions,
the survey was reviewed by several people who are not co-
authors of this paper. The survey was also piloted with smaller
groups before distributing the survey widely. Upon completion
of the survey, participants were able enter a sweepstakes to win
one of four $100 USD electronic gift cards. The full survey
is available online [23].
Analysis :From our interviews, we found that perceptions of
whether OSS4SG and general OSS are different inﬂuence how
contributors describe their experiences. Thus, in our survey,
we (1) ﬁrst collect respondent’s opinions on the agreement
that OSS4SG distinguish from general OSS, and (2) then
whether a respondent has worked in OSS4SG projects before.
In the survey analysis, we compare between OSS4SG and
OSS. To clarify the results from our analysis, we use the
following named buckets in our text and tables to indicate
subgroups of all survey respondents based on their self-
reported information.
P-OSS4SG : Respondents who agree that OSS4SG should
be distinguished from general OSS.
P-OSS : Respondents who believe all OSS projects are for
social good.
P-OSS4SG+ : Respondents in P-OSS4SG but have also
worked on at least one OSS4SG project in the past.
P-OSS+ : All respondents excluding P-OSS4SG+.
We received 517 valid responses from the 5765 email
invitations (8.97% response rate), which aligns with previous
studies in software engineering surveys [31] and comparable
to other surveys on open source contributors. Every survey
respondent was regrouped into either P-OSS or P-OSS4SG
based on their responses and overall actual experience. Our
respondents were also from a range of regions including Africa
(n= 23 ), the Americas ( n= 181 ), Asia ( n= 137 ), Europe
(n= 164 ), and Oceania ( n= 11 ). The OSS project domains
reported in the survey (499 reported topics in total) covered
all 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs) deﬁned by theUnited Nation; the most popular topics are Quality Education
(78 projects), Good Health and Well-Being (62 projects), and
Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure (60 projects).
III. R ESULTS
For each research question, we ﬁrst introduce the interview
observations and analysis, then present the corresponding
survey results. In some cases, we have anonymized parts of
quotes to maintain participants’ privacy.
A.How do contributors deﬁne OSS4SG? (RQ1)
Though the term social good has been used in the literature
of open source [15], no consensus of deﬁnition, especially
from the perspective of open source developers, has emerged
(see Section VI-B). We ﬁrst investigate how OSS contributors
understand and deﬁne OSS4SG .
1) Interview: Our interview participants expressed two
high-level opinions on the deﬁnition of OSS4SG . Three out
of 20 participants (P5, P8, P11) believed, to an extent, that all
OSS projects are for social good, because every project can
beneﬁt its users:
“I think the fact that the project is open source and people
can contribute their knowledge and can use it as they are
required by the license, there’s a social beneﬁt that everyone
can use from the project itself. ” (P8)
However, participants can draw the same conclusion with
different reasoning and understanding of the deﬁnition of
social good . For example:
“I think almost all projects should come into social good
because some way or another, you never know what the
bigger project is. So I may be using another open source
software for my project, my project being something for kids
or for education or for some other social purposes, but the
open source project I am working on may be just a tech-
based project. ” (P11)
Though P11 agrees that all open source projects are for
social good, it is based on the assumption that every project
can potentially beneﬁt society indirectly by being part of
another project that solves societal issues.
The remaining 17 participants (and to some extent P11)
believe that certain unique properties make some open source
projects distinct from the rest: identiﬁed as for Social Good .
There are three main properties the interview participants used
to deﬁne Open Source for Social Good (OSS4SG) :
The project targets people or communities that need help:
“It’s just for the software that actually makes a difference
on the access or on the usability of people who needs
some help. ” (P20)
The project aims to solve some societal issues or provide
social beneﬁts: “ If we are talking about the social good
term, it comes with any project or any initiative that is,
like, that aims to provide any help to the social projects. ”
(P10)
1023The project is non-proﬁt (or hosted by non-proﬁt owners):
“The goal is the software itself, not necessarily proﬁting
off the software. ” (P9)
Participants also provided inspiring insights on the deﬁnition
ofOSS4SG from the view of the government’s responsibility
or users’ capability:
“I’m guessing it’s things that the government should have
been doing, but you’re going to have someone else doing
it.” (P18)
“Or like you’re building for something who has the knowl-
edge and who in turn builds for someone who doesn’t have
the knowledge. ” (P19)
2) Survey: Among our valid survey respondents, 52.8%
(n= 249 ) agreed that OSS4SG projects are distinct from
other OSS projects. We built a logistic regression model to
investigate the relationship between demographic information
and opinions on distinguishing OSS4SG projects. In this
model, we included demographic information, such as gender,
race, age, locations of contribution, employment status, pro-
fessional ﬁelds, education levels and background, volunteering
experience and capacity of OSS contribution. This logistic
regression model treats “OSS4SG is different from OSS” as 1.
We found that women in our sample tend to believe all OSS
projects are for social good ( Estimate = 1:9; p < 0:05).
Contributors with previous volunteering experience on human
support tend to believe OSS4SG is distinct from general OSS
(Estimate = 1.72 ; p < 0:01).
Among the 249 survey respondents who distinguish between
OSS4SG and OSS projects, 89.1% agreed that the identiﬁca-
tion of social good in open source depended on if a project
targeted to solve societal issues, while 77.1% expected an
OSS4SG project to be targeted at users who need help. Only
35.3% believed OSS4SG projects must be non-proﬁt or hosted
by non-proﬁt owners.
Contributors cite the target audience and societal issues to
determine whether a project is truly OSS for Social Good.
B.What are the motivations for contributing to OSS4SG
projects? (RQ2)
1) Interview: First, we present the themes explaining the
motivations for contributing to OSS4SG. Some themes we
identiﬁed include contributing for an emotional fulﬁllment,
helping those in need, and leaving their “ﬁngerprint on the
world”. A summary of these themes is listed in Table II.
2) Survey: We included all the themes from Table III as
well as motivations included in previous studies on open
source in our survey [3], [32], [33]. To investigate if contrib-
utors are motivated in different ways for OSS4SG and OSS,
we asked P-OSS4SG to rate how important each motivation
item was for them to contribute to OSS4SG, and asked P-OSS
to rate the items based on their opinions on OSS projects.
Each motivation item is a ﬁve-point Likert scale question:“Not Important’, “Sightly Important”, “Moderately Impor-
tant”, “Important”, and “Very Important”. Table III lists the
accumulated percentages of “Important” and “Very Important”
for each motivation theme for OSS4SG and OSS respectively,
and the difference between them (i.e., column Delta ).
We found that, compared to OSS, for OSS4SG contributors
it signiﬁcantly less important to beneﬁt themselves by learning
or improving skills (M6, –19.6%, p < 0:001), building their
portfolio (M9, –14.3%, p < 0:05) and helping with their own
work or projects (M10, –10.6%, p < 0:001). On the contrary,
OSS4SG contributors are signiﬁcantly more motivated to solve
a societal issue (M4, +9.5%, p < 0:01).
Compared to OSS, OSS4SG contributors indicate they are
signiﬁcantly more motivated by solving societal issues
rather than beneﬁting themselves through learning skills
or building a career portfolio.
C.What factors do contributors consider to select an
OSS4SG project? (RQ3)
We will ﬁrst discuss the factors and properties of OSS4SG
projects that contributors evaluate when they select a project to
contribute to, and presented the comparison with OSS projects.
We will then discuss the search strategies contributors use to
look for OSS4SG projects. In the end, we will present the
OSS4SG contributors’ project preference in terms on scale of
impact (spatial, temporal, and social) and owner types.
1) Interview: With limited space, a summary of the factors
OSS4SG contributors demonstrated to consider when selecting
a project in the interview is listed in Table IV, which are the
same statements we used in our survey design. Participants
reported factors including both properties of the projects and
their own personal preferences.
Participants expressed special considerations on owners of
projects, including preferences for certain types of owners:
“If it’s even a charity organization I go and look at who
their sponsors are. And if it’s a government I’m already
like, no, it’s not gonna happen. A political party maybe.
But government is too far for me. ” (P14)
We will discuss more on contributors’ preference on project
owners from the survey results in Section III-C2.
Participants search for OSS4SG projects in different ways.
Some participants search for OSS4SG projects by talking to
other people in meetings or tech events that are relevant to
their social interests. For example:
“I can go to like a underground, political event every night
and like meet activist, tech people all the time. It’s like I
can just talk to people. ” (P18)
Some prefer starting with project owners:
“I went to view some of the large releases that they (owners)
made [. . . ] and I checked through their websites also. ”
(P10)
Some look for projects from their personal connections:
1024TABLE II: Themes of Motivations for Contributing to OSS for Social Good.
Theme Description Representative Example Participants
To help those in need Contributors wanted to help people who
are in need but may lack the capability of
solving the problems themselves.“I’m so much more motivated to build
products that I know have a good outcome
for a group of people that is generally
underserved. ”P2, P3, P4, P5, P6,
P7, P8, P9, P10,
P12, P14, P18, P19
To become a better
programmerContributors wanted to improve their skills,
build up their portfolios, or improve their
reputation in the community.“when I contribute to that, it can deﬁnitely
give me more experience. ”P2, P3, P5, P10,
P11, P12, P14,
P16, P17, P20
To have an impact on
societyContributors wanted to make a difference
to the society.“So, I think the main reason is because
I want to make a difference on my life...
make a ﬁngerprint on the world. ”P1, P3, P4, P7,
P13, P14, P15, P17
For emotional fulﬁllment Contributors were motivated by feeling
good about the impacts of the project.“It gives a mental satisfaction that I’m
working towards something good”P3, P4, P10, P11,
P12, P17, P20
To help fellow developers
with their projectContributors want to help the develop-
ers to achieve the accomplishment of the
projects.“Another is to help the people in the
project to help reach their goals. ”P3, P7, P10, P12,
P13, P18
To give back as
I receivedContributors want to give back to the so-
ciety (e.g., altruism).“And I also feel like however much you
take from something, you should give
back. ”P4, P5, P9, P16,
P20
To meet like-minded
peopleContributors wanted to get to know more
people.“I think it brings like-minded people to-
gether most of the time, so I get to interact
with people who are working on similar
project or they have similar interests. ”P11, P13, P17
Asa hobby Contributors worked in OSS4SG as a
hobby or something they like doing.“I’ve moved to sales but still collaborating
... It’s just as a hobby. ”P14, P15
Because I need it
for workContributors worked on OSS4SG for their
professional work projects.“So the direct cause that I found it is
through [elided]’s little competition. ”P2
“A friend talk about that or that other project, and you just
have a feeling, hey, maybe ﬁnd you to work on this. ” (P15)
An interesting search strategy for OSS4SG projects is based
on the social impact (see more discussion in Section III-C2):
“I was reading about Coronavirus and tracking the spread
of it, and found that there are no mobile apps that provide
this ability. ” (P6)
Participants also use regular search engines and online open
source platform to search for OSS4SG (e.g., GitHub).
2) Survey: We reﬁned all the factors of project evaluation
provided in the interviews and designed 14 statements in
the survey. Similarly with RQ2 , we asked P-OSS4SG to rate
how important each factor was when they select an OSS4SG
project, and asked P-OSS to rate the factors based on their
opinions on OSS projects. Table IV lists the accumulated
percentages of “Important” and “Very Important” for each
factor for OSS4SG and OSS respectively. Column Delta lists
the importance difference between OSS4SG and OSS.
From Table IV, compared to OSS, OSS4SG contributors
consider the importance of “learning skills (F10)” by 18.6%
less signiﬁcantly: this result aligns with our ﬁndings on
motivations in Section III-B2. While the popularity of a project
is an important factor of evaluation for OSS, when selecting an
OSS4SG project, contributors focus less on project popularity
(F14, –11.7%, p < 0:05). One interesting and signiﬁcant
difference on factors of evaluations between OSS4SG and
OSS projects is the owner of projects: when selecting OSS4SGprojects, contributors investigate more on the owners than OSS
projects (+21.4%, p < 0:001). This quantitatively veriﬁes our
observations in the interviews.
In the survey, we further explored how contributors evalu-
ated different scales of impact and owners when they select
OSS4SG projects to contribute to.
Scale of Impact: Table V shows all respondents decisions
on three pairs of project options (Project Aand B) based
on different scales of impact: spatial proximity, temporal
proximity, and social proximity. We found that contributors
prioritized OSS4SG projects that met global needs, had long-
term beneﬁts, and beneﬁted their personal connections.
Owner Preference: In the survey, 55.7% of respondents
expressed willingness to contribute to OSS projects hosted by
technology companies, while only 44.4% of respondents are
willing to work for OSS4SG projects hosted by technology
companies ( p < 0:001). There are no signiﬁcant differences
on preference on government (30.9% for OSS4SG, 25.9%
for OSS) and charity (68.2% for OSS4SG, 66.7% for OSS)
owners.
While sharing common concerns when selecting projects,
compared to OSS, OSS4SG contributors more thoroughly
investigate the owners of projects. OSS4SG contributors
tend to prioritize projects that meet global needs, have long-
term beneﬁts, and beneﬁt their personal connections. They
also expressed less interest in projects hosted by technology
companies.
1025TABLE III: The responses from P-OSS4SG andP-OSS to the question “Please rate how much you are motivated from the
following aspects when you decide to contribute to a project:” (Q19, Q19’). The columns P-OSS4SG and P-OSS list the
accumulated percentages of responses from “Important” and “Very Important” (i.e., higher than “Moderately Important”).
Delta lists the difference of the percentages between P-OSS4SG andP-OSS ; statistically signiﬁcant differences are indicated
with asterisks (*). The motivation items are ranked and numbered by the importance in P-OSS4SG .
MotivationP-OSS4SG
(n=222)P-OSS
(n=198)Delta
(P-OSS4SG - P-OSS)
I want to help the target users. (M1) 69.4% 65.7% 3.7%
I want to give back. (M2) 66.2% 63.6% 2.6%
I want to have an impact on society. (M3) 64.4% 60.1% 4.3%
I want to help solve a societal issue. (M4) 63.5% 54.0% 9.5% **
It’s my hobby. (M5) 63.5% 70.7% -7.2%
I can learn or improve technology skills. (M6) 53.1% 72.7% -19.6% ***
I want to help other contributors in the team. (M7) 51.8% 62.6% -10.8%
It’s my job. (M8) 51.8% 53.0% -1.2%
It helps me to build my portfolio and reputation for my career. (M9) 39.2% 53.5% -14.3% *
I need to improve this project for my work or school studies. (M10) 29.3% 39.9% -10.6% ***
I want to meet new people. (M11) 17.6% 30.3% -12.7% **
My organization/boss encourages me to work on this project. (M12) 15.3% 21.2% -5.9%
I want to get paid. (M13) 12.6% 13.6% -1.0%
Wilcoxon rank sum test signiﬁcance codes: ‘***’ p <0:001, ‘**’ p <0:01, ‘*’p <0:05
TABLE IV: The responses P-OSS4SG andP-OSS to the question “Please rate how important the following factors are
to you when you decide to work on a project” (Q17, Q17’). The columns P-OSS4SG andP-OSS listed the accumulated
percentages of responses from “Important” and “Very Important” (i.e., higher than “Moderately Important”). Delta list
the difference of the percentages between P-OSS4SG andP-OSS . Statistically signiﬁcant differences are indicated with
asterisks (*). The items are ranked and numbered by the importance in P-OSS4SG .
Factors to Consider When Selecting a ProjectP-OSS4SG
(n=226)P-OSS
(n=202)Delta
(P-OSS4SG - P-OSS)
I personally respect/care about the issue this project is trying to solve. (F1) 83.6% 75.7% 7.9%
I like the idea of this project. (F2) 83.2% 78.2% 5.0%
This project is active. (F3) 74.3% 72.3% 2.0%
The goal of this project meets some form of needs I care about. (F4) 73.0% 67.3% 5.7%
This project is welcoming. (F5) 67.7% 64.3% 3.4%
I fully understand the goal and value of this project. (F6) 65.9% 65.3% 0.6%
I trust the owner/organizer of this project. (F7) 63.5% 42.1% 21.4% ***
I feel conﬁdent in my skills to help with this project. (F8) 62.4% 65.8% -3.4%
This project is well-maintained. (F9) 57.5% 64.8% -7.3%
I can learn some new skills or enhance my skills in this project. (F10) 43.8% 62.4% -18.6% ***
This project targets a lot of users. (F11) 24.8% 27.7% -2.9%
This project has a diverse contributor team (e.g., gender, race, geography). (F12) 16.4% 18.3% -1.9%
Someone else in my community is also working on this project. (F13) 15.9% 16.3% -0.4%
This project is popular in the community. (F14) 15.5% 27.2% -11.7% *
Wilcoxon rank sum test signiﬁcance codes: ‘***’ p <0:001, ‘**’ p <0:01, ‘*’p <0:05
D.What are the current challenges to work for OSS4SG?
(RQ4)
We report the challenges contributors are facing with cur-
rently in OSS4SG. In the end of the section, we discuss on
observations from P21, who provided insightful and unique
feedback on challenges in OSS4SG from the perspectives of
technical advisors (with no programming background).
1) Interview: The most frequently reported challenge in
our interviews is that it is very hard to match contributors
and OSS4SG projects, (P1, P3, P4, P9, P18). This challenge
is also indicated from consulting with the GitHub Social
Impact Sector. Currently, there is no indicator (e.g., badges)
yet to recommend or identify OSS4SG projects in open source
community:“It is difﬁcult to know where the projects are. Where the
communities are. And getting involved in it. There are many,
many, many developers that might want to contribute, but
they never get, you know, an announce or publication, a
post, something. ” (P1)
Lack of funding, which results in unstable ﬂow of contrib-
utors, is reported to be a challenge for OSS4SG:
“I honestly think the hardest thing about working on social
good is very frequently they’re funded by charities, so it’s
very hard to get people’s full focus on it. Like, paid full
focus on it. ” (P4)
Because OSS4SG projects often include contributors with
different backgrounds, communication can be challenging:
1026TABLE V: The responses to the question “Assume you only
have time to work on one project, please choose the one
from each of the three pairs below” (Q21). The three pairs of
projects are based on the scale of impact in terms of spatial,
temporal and social proximity.
Project Selection Based on Scale of ImpactPercentage
(n=404)
SPATIAL PROXIMITY
A:A project that is needed globally
(e.g., tracking pandemic issues like COVID19) 65.8%
B:A project that is needed only in my local area
(e.g., tracking local health issue)34.2%
TEMPORAL PROXIMITY
A:A project that is beneﬁcial in the long term
(e.g., monitor global warming)57.7%
B:A project that is beneﬁcial now
(e.g., monitor a recent ﬂood disaster)42.3%
SOCIAL PROXIMITY
A:A project that a stranger needs
(e.g., monitoring system for a health issue that
does not affect my family)31.9%
B:A project that someone I know personally needs
(e.g., diabetes tracker my family, friend or myself
can use)68.1%
“In a social good project, we would also have engineers and
designers, so it’ll take a lot of time to come to a conclusion
because there are so many different skill perspectives on the
table. ” (P17)
The lack of concept of open source of users make it
challenging for OSS4SG controbutors, emotionally:
“For developers maybe it’s quite common, but for normal
people, it’s not familiar with that concept [of open source],
like that you can contribute something back and that is free,
so you like blame the developer for error or something. . . ”
(P3)
Participants also reported conﬂicts they have experienced in
OSS4SG. For example, some contributors may be ignorant of
a wider requirement of usage:
“[Talking about other contributors] So, we can use the
software this way, you know, for our good. I don’t care
the others. ” (P1)
Different cultural backgrounds may introduce conﬂicts on
social norms:
“How they express, it would be much frank. It could be,
at times, by putting their opinions, they might come off to
some people as harsh. ” (P17)
Different backgrounds (especially working with contributors
with less technology background) may introduce conﬂicts on
technology-based communication:“I sometimes get told by them that I’m speaking maybe on
a too technical of level. ” (P14)
2) Survey: In our survey, we grouped and reﬁned all the
observations on challenges in OSS4SG in the interviews,
and then combined with challenges in OSS from previous
studies [17]. Finally we designed 10 challenge statements. We
asked P-OSS4SG+ (i.e., with actual OSS4SG experience) to
rate how much they agreed on each challenge in OSS4SG, and
asked P-OSS+ to rate the agreement on each challenge based
on their experience in OSS. Each challenge statement is a ﬁve-
point Likert scale question: “Strongly Disagree”, “Disagree”,
“Neither Agree nor Disagree”, “Agree”, and “Strongly Agree”.
Table VI list the accumulated percentages of “Agree” and
“Strongly Agree” for each challenge in OSS4SG and OSS re-
spectively. This table rank all the challenges by the agreement
percentage of OSS4SG.
From Table VI, for both OSS4SG and OSS, “It is hard
for newcomers to understand how to contribute to the project.
(C1)” is reported to be the most challenging factor. OSS4SG
contributors reported a higher rate on “not knowing where to
ﬁnd good projects to work on (C3)” ( Delta = 12:9%), which
quantitatively veriﬁed the observations in the interviews. With
a signiﬁcant difference on agreement, OSS4SG contributors
face less challenges with unreasonable feature requests (C9)
and over-documentation (C10). In general, OSS4SG and OSS
contributors face similar challenges except that it is more
difﬁcult for OSS4SG contributors to ﬁnd projects to work on.
3) Interview with a technical advisor: We had one par-
ticipant, P21, from our interviews who was not a software
developer but had been working for years as a technical
advisor that coordinated between software development teams
and stakeholders (in healthcare and pharmacy) to convert their
products to OSS. The perspective he provided highlights the
value of community-centric and project-centric roles [34]. He
provided insightful feedback from years of experience working
on OSS4SG that involved collaborating with multiple local
governments and administrations globally:
“It takes a long time to set up the global communities around
the software... The biggest challenge is to get a political
consensus in the given countries that this is what we are
going to do and formalize it and making sure that you have
national level consensus and a plan, commitment. ” (P21)
He also pointed out that, for an OSS4SG project that may
need the support of political administrations, it was necessary
to consider the potential reachability and limitations in the
project’s design phase. Furthermore, he also suggested that the
OSS4SG community needed a formal model to convert social
good software projects to open source. Currently, they could
only explore potential options by learning from individual
cases:
“So what we have been looking at as a model is [elided
software name], or the open source application for district
health information system. Because I think they have done
a very good job in regards to both publishing the software,
1027TABLE VI: The responses from P-OSS4SG+ andP-OSS+ to the question “Please rate the agreement on how challenging
the following aspects are to you” (Q27, Q27’). The columns P-OSS4SG+ andP-OSS+ listed the accumulated percentages of
responses from “Agree” and ”Strongly Agree” (i.e., higher than “Neither Agree nor Disagree”). Delta listed the difference of
the percentages between P-OSS4SG+ andP-OSS+ . Statistically signiﬁcant differences are indicated with asterisks (*). The
challenge items are ranked and numbered by descending agreement of P-OSS4SG+ .
ChallengesP-OSS4SG+
(n=153)P-OSS+
(n=228)Delta
(P-OSS4SG+ - P-OSS+)
It is hard for newcomers to understand how to contribute to the project. (C1) 69.9% 64.5% 4.5%
It is hard to understand what features my users need. (C2) 53.6% 49.1% 4.5%
Not knowing where to ﬁnd good projects to work on. (C3) 49.7% 36.8% 12.9%
Needing more money to work on a project. (C4) 49.0% 43.0% 6.0%
Not understanding the direction of a project. (C5) 41.8% 34.2% 7.6%
Other contributors losing sight of direction of a project. (C6) 32.0% 35.5% -3.5%
Working with people who do not understand open source. (C7) 32.0% 33.8% -1.8%
The project is over-engineered. (C8) 24.8% 24.6% 0.2%
Stakeholders are unreasonable on feature requests. (C9) 22.2% 29.4% -7.2% **
Too much time is spent on documentation in this project. (C10) 14.4% 21.1% -6.7% *
Wilcoxon rank sum test signiﬁcance codes: ‘***’ p <0:001, ‘**’ p <0:01, ‘*’p <0:05
but also, creating a community around it that, of course,
massively increases sustainability. ” (P21)
Though P21 does not have programming experience, his
experience on collaborating with non-technology stakeholders
and pushing social good products to OSS is valuable for
OSS4SG community.
Though facing with similar challenges with OSS, it is more
challenging for OSS4SG contributors to ﬁnd a project to
contribute to.
IV. D ISCUSSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Our ﬁndings demonstrate that Open Source Software for
Social Good is a sub-type of OSS projects that have its
own characteristics. Developers perceive differences between
OSS4SG and general OSS on deﬁnition, motivation, factors
used for evaluation, and challenges. In the remainder of
this section, we present design implications based on our
ﬁndings speciﬁcally for OSS4SG contributors, project owners,
organizations seeking for OSS4SG options, and fund raisers
to improve the OSS4SG community.
A. Match contributors to OSS4SG projects
In our study, OSS4SG contributors described challenges
with the lack of information and communication channels to
discover OSS4SG projects. They also indicated that OSS4SG
projects that need help cannot effectively reach developers
willing to help (Section III-D). Thus, we suggest implications
to mitigate these challenges from the perspective of the OSS
community and project owners.
For the OSS community , we suggest instrumenting badges
and labels andimproving nomination guidelines to highlight
OSS4SG projects. Research has shown that indicating OSS
project properties with badges can improve the participation
and help contributors search for projects of interest [35].
We suggest a similar approach to help contributors identifyprojects that are for social good. Our ﬁndings suggest contrib-
utors identify OSS4SG projects based on the targeted users
and social issues. Such badges or labels can be added to
OSS projects to ease the searching process. Currently, third
parties that provide directories of OSS4SG projects (e.g., Ovio,
Digital Public Goods, etc.) use free nominations from users.
We suggest curators of OSS4SG project directories adapt
nomination guidelines with criteria of OSS4SG to lead users
to effective nominations.
For OSS4SG advocates, project owners, organizers, and
fund raisers , we suggest clarifying and emphasizing relevant
OSS4SG information to attract contributors of interest .
Our ﬁndings on OSS4SG motivations (Section III-B) and
factors used for selecting projects (Section III-C) indicate
that OSS4SG contributors care more about project owners,
projects’ goals, social impact and targeted users more than
when compared to general OSS contributors. Emphasizing
this information in project documentation or websites can
attract and help contributors with interest of certain type of
projects. Thorough introductions and easily accessible links to
websites of project owners and organizations are also helpful
for contributors to evaluate and select projects.
B. Protect safety and privacy in OSS4SG
Our ﬁndings suggest that many OSS4SG projects focus on
particularly sensitive societal issues and target empowering
marginalized populations of users. Therefore special care may
be required to support contributors and end users in OSS4SG
effectively and respectfully.
We suggest providing required training and reporting struc-
tures for disruptive behaviors in OSS4SG projects to protect
contributors and end users when risks may apply. For
example, OSS4SG projects that serve victims of domestic vio-
lence (P4’s project), or gender minorities (P14’s project), may
involve interactions with users, in which case both contributors
and end users may suffer from polarized opinions, even
harm, especially in certain geographical regions. OSS4SG
contributors may also lack the knowledge and or not recognize
1028signals to potentially risky situations. Thus, extra support of
reporting and training is necessary.
In OSS4SG projects that collaborate with non-traditional
entities, such as local governments and charities, or involve
sensitive data, such as COVID-19 tracking systems, special
regulations may apply to protect data privacy and be
compliant with government regulations and policies. In some
cases, these regulations may be communicated by stakeholders
(P21). OSS4SG contributors and project owners should be
aware of regulations and be equipped to resolve potentially
harmful outcomes from violations of data privacy.
V. L IMITATIONS
In this section we discuss the limitations and threats to
validity of this study. The observations and themes that are
discussed in this paper are based on 21 interviews and 517
survey responses within the open source community. As with
any empirical study the extent to which the ﬁndings generalize
to other populations is unknown; however, we are conﬁdent
that the results from this apply to the broad open source
community. Our sampling approach for the interviews was
speciﬁcally designed to capture a wide range of responses [36]
by using a stratiﬁed sample based on project popularity,
contribution count, and commit recency. The participants for
the interviews and surveys were selected from 437 manually
curated OSS4SG projects, which cover most of the 17 sus-
tainable development goals from the United Nations [24].
The survey compared OSS4SG experiences with experi-
ences in regular OSS projects. Since there is no automated way
to decide whether a OSS project is for social good, we relied
on self-reported information from survey participants to dis-
tinguish the groups. There are limitations with any survey, for
example, since survey participants self-selected, contributors
to social good projects may have been more eager to respond.
Participants may also have misunderstood some questions; to
reduce this risk the survey was reviewed by several people
who are not co-author of the paper and piloted with a small
group. As the survey was in English, only English-speakers
participated. Therefore we cannot claim that the results apply
to regions with less English-proﬁciency. Investigating how
the deﬁnitions of social good and motivations of social good
vary across regions and racial/ethnic minorities is a promising
direction for future research.
VI. R ELATED WORK
A. Social Good outside Computer Science
The term Social Good has been embraced in domains such
as sociology and social work [12], [13], business and non-
proﬁt world [37]–[39]. Mor Barak refers to social good as the
heart of the social work profession [13] and pointed out that,
in contrast with public goods , social good does not depend on
public policy and funding. Similarly, social good should be
distinguished from common good which is tied to a speciﬁc
community’s goals, norms, and resources [12]. Social good has
been essential to promote activities and attract public attention
and support: hackathons evolved in social work with new goalsof changing the world for good [40], and contributing to social
good can improve volunteers’ happiness and well-being [41],
[42]. In management science, social good is discussed in the
context of corporation social responsibility with the goal to
positively impact both corporations and society [37]–[39].
B. Social Good in CS Education, Security, AI, and SE
In the computer science domain, researchers and practition-
ers in CS education have been enhancing underrepresented
groups’ participation in computational activities to promote
diversity and education equity [18], [43]–[49]. Security re-
searchers introduced social good through emphasizing the
importance of data privacy in tandem with cyber attacks and
a focus on citizen rights and safety [50], [51]. In Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI), social good is referred to as the guarantee for
appropriate moral choices [14], in particular trust, fairness, and
identiﬁcation of bias in AI and machine learning models [52]–
[55]. The AI for Social Good (AI4SG) movement leverages AI
techniques for social good and several technology companies
started initiatives to tackle social problems and improve lives
using AI-based solutions [56], [57] Examples are Microsoft’s
AI for Earth [10] and Google’s AI for Social Good [11].
In software engineering, Ferrario et al. [15] referred to
“software engineering for social good” as the development,
maintenance and sustainability of software aimed to promote
social change. They proposed a process to allow social soft-
ware projects to be built quickly with limited resources, while
helping the understanding of the social context and vulnerable
user group. Dekhtyar et al. [58] suggested that SE conferences
should be the focal points for activities that beneﬁt society
and that such activities should be an integral, valued, and
recognized part of the conference programs. They shared their
experience of running such an event (RE Cares) with great
success [59].
In April 2020, GitHub’s Social Impact Sector released a
report indicating the tremendously increasing demands and
lack of research and resources related to open source projects
with social impact [19]. Although the aforementioned report
presents discussions from the organization and fundraiser
perspective, it does not primarily focus on software developers.
To the best of our knowledge, our paper introduces the notion
of OSS4SG and presents a ﬁrst empirical study of social good
in the open source community from the software developer
perspective. We hope this work can lead to future community
efforts to support OSS4SG more efﬁciently.
C. Social Factors in Open Source
Studies have investigated fundamental features and effective
work practice for OSS contributors [60]–[63]. Hars et al.
studied motivations of open-source contributors in technology
and found that contributors are most concerned with self-
marketing and fulﬁlling personal software needs [32]. Similar
ﬁndings are veriﬁed in [3], [33]. Our results highlight that the
motivations for OSS4SG contributors are different: compared
to OSS projects, contributors signiﬁcantly care less about
beneﬁting themselves.
1029Other studies in OSS have focused on social aspects of the
software development, for example, the socialization of new
contributors, that is, how software developers are sustained
and reproduced over time through the progressive integration
of new members in OSS projects [64]. OSS contributors
preferentially join projects when they have pre-existing social
relationships [65]. Their participation in social networks may
have direct impact on OSS success [66]. Research has also
looked at donation patterns in OSS [67] and investigated
the challenges and support for underrepresented participant
groups [68], [69]. Gender and tenure diversity was found
to present a positive effect on productivity [68]. However,
OSS suffers from bias against underrepresented groups (e.g.,
women) [69], [70]. Qiu et al. showed that OSS contributors
used signals, such as the amount of recent activities, to select
which projects to work on [71]. Likewise, Ford et al. identiﬁed
how contributors used those signals to evaluate each other [72].
Our ﬁndings on project selection (Section III-C2) are similar
to regular OSS; however, when selecting projects, OSS4SG
contributors paid more attention to the project owners than
OSS contributors.
While a rich body of research in OSS sheds light on how to
better support the community with the understanding of effects
of different social factors, the ﬁndings may overlook unique
properties of OSS4SG. As one of the ﬁrst steps, our study
compensates the investigation for OSS4SG to support future
research, service and improvement for this community.
VII. C ONCLUSION
Open Source is an important distributed and collaborative
development platform for software engineering. Social good
projects in open source have demonstrated prevalent values to
both software engineering and society, which has not yet been
explored in the software engineering research community.
In this paper, we introduced the notation of Open Source
Software for Social Good (OSS4SG) to the community. We
presented the ﬁrst empirical study based on 17 hours of semi-
structured interviews and 517 survey responses of motivations
and challenges in OSS4SG. We believe our results shed light
on the global impacts open source software can have and will
lead to future research and support for OSS4SG, including
but not limited to, providing help and steering guidance for
adapting more social good projects to OSS.
Upon the time of publishing, this work has been featured
in the 2020 GitHub Octoverse Community Report [73]. In
our future work we plan to actualize our ﬁndings and devise
interventions to support contributors identifying projects and
project owners identifying the contributors they need to be
successful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We want to extend gratitude to our study participants for
providing such elaborate and personal narratives of what
motivated them to be innovators. We would also like to thank
Mala Kumar from GitHub’s Tech for Social Good program of
the Social Impact Team for providing insight in early stagesof this project. The values and implications of this work
to open source software for social good have been shared
with the GitHub Social Impact Team to promote community
growth and support. The ethics for this study were reviewed
and approved by the Microsoft Research Institutional Review
Board (MSRIRB), which is an IRB federally registered with
the United States Department of Health & Human Services.
(Reference: MSRIRB #649 and #718).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Boss, “Coding for a better world,” 2012, retrieved May 27, 2020 from
https://ssir.org/articles/entry/coding forabetter world.
[2] Y . Wagener, “How to use your programming skills for social impact,”
December 2017, retrieved May 27, 2020 from https://www.idealist.org/
en/careers/use-programming-skills-social-impact.
[3] G. Hertel, S. Niedner, and S. Herrmann, “Motivation of software devel-
opers in open source projects: an internet-based survey of contributors
to the linux kernel,” Research policy , vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1159–1177,
2003.
[4] “Tensorﬂow,” retrieved July 11, 2020 from https://github.com/
tensorﬂow/tensorﬂow.
[5] “Facebook react,” retrieved July 11, 2020 from https://github.com/
facebook/react.
[6] “Little-window,” retrieved July 11, 2020 from https://github.com/
chaynHQ/little-window.
[7] “Refuge restrooms,” retrieved July 11, 2020 from https://github.com/
RefugeRestrooms/refugerestrooms.
[8] “Commcare,” retrieved July 11, 2020 from https://www.dimagi.com/
commcare/.
[9] “Microsoft ai for good,” retrieved Aug 11, 2020 from https://www.
microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-good.
[10] “Microsoft ai for earth,” retrieved Aug 11, 2020 from https://www.
microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-earth.
[11] “Google ai for social good,” retrieved Aug 11, 2020 from https://ai.
google/social-good/.
[12] M. E. Mor Barak, “Social good science and practice: A new framework
for organizational and managerial research in human service organi-
zations,” Human Service Organizations: Management, Leadership &
Governance , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 314–325, 2019.
[13] M. E. Mor Barak, “The practice and science of social good: Emerging
paths to positive social impact,” Research on Social Work Practice ,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 139–150, 2020.
[14] R. Abebe and K. Goldner, “Mechanism design for social good,” AI
Matters , vol. 4, no. 3, p. 27–34, Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3284751.3284761
[15] M. A. Ferrario, W. Simm, P. Newman, S. Forshaw, and J. Whittle,
“Software engineering for’social good’: integrating action research,
participatory design, and agile development,” in Companion Proceedings
of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2014, pp.
520–523.
[16] “Covid-19 initiatives,” retrieved Aug 11, 2020 from https://www.dimagi.
com/blog/coronavirus-covid-19-response-initiative/.
[17] A. Lee, J. C. Carver, and A. Bosu, “Understanding the impressions,
motivations, and barriers of one time code contributors to ﬂoss projects:
A survey,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2017, pp. 187–197. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2017.25
[18] J. Payton, T. Barnes, K. Buch, A. Rorrer, H. Zuo, K. Gosha, K. Nagel,
N. Napier, E. Randeree, and L. Dennis, “Stars computing corps: Enhanc-
ing engagement of underrepresented students and building community
in computing,” Computing in Science & Engineering , vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
44–57, 2016.
[19] G. Assaf, M. Kumar, A. Kanyagia, and J. Jones, “Open source software
in the social sector: Examining barriers, successes, and opportunities,”
April 2020, retrieved May 11, 2020 from https://socialimpact.github.
com/#report.
[20] “Ovio explore projects,” retrieved May 11, 2020 from https://ovio.org/
projects.
[21] “Digital public goods,” retrieved May 11, 2020 from https://
digitalpublicgoods.net/explore/.
1030[22] J. W. Creswell and J. D. Creswell, Research design: Qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches . SAGE publications, 2018.
[23] Supplementary Material for Leaving My Fingerprints: Motivations and
Challenges of Contributing to OSS for Social Good . Zenodo, Feb.
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4536791
[24] U. N. D. Programme, “Sustainable development goals,” retrieved
May 11, 2020 from https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/
sustainable-development-goals.html.
[25] N. Shrestha, C. Botta, T. Barik, and C. Parnin, “Here we
go again: Why is it difﬁcult for developers to learn another
programming language?” in 2020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380352
[26] A. M. Huberman, M. Miles, and J. Saldana, “Qualitative data analysis:
A methods sourcebook,” SAGE publications , 2014.
[27] J. J. Thomson, “The trolley problem,” The Yale Law Journal , vol. 94,
no. 6, pp. 1395–1415, 1985.
[28] Y . Trope and N. Liberman, “Construal-level theory of psychological
distance,” Psychological Review , 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018963
[29] FDA, “Collection of race and ethnicity data in clinical trials: Guidance
for industry and food and drug administration staff,” 2016, retrieved May
11, 2020 from https://www.fda.gov/media/75453/download#page=13.
[30] M. K. Scheuerman, K. Spiel, O. L. Haimson, F. Hamidi, and S. M. Bran-
ham, “Hci guidelines for gender equity and inclusivity,” 2019, retrieved
May 11, 2020 from https://www.morgan-klaus.com/gender-guidelines.
html.
[31] F. Shull, J. Singer, and D. I. Sjøberg, Guide to advanced empirical
software engineering . Springer, 2007.
[32] S. O. Alexander Hars, “Working for free? motivations for participating
in open-source projects,” International Journal of Electronic Commerce ,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 25–39, 2002.
[33] J. Bitzer, W. Schrettl, and P. J. Schr ¨oder, “Intrinsic motivation in
open source software development,” Journal of Comparative Economics ,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 160–169, 2007.
[34] B. Trinkenreich, M. Guizani, I. Wiese, A. Sarma, and I. Steinmacher,
“Hidden ﬁgures: Roles and pathways of successful oss contributors,”
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) , 2020.
[35] A. Trockman, S. Zhou, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “Adding sparkle
to social coding: an empirical study of repository badges in the npm
ecosystem,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2018, pp. 511–522.
[36] M. Q. Patton, Qualitative evaluation and research methods . SAGE
Publications, inc, 1990.
[37] F. Gao, L. L. Lisic, and I. X. Zhang, “Commitment to social good and
insider trading,” Journal of Accounting and Economics , vol. 57, no. 2-3,
pp. 149–175, 2014.
[38] A. McWilliams, D. S. Siegel, and P. M. Wright, “Corporate social
responsibility: Strategic implications,” Journal of management studies ,
vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2006.
[39] M. Quayson, C. Bai, and J. Sarkis, “Technology for social good
foundations: A perspective from the smallholder farmer in sustainable
supply chains,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , 2020.
[40] S. Henderson, “Getting the most out of hackathons for social good,”
Volunteer ENGAGEMENT 2.0: Ideas and insights changing the world ,
pp. 182–194, 2015.
[41] F. Borgonovi, “Doing well by doing good. the relationship between
formal volunteering and self-reported health and happiness,” Social
science & medicine , vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 2321–2334, 2008.
[42] J. Wilson and M. Musick, “Doing well by doing good: V olunteering
and occupational achievement among american women,” Sociological
Quarterly , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 433–450, 2003.
[43] A. Robinson and M. A. P ´erez-Qui ˜nones, “Underrepresented middle
school girls: on the path to computer science through paper prototyping,”
inProceedings of the 45th ACM technical symposium on Computer
science education , 2014, pp. 97–102.
[44] J. Margolis, J. J. Ryoo, C. D. Sandoval, C. Lee, J. Goode, and
G. Chapman, “Beyond access: Broadening participation in high school
computer science,” ACM Inroads , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 72–78, 2012.
[45] M. Mejias, K. Jean-Pierre, L. Burge, and G. Washington, “Culturally
relevant cs pedagogy-theory & practice,” in 2018 Research on Equity
and Sustained Participation in Engineering, Computing, and Technology
(RESPECT) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.[46] A. N. Washington and A. Romanova, “Ethnic identity as a quantitative
measurement in computer science education,” in 2019 Research on
Equity and Sustained Participation in Engineering, Computing, and
Technology (RESPECT) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–1.
[47] D. McFarlane and E. M. Redmiles, “Get paid to program: Evaluating
an employment-aware after-school program for high school women of
color,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Conference on Innovation and
Technology in Computer Science Education , 2020, pp. 212–218.
[48] M. Ong, C. Wright, L. Espinosa, and G. Orﬁeld, “Inside the double
bind: A synthesis of empirical research on undergraduate and graduate
women of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics,”
Harvard Educational Review , vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 172–209, 2011.
[49] K. Braswell, B. Brown, J. Johnson, and J. Payton, “Pivoting during
a pandemic: Designing a virtual summer camp to increase conﬁdence
of black and latina girls,” in Proceedings of the 52nd ACM Technical
Symposium on Computer Science Education , ser. SIGCSE ’21, 2020.
[50] E. Karaﬁli, A. C. Kakas, N. I. Spanoudakis, and E. C. Lupu,
“Argumentation-based security for social good,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.00732 , 2017.
[51] A. K. Bandara, A. C. Kakas, E. C. Lupu, and A. Russo, “Using argumen-
tation logic for ﬁrewall conﬁguration management,” in 2009 IFIP/IEEE
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management . IEEE,
2009, pp. 180–187.
[52] K. R. Varshney, “Trustworthy machine learning and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence,” XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students , vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 26–29, 2019.
[53] O. R. Wearn, R. Freeman, and D. M. Jacoby, “Responsible ai for
conservation,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 72–73,
2019.
[54] R. Binns, “Fairness in machine learning: Lessons from political phi-
losophy,” in Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency ,
2018, pp. 149–159.
[55] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, and A. Galstyan,
“A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09635 , 2019.
[56] J. Cowls, T. King, M. Taddeo, and L. Floridi, “Designing ai for social
good: Seven essential factors,” Available at SSRN 3388669 , 2019.
[57] B. Berendt, “Ai for the common good?! pitfalls, challenges, and ethics
pen-testing,” Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics , vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 44–65, 2019.
[58] A. Dekhtyar, J. H. Hayes, J. Payne, T. Yu, J. Horkoff, G. Mussbacher,
I. Hadar, M. Levy, B. Paech, K. Y . J. Eunjung, H. Seungbum, H. Young-
taek, N. Byoungyoung, and K. Sanggon, “From re cares to se cares:
Software engineering for social good, one venue at a time,” in 2020
IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE) , 2020.
[59] A. Dekhtyar, J. Huffman Hayes, I. Hadar, E. Combs, A. Ferrari,
S. Gregory, J. Horkoff, M. Levy, M. Nayebi, B. Paech, J. Payne,
M. Primrose, P. Spoletini, S. Clarke, C. Brophy, D. Amyot, W. Maalej,
G. Ruhe, J. Cleland-Huang, and D. Zowghi, “Requirements engineering
(re) for social good: Re cares [requirements],” IEEE Software , vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 86–94, 2019.
[60] R. A. Ghosh, R. Glott, B. Krieger, and G. Robles, “Free/libre and open
source software: Survey and study,” 2002.
[61] K. Crowston, H. Annabi, J. Howison, and C. Masango, “Effective work
practices for software engineering: free/libre open source software devel-
opment,” in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM workshop on Interdisciplinary
software engineering research , 2004, pp. 18–26.
[62] S. Haeﬂiger, G. V on Krogh, and S. Spaeth, “Code reuse in open source
software,” Management science , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 180–193, 2008.
[63] G. V on Krogh, “Open-source software development,” MIT Sloan Man-
agement Review , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 14–18, 2003.
[64] N. Ducheneaut, “Socialization in an open source software community:
A socio-technical analysis,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) , vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 323–368, 2005.
[65] C. Casalnuovo, B. Vasilescu, P. Devanbu, and V . Filkov, “Developer
onboarding in github: the role of prior social links and language expe-
rience,” in Proceedings of the 2015 10th joint meeting on foundations
of software engineering , 2015, pp. 817–828.
[66] H. Fang, D. Klug, H. Lamba, J. Herbsleb, and B. Vasilescu, “Need for
tweet: How open source developers talk about their github work on
twitter,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories , 2020, pp. 322–326.
1031[67] C. Overney, J. Meinicke, C. K ¨astner, and B. Vasilescu, “How to not get
rich: An empirical study of donations in open source,” in Proceedings of
the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2020, pp. 1209–1221.
[68] B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. van den Brand, A. Serebrenik,
P. Devanbu, and V . Filkov, “Gender and tenure diversity in github teams,”
inProceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors
in computing systems , 2015, pp. 3789–3798.
[69] S. H. Padala, C. J. Mendez, L. F. Dias, I. Steinmacher, Z. S. Hanson,
C. Hilderbrand, A. Horvath, C. Hill, L. D. Simpson, M. Burnett et al. ,
“How gender-biased tools shape newcomer experiences in oss projects,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 2020.
[70] J. Terrell, A. Koﬁnk, J. Middleton, C. Rainear, E. Murphy-Hill,
C. Parnin, and J. Stallings, “Gender differences and bias in open source:
Pull request acceptance of women versus men,” PeerJ Computer Science ,
vol. 3, p. e111, 2017.
[71] H. S. Qiu, Y . L. Li, S. Padala, A. Sarma, and B. Vasilescu, “The signals
that potential contributors look for when choosing open-source projects,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , vol. 3, no.
CSCW, pp. 1–29, 2019.
[72] D. Ford, M. Behroozi, A. Serebrenik, and C. Parnin, “Beyond the
code itself: How programmers ¡i¿really¡/i¿ look at pull requests,”
inProceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software
Engineering: Software Engineering in Society , ser. ICSE-SEIS
’19. IEEE Press, 2019, p. 51–60. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIS.2019.17
[73] N. Forsgren, G. Ceccarelli, D. Jedamski, S. Kelly, and C. Sullivan, “State
of the octoverse: Empowering healthy communities,” p. 23, December
2020, retrieved February 11, 2021 from https://octoverse.github.com/
static/github-octoverse-2020-community-report.pdf.
1032