Mate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing
Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors
Ruoxi Sun
CSIRO’s Data61
AustraliaMinhui Xue
CSIRO’s Data61
Cybersecurity CRC
AustraliaGareth Tyson
Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (GZ)
China
Tian Dong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ChinaShaofeng Li
Peng Cheng Laboratory
ChinaShuo Wang
CSIRO’s Data61
Cybersecurity CRC
Australia
Haojin Zhu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ChinaSeyit Camtepe
CSIRO’s Data61
Cybersecurity CRC
AustraliaSurya Nepal
CSIRO’s Data61
Cybersecurity CRC
Australia
ABSTRACT
Numerous open-source and commercial malware detectors are
available. However, their efficacy is threatened by new adversar-
ial attacks, whereby malware attempts to evade detection, e.g.,by
performing feature-space manipulation. In this work, we propose
an explainability-guided and model-agnostic testing framework for
robustness of malware detectors when confronted with adversarial
attacks. The framework introduces the concept of Accrued Mali-
cious Magnitude (AMM) to identify which malware features could
be manipulated to maximize the likelihood of evading detection.
We then use this framework to test several state-of-the-art malware
detectors’ ability to detect manipulated malware. We find that ( i)
commercial antivirus engines are vulnerable to AMM-guided test
cases; ( ii) the ability of a manipulated malware generated using one
detector to evade detection by another detector ( i.e.,transferability)
depends on the overlap of features with large AMM values between
the different detectors; and ( iii) AMM values effectively measure the
fragility of features ( i.e.,capability of feature-space manipulation to
flip the prediction results) and explain the robustness of malware
detectors facing evasion attacks. Our findings shed light on the
limitations of current malware detectors, as well as how they can
be improved.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Software and application security .
KEYWORDS
Malware detectors, Explainability, Robustness
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0327-0/23/12. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616309ACM Reference Format:
Ruoxi Sun, Minhui Xue, Gareth Tyson, Tian Dong, Shaofeng Li, Shuo Wang,
Haojin Zhu, Seyit Camtepe, and Surya Nepal. 2023. Mate!Are You Rea lly
Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of
Malware Detectors. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engi-
neering (ESEC/FSE ’23), December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616309
1 INTRODUCTION
The anti-malware market is at the forefront of cybersecurity inno-
vation, constantly driving anti-malware vendors to update their
solutions to protect users against a wide range of malicious soft-
ware variants. The global antivirus software market is expected
to reach more than 4 billion USD in 2025 [ 18]. Despite this, recent
research has shown that the total number of malware infections
has continued to rise [ 4], hitting a new high during the COVID-19
pandemic [ 13,66]. There are also numerous high-profile cases of
zero-day attacks are being used in offensive campaigns. For exam-
ple, just a few hours before the Russian-Ukraine conflict, Microsoft’s
Threat Intelligence Center identified a never-before-seen malware,
“FoxBlade”, that targeted Ukraine’s government ministries and fi-
nancial institutions [19].
This trend suggests that traditional signature-based and behavior-
based methods cannot keep up with the rampant growth of novel
malware. Hence, commercial antivirus companies have started us-
ing machine learning [ 1,68] to enable detection without the need
for signatures. However, it has been shown that attackers can evade
machine learning-based detectors by manipulating the features that
such malware detectors use [ 36,37,56,58,74]. Because of this, com-
mercial antivirus systems are susceptible to adversarial attacks [ 63].
Although there have been numerous works [ 28,30,39,41,54] look-
ing at adversarial attacks in computer vision (where adversaries
change specific pixels), adversarial attacks on malware are far less
understood. We therefore leverage this adversarial approach to
build a testing framework to evaluate malware detectors. However,
we find that it is difficult to fully identify the root causes that impact
the decisions of malware detectors. We therefore reduce this causalarXiv:2111.10085v4  [cs.CR]  27 Nov 2023ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
discovery problem to identifying the explainable factors that are
measurable to impact the robustness of malware detectors.
To implement the testing framework for malware detectors, it is
necessary to build techniques that can ( i) generate adversarial mal-
ware variants; and ( ii) measure the explainable features that drive
the malware detector’s ultimate decision (benign or malicious). One
existing approach for generating adversarial malware test samples
isobfuscation . This focuses on changing the semantic meanings of
code snippets in the problem-space ( i.e.,source code), and further
obfuscating the malicious signatures or patterns, including hiding
the control flow, inserting dummy code, and manipulating variable
names [ 8,11,14,17,23,47], thereby fooling rule-based malware de-
tectors. However, defenses against obfuscation are well-researched.
For example, recent research [ 25,26,32] looks into malware behav-
ior distillation or program behavioral variability analysis towards
training robust malware classifiers. Furthermore, Pierazzi et al. [58]
argue that the use of mass obfuscation may be counterproductive,
rendering antivirus companies to be on the alert [70, 71].
In this research, we aim to test the robustness of malware de-
tectors against a new type of adversarial generation: feature-space
manipulation . This involves manipulating the malware to trigger
changes in the feature space used by detectors. Such threats are be-
coming more prominent because machine learning-based detectors
have reduced the efficacy of problem-space attacks. Feature-space
manipulation aims to introduce the intended changes to the feature
space ( i.e.,extracted feature vectors) by precisely modifying the
problem-space ( i.e.,code). These manipulating actions could be,
for example, adding a redundant section ( e.g.,adding a new code
section without linking its address in the section table) or injecting
dead code that is unreachable ( e.g.,adding a file I/O request under
an always-false condition, so that the dummy code will never be
executed). Similar techniques have been implemented by Demetrio
et al. [34] in a black-box optimization of adversarial Windows mal-
ware. Although they still focus on problem-space, it is possible to
apply such techniques in a feature-space manipulation. Due to its
urgency, we argue that building a comprehensive testing frame-
work that can automate the identification of limitations in malware
detectors is vital.
Several challenges need to be solved during the establishment of
a testing framework for robustness of malware detectors. The first
challenge is how we can mimic a random attacker in the real world,
who may have limited capacity and knowledge. This means that
we are limited to off-the-shelf and easy-to-obtain techniques in the
testing. The second challenge is, since most commercial malware de-
tectors are not open-source, this must be done in a detector-agnostic
manner. The third challenge is how to interpretively understand the
testing results ( e.g.,why test cases work across different detectors).
With the above challenges in mind, to ensure the reproducibility
and coverage of our framework, we have several criteria on the
development of our testing framework: ( i)Easy-to-obtain , we only
utilize open-source and off-the-shelf tools or techniques; ( ii)Model-
agnostic , we decouple the testing strategy from the specifics of the
detector; and ( iii)Explainable , an explainable approach is proposed,
which will help us to explain the root cause of test cases’ transfer-
ability and identify potential weaknesses in malware detectors.
In this paper, we first propose Accrued Malicious Magnitude
(AMM) to guide feature space manipulation, finding the correctaction(s) on the problem-space that will influence the feature val-
ues but without changing run-time functionality. We then evaluate
the robustness of state-of-the-art malware detectors with generated
test cases. To establish such a strategy, we generate test cases by
perturbing the feature space and converting the manipulations back
into the problem space. To achieve our goal, the problem is split
into two sub-problems: ( i) generating test cases; and ( ii) testing mal-
ware detectors. Our research helps security researchers as well as
vendors who develop anti-malware solutions to better understand
the robustness of malware detectors and provide insights into how
to improve malware defense strategies in an interpretive manner.
The main contributions of this paper are four-fold:
•We propose an explainability-guided and model-agnostic testing
framework for malware detectors (§4). Our framework generates
test cases while preserving the malicious functions of the mal-
ware. We introduce the concept of Accrued Malicious Magnitude
(AMM) to guide the feature selection approach for feature-space
manipulation. We further project the manipulated features back
into the problem space with a binary builder.
•We use AMM to test the robustness of state-of-the-art malware
detectors (§5). We show that commercial antivirus engines are
vulnerable to AMM-based test cases (§6.2). Experimental results
indicate that feature-space manipulated test cases have signifi-
cant evasion capability, which decreases the detection rates of 8
state-of-the-art Android malware detectors by 91.75% on aver-
age, and bypasses an average of 37.35 (62.25%) antivirus engines
in VirusTotal [ 16]. We also highlight the generalizability of our
AMM approach by applying it to WinPE malware detectors (§6.4).
•We explain how manipulations trained on one detector can work
on another detector ( i.e.,transferability) through our explaina-
bility-guided approach (§6.3), indicating that this transferability
relies on the overlap features that have large AMM values be-
tween different machine learning models.
•We further investigate an approach to improve machine learning-
based detectors through excluding high sensitive but less impor-
tant features during training (§6.5). Results show that AMM val-
ues can effectively measure the capability of features of flipping
classification results. We suggest that machine learning-based
anti-virus products should consider using the AMM values to
improve their robustness.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to system-
atically test the robustness of malware detectors in a way that
combines feature-space manipulations with semantic explainabil-
ity.
2 PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce a motivating example and related
research.
2.1 Motivating Example
To motivate the need for our testing framework, we analyze the
source code from an example Android malware, which is tagged as
malicious by 39/60 detectors from VirusTotal (VT) [ 16]. From the
source, we find a snippet of malicious code shown in the top part of
Figure 1. As shown in lines 3 and 4, the malware executes a native
scripts via root permissions by su -c ./script1 command.Mate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Dummy
Function
Calls AddedOriginal
Malicious
Code
Snippet1
2
3
4
5
  public void gogogo( ) {
          ...
          try {
                  long time = System.currentTimeMillis( );
                  if (time < 0) { new MediaPlayer( ).reset( ); }
                  String cmd2[ ] = {"su", "-c", "./script1"};
                  if (time < 0) { Settings.System.putInt(null, "", 0); }
                  Runtime.getRuntime( ).exec(cmd2);
                  if (time < 0) { this
                             .getSystemService (CONNECTIVITY_SERVICE)
                             .getNetworkInfo (0); }
                  ... 
          } catch (Exception e1) { e1.printStackTrace( ); }
          ... }6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14  public void gogogo( ) {
          ...
          try {
                  String cmd2[ ] = {"su", "-c", "./script1"};
                  Runtime.getRuntime().exec(cmd2);
                  ... 
          } catch (Exception e1) { e1.printStackTrace( ); }
          ... }
Figure 1: An intuitive example of injecting dummy ‘benign’
function calls into malicious malware, which bypasses 6 an-
tivirus engines in VirusTotal and evades Drebin.
Static features are commonly used in malware detectors where
the results is determined through pattern recognition, weighted al-
gorithms, or signature matching. Thus, it is possible to mislead
detectors by introducing more ‘benign-oriented’ elements into
malware. Hence, we insert several ‘benign’ function calls with
always- false condition closure ( e.g.,time<0 ) to ensure they are
unreachable during run-time, preserving the original (malicious)
functionality. After rebuilding the source code, the modified binary
is identified by 33 scanners – 6 fewer than originally, and it by-
passes the machine-learning detector provided by Drebin [ 24]. The
remainder of this paper develops an explainability-guided testing
framework and problem-space rebuilding tool that can automate
this intuitive idea for the testing of detector robustness.
2.2 Related Work
Malware detectors. Many modern antivirus engines utilize rule-
based analysis, such as signature matching, static unpacking, heuris-
tics matching, and emulation techniques [ 6,50]. However, rule-
based antivirus engines rely heavily on expert knowledge. With
the advantage of feature extraction derived from machine learning
techniques, there has been a flurry of work that integrates machine
learning models into malware detectors [ 22,24,40,49,50,57,72,73].
We focus our evaluation on detectors that use static features due to
their prevalence in providing pre-execution detection and preven-
tion for many commercial endpoint protection solutions, such as
Kaspersky [7], Avast [9], and ESET [5].
Evaluation of malware detectors. A few studies [ 56,59] have
explored the effect of obfuscations on anti-malware products, uti-
lizing off-the-shelf tools. Hammad et al. [44] conducted a large-
scale empirical study that evaluates the effectiveness of the top
anti-malware products, including 7 open-source, academic, and
commercial obfuscation tools. Several studies [ 31,62,65] have eval-
uated machine learning-based malware classifier models with the
adversarial samples generated by generative adversarial networks(GANs) or automated poisoning attacks. Recent research [ 26,52]
proposed methods to cope with concept drift or dataset shift, which
may lead to performance degradation of malware detectors. Com-
pared to our research, the scope of these studies only covers either
the rule-based products or the machine learning-based models in
isolation (rather than both).
Adversarial samples against malware detectors. The goal of
the adversarial attacks is to generate a small perturbation for a
given malware sample that results in it being misclassified. This
type of attack has been extensively explored in computer vision,
and previous research efforts have also investigated the applica-
bility of such techniques to malware classification. Xu et al. [74]
proposed a genetic programming-based approach to perform a di-
rected search for evasive variants for PDF malware. Demetrio et
al.[35] demonstrated that genetic programming based adversarial
attacks are applicable to portable executable (PE) malware clas-
sifiers. Two recent works [ 21,64] also apply deep reinforcement
learning to generate adversarial samples for PE malware to bypass
machine learning models. Compared to our research, these stud-
ies focus on proposing adversarial attacks rather than testing the
robustness of malware detectors and further explaining it.
3 THREAT MODEL & PROBLEM DEFINITION
In this section, we define the threat model we use in testings, and
present our problem definition.
3.1 Threat Model
Our testing framework generates adversarial samples to test the ro-
bustness of malware detectors. For this, we must define our assumed
threat model. We follow the methodology by Carlini et al. [29] and
describe this threat model with the adversary’s goals, capabilities,
and knowledge.
Adversary’s goal. The adversary’s goal is to manipulate malware
samples to evade the detection of malware detectors, including
both white-box and black-box detectors. In the testing, we only
use binary detectors which determine if the software under test
is benign or malicious. Thus, the goal of attackers is to cause the
malicious samples to be misclassified as benign.
Adversary’s capability and knowledge. In this work, we as-
sume that an attacker has full knowledge of onemachine learning
model that has been trained for malware detection, including its
architecture and training dataset. This is reasonable as many ma-
chine learning models, such as LGBM [ 48], are open-source. Such
a white-box model will be used as the source of adversarial sam-
ple generation. With this white-box model, the attacker is capable
of ranking the contribution of features and manipulating a ma-
licious sample accordingly to influence its representation in the
feature space. For other black-box detectors under-test, including
machine learning classifiers and antivirus engines, the adversary
has no knowledge about the detectors’ training dataset, inner struc-
ture, or detection mechanism. For instance, the adversary cannot
inject poisoned data into the training dataset or manipulate any
code of detectors. However, they will still have some basic knowl-
edge about machine learning-based detectors, including access to
open-source datasets which could be part of the actual trainingESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
Explainability-guided Feature Selection
Malicious SampleTest Case Generation
Feature
ExtractionFeature-space Manipulation
Feature Manipulation
Datasets
f1
v1fn
vn. . .
. . .f 2
v2Input Features
f1
v11f2
v12f n
v1n...
......
vm1vm2 vmn.........s11s12 s1n
......
sm1sm2 smn.........SHAP Matrix, M
Test CasesDetermining the capacity
of manipulationRange of SHAP per
feature, D
# of samples have
larger SHAP , C
Determining the amount of
manipulable samples
Accrued Malicious Magnitude 
(AMM = D·C)   f = arg max (AMM)       
   Most manipulable feature
     
   v = arg min (M[f])       
   Most benign-oriented value
Greedy Alg.Learning-based
DetectorTraining
Feature Patch
f i
vif j
vjf k
vkProblem-space Builder
Decompiling Seed Malware
Adding Unreachable API Calls
Inject Dummy ItemsBinary BuilderMalware Detector
Testing
Transferability 
Analysis Malware Detector
Weakness
Generalizability
Analysis 
Regression T esting to
Improve Detectors
Figure 2: The overview of our testing framework.
dataset, generic or popular feature extraction methods [ 61], and
off-the-shelf machine-learning detectors.
3.2 Problem Definition
Our goal is to test the robustness of malware detectors using the
generated test cases. Consider a malware detector mapping a piece
of software𝑥∈𝑋to a classification label 𝑙∈{0,1}(where 0 repre-
sents benign and 1 represents malicious). The adversary is trying
to mislead this prediction. Our key test metric is the detection rate
on test cases:
𝑑(𝑥𝑚)=1, 𝑥𝑡=Gen(𝑥𝑚), 𝑑(𝑥𝑡)=0,
DetectionRate(𝑑)=1
𝑛𝑛∑︁
𝑖=1𝑑(𝑥𝑖
𝑡)(1)
where𝑑is the malware detector which could be either a machine
learning detector (a feature extraction method plus a trained model)
or an antivirus engine. 𝑥𝑚is the original malware sample, and Gen
is the generator of test case, 𝑥𝑡, while keeping its malware function-
ality the same as 𝑥𝑚.DetectionRate(𝑑)is defined as a detector’s
detection rate on 𝑛test cases, indicating the robustness of 𝑑.
4 TESTING FRAMEWORK
Our testing framework consists of three key components (see Fig-
ure 2): ( i) explainability-guided feature selection, to select the fea-
tures for manipulation; ( ii) a test case generator that relies on the
previously selected features; and ( iii) malware detector testing to
identify which detectors are robust against the adversarial malware
samples. Before diving into the testing framework, we would like
to introduce preliminary knowledge about SHAP [ 53], the model
explanation technique we used in our testing.
4.1 A Primer on SHAP
Research into explainable machine learning has proposed multiple
systems to interpret the predictions of complex models. We rely
on SHAP [ 53] (based on the coalitional game theory concept of
Shapley values) as prerequisite knowledge to bootstrap the test-
ing framework. The SHAP framework subsumes several earliermodel explanation techniques together, including LIME [ 60] and
Integrated Gradients [ 67]. SHAP has the objective of explaining
the final value of a prediction by attributing a value to each feature
based on its contribution to the final result. To accomplish this task,
the SHAP frameworks train a surrogate linear explanation model 𝑔
of the form:
𝑓(𝑥)=𝑔(𝑥′),
𝑔(𝑥′)=𝜙0+𝑀∑︁
𝑗=1𝜙𝑗𝑥′
𝑗,(2)
where𝑓is the original model, 𝑥is the input sample to be attrib-
uted,𝑥′is the coalition vector of 𝑥.𝜙0=E𝑋(𝑓(𝑋))is the average
prediction of the original model on sampled dataset 𝑋. The Shapley
value𝜙𝑗∈Ris the feature attribution for the 𝑗𝑡ℎfeature𝑥′
𝑗to the
model’s decision. Summing the effects of all feature attributions
approximates the difference of prediction for 𝑥and the average of
the original model, aiming to explain any machine learning-based
model without internal knowledge.
LIME uses a linear explanation model 𝑔(𝑥′)to locally approxi-
mate the original model, where locality is measured in the simplified
binary input space, i.e.,𝑥′∈{0,1}𝑀. To find𝜙, LIME minimizes
the following objective function:
𝜉=arg min
𝑔∈𝐺𝐿(𝑓,𝑔,𝜋𝑥)+Ω(𝑔),(3)
where𝐿is the squared loss over a set of samples in the simplified
input space weighted by the kernel function 𝜋𝑥, andΩpenalizes
the complexity of 𝑔∈𝐺where𝐺is hypothesis space. Therefore,
based on the input feature vectors and the output predictions of the
model, in this research, we use SHAP to approximate the fragility
of each feature, selecting features that can be manipulated to flip
the prediction.
4.2 Step 1: Feature Selection
In the first step of our methodology, we utilize SHAP to create
explainability-guided adversarial test cases. In this step we use a
single detector model to generate SHAP values for the input dataset,Mate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 1: Feature extraction methods used in different Android
malware detectors and in our measurement.
FeaturesDrebin
[24]MaMaDroid
[57]RevealDroid
[40]DroidSpan
[27]Our
Measurement
Permissions
Hardware Components
App Components
API Calls
Strings
(e.g.,Network Addresses)
Call Graphs
Native Call
: the feature is involved; : the feature is indirectly involved.
calculating how much one feature contributes to an individual
prediction. It is assumed that an adversary would have access to
this single model. The workflow of the explainability-guided feature
selection is illustrated in Algorithm 1. For a set of seed malware,
𝑋𝑠, we generate a corresponding test case set, 𝑋𝑡.
Pre-processing. We extract features from the training samples
𝑋of a trained machine learning model 𝑚(line 2). Here we will
use a generic feature extraction approach that is adopted from
open-sourced detectors to mimic the adversary’s capability and
knowledge. Using Android as an example, Table 1 summarizes the
feature extraction methods of several state-of-the-art for Android
malware detection. We adopt features that are representative and
easy to extract. It is possible to generate stronger evasive adversarial
test cases with more features involved. However, our goal is to
evaluate malware detectors with an easy-to-obtain approach, which
should provide a lower bound of robustness. Note, we use a similar
strategy to determine the feature extraction methods for other
operating systems, as described in §6.4.
Then the vectorized samples 𝑋′and the model are input to
shap()to calculate the SHAP value matrix 𝑀(line 3). The matrix is
then used to select the most evasive features and the most benign-
oriented values ( i.e.,the most negative values that exist in the
selected features, as 0 represents benign).
Feature selection. To select the feature that has largest malicious
magnitude, we propose the concept of Accrued Malicious Magnitude
(AMM) . The AMM is defined as the product of the magnitude of
SHAP values in each feature and the number of samples that have
malicious-oriented values ( i.e.,values towards the positive side, as
1 represents malicious) in the corresponding feature. By calculating
AMM values, we select the feature that has the largest modifiable
capability and has the most samples to be modified as the test
cases, i.e.,samples that have SHAP values towards the positive
(malicious) side, which have the potential to be manipulated to
benign. Specifically, starting from the getRange(𝑀)in line 5, we
first calculate the range of SHAP values in each feature and store
the results in a one-dimension vector 𝐷.𝐷indicates the potential
magnitude we can modify on each feature, i.e.,each𝑑𝑖∈𝐷presents
the difference between the maximum SHAP value and the minimum
SHAP value of feature 𝑓𝑖. Next, for each feature, we count how many
samples have a SHAP value larger than the mean SHAP value of
that feature (the countLarge(𝑀)in line 6) and collect the results in a
one-dimensional vector 𝐶. Therefore, a larger 𝑐𝑖∈𝐶means that, for
feature𝑓𝑖, there are more samples that have a SHAP value towards
malicious, such that more samples can be manipulated towards
benign. Therefore, we select the most evasive feature according to
the AMM values, denoting the dot product of the range of SHAPAlgorithm 1: AMM-based Feature-Space Selection
Input: Machine learning model 𝑚, dataset𝑋, and the number of features to
be selected𝑁.
Output: Feature patch 𝑃.
1𝑃=map(𝐹𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒,𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒);
2𝑋′←vectorize(𝑋);
3𝑀←shap(𝑋′,𝑚);
4while𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑃)<𝑁do
5𝐷←getRange(𝑀);
6𝐶←countLarge(𝑀);
7𝐴𝑀𝑀←𝐷·𝐶;
8𝑓←arg max(𝐴𝑀𝑀);
9𝑣←arg min(𝑀[𝑓]);
10 ifisManipulatable(𝑓)then
11𝑃←𝑃∪(𝑓,𝑣);
12 for𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑥′∈𝑋′do
13 if𝑥′[𝑓]≠𝑣then
14 𝑖𝑑𝑥←getIndex(𝑋′,𝑥′);
15 𝑀←𝑀\𝑀[𝑖𝑑𝑥];
16 𝑋′←𝑋′\𝑥′;
17return𝑃;
values (𝐷) and the number of SHAP values greater than mean ( 𝐶)
(line 7).
Value selection. Once we have identified the feature 𝑓to compro-
mise, the next step is to choose the value for the selected feature to
guide the manipulation. We select the most benign-oriented value,
𝑣, in the feature space. This corresponds to the most negative value
in𝑀[𝑓], the SHAP value of the feature 𝑓(line 9).
Updating the feature. After obtaining(𝑓,𝑣), if the selected fea-
ture𝑓is manipulable, we add the pair into a map, 𝑃, as the Feature
Patch to be used in the feature-space manipulation (line 11). Note
that, due to the strong semantic restrictions of the binaries, we
cannot simply choose any arbitrary pairs of feature and values for
the test manipulation. Instead, we restrict the feature-space ma-
nipulation to only features and values that are independent (IID)
and can be modified with original functionalities preserved. For
example, consider the feature that counts the size of a binary: When
we modify the value of another feature, the former will be modi-
fied indirectly. Therefore, the features and values we select to be
manipulated follow two principles employed by the previous litera-
ture [ 42,43,61]. These principles are: ( i) features are manipulable
in the original problem space; and ( ii) selected features have no
dependencies or cannot be affected by other features. We described
manipulable features for Android and WinPE datasets later in §5.2
and §6.4.
Greedy strategy. After obtaining feature-value pairs, we conduct
a greedy strategy, removing samples that have the same value, 𝑣,
for feature𝑓from the dataset (lines 13 to 17). We do this to make
sure that the same feature-value pair will not be selected again.
The procedure repeats until we find 𝑁feature-value pairs. These
𝑁pairs are then used as feature patch in the next stage to generate
test cases.
4.3 Step 2: Test Case Generator
In the next step, the test case generator conducts feature manipula-
tion according to the feature patch obtained from prior steps.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
Feature-space manipulation. Equation 4 summarizes the feature-
space manipulation:
𝑥′
𝑚=vectorize(𝑥𝑚),
𝑥′
𝑡=manipulateFeature (𝑥′
𝑚,𝑃),
𝑥𝑡=Gen(𝑥𝑚,𝑥′
𝑡),(4)
where𝑥′𝑚is the result of applying feature extraction on a malicious
sample𝑥𝑚using vectorize().manipulateFeature ()manipulates the
sample in feature-space guided by the selected feature and value
pairs,𝑃. Note that, the sample generator Gen()will take the ma-
nipulated feature-space sample 𝑥′
𝑡and the original seed sample
𝑥𝑚as input, and implement the changes in feature-space back to
problem-space to generate the test case, while keeping its malware
functionality (as detailed in Binary builder below).
Binary builder. To ensure that no loss of functionality is inad-
vertently introduced as a side effect of feature manipulation, we
only apply these changes to unreachable areas of binaries, so that
these changes will never be executed during run-time. Therefore,
we guarantee that test cases are executable and can be applied
in the testing of malware detectors in the wild. Then, we apply
these changes on seed binaries with the help of open-source binary
builders.
For simplicity, we present our tooling for Android malware, yet
we emphasize that our framework works with other operating sys-
tems (see §6.4). We adopt a similar feature extraction method of
Drebin on the Android APK. Since features are a vector of boolean
values representing the existence of a feature, the feature value
could only be modified from 0 (absence) to 1 (presence) to pre-
serve original functionalities. We first leverage Apktool [ 3] to de-
compile an APK file into Smali [ 12] code, a structured assembly
language. API calls and network URLs are transformed to smali
instruction code, which is wrapped by an unreachable disclosure,
e.g.,an always-false condition closure such as if(time < 0) . The
Smali code is then inserted into the Smali file of the main activity.
Features representing Android manifest components are inserted
into AndroidManifest.xml file directly. Finally, we utilize Apktool
to assemble all decompiled and manipulated files into an adversar-
ial APK sample. If a feature manipulation cannot be implemented
in this way, we skip it and continue with the next feature in the
selected patch.
4.4 Step 3: Malware Detector Testing
After the test cases are generated, our framework programmatically
executes a series of tests on the malware detectors. This involves
(i) calculating the per-detector robustness; and ( ii) testing the trans-
ferability of attacks across detectors. We conclude this subsection
by proposing techniques that can improve detector performance.
Testing detector robustness. The methodology to test detector
robustness is straightforward. We first input the seed malware
into each detector and collect the detection rate on the unaltered
malware dataset. Next, the test cases generated from the white-box
model will be input to the detectors (including the white-box model
itself). We then compare the difference between the detection rate
of the seed vs.test cases. This allows us to test which detectors are
vulnerable to test cases, i.e.,whether the manipulation on AMM
features changes the detector results.Transferability analysis. Considering that machine learning-
based detectors may use similar feature extraction methods, it is
possible that multiple detectors are susceptible to the same fea-
ture manipulations. Specifically, we posit the test cases generated
from one machine learning model are likely to be effective on other
models that are trained on the same data distribution, due to the
similarity of decision boundaries. Therefore, the test framework
also calculates the ability to transfer an evasion trained on one
detector to another, i.e.,transferability. This is important as, the
more powerful the transferability a malware test case has, the more
effective it is against other detectors. To evaluate the transferability
of test cases generated by the AMM-based approach, we gener-
ate cases from white-box models and apply them to black-box
models. If transferability exists, the test framework calculates the
feature-space overlaps among models to explore the root cause of
transferability. This can be used by developers to understand the
weaknesses in their feature engineering.
Regression testing for detector improvement. Inspired by
recent research [ 46], a detection model can be improved by remov-
ing important features from the training phase, where the impor-
tant features refer to the ones that are highly contributing to the
model prediction accuracy. Shapley Additive Global importancE
(SAGE) [ 33] is a framework that measures how much a feature
contributes to the prediction accuracy of a model. We apply the
improvement on the detection models with SAGE and test their ro-
bustness against adversarial samples. Specifically, we first calculate
SAGE values of each feature. Since the most important features are
the ones with largest SAGE values, we sort the features by SAGE
values in a descending order and select the top features. Then we
remove the top features from samples and generate a new training
set. Finally, an improved model 𝑚𝑖is trained with the new training
set. To establish a thorough comparison, we train another model
𝑚𝑎that excludes top AMM-based features to compare and explain
the improvement of malware detectors.
5 TESTING FRAMEWORK SETUP
In this section, we describe the setup of our tests, including the
detectors under test, the datasets, and how we trained the models.
5.1 Detectors under Test
To showcase our testing framework, we experiment with a number
of malware detectors. For Andoird malware detectors, we test the
robustness of 8 state-of-the-art machine learning-based detectors (a
combination of 2 feature extraction methods and 4 machine learning
models); for WinPE detectors, we test 4 detectors (1 feature extrac-
tion method accompany 4 models). We also test 60 antivirus engines
available using VirusTotal [ 16]. The detectors under test are listed
in Table 2. Specifically, we involve Drebin [ 24], MaMaDroid [ 57],
and Ember [ 22] in our testing, because ( i) they proposed unique
features extraction methods; ( ii) high accuracy rates are reported
on large datasets; and ( iii) their source code and datasets have been
made publicly available.
To follow the conventions of prior studies [ 24,27,40,57,61],
we select 4 off-the-shelf machine learning-based malware models
that are commonly used in malware detectors. In our threat model,
the adversary has full knowledge of one machine learning-basedMate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 2: Detectors under test.
Type Name Description
Feature
Extraction
MethodsDrebin [24]A lightweight method for Android malware detection,
extracting 8 sets of features from an application’s code
and manifest.
MaMa-
Droid [57]A static-analysis-based system that abstracts app’s API
calls and builds a model from the call graph of an app
as Markov chains.
Ember [22]A static WinPE malware classifier extracting eight
groups of raw features that include both parsed fea-
tures and format-agnostic histograms and counts of
strings.
Machine
Learning
ModelsLGBM [48]LightGBM, an open-sourced gradient boosting frame-
work, based on the decision tree algorithm.
SVMSupport Vector Machine, a supervised learning method
based on statistical learning frameworks.
RFRandom Forests, an ensemble learning method that com-
bines decision trees to provide classification.
DNNA feed-forward neural network with with one input
layer and three fully-connected hidden layers (the last
one ends with a Softmax function).
Antivirus
EnginesVT [16]VirusTotal, a website that aggregates more than 70 an-
tivirus products and online scan engines, allowing a
user to check for viruses that the user’s own antivirus
software may have missed.
model. Without loss of generality, we set LGBM as this white-box
model. Note, any machine learning model could serve this role
as our approach is model-agnostic. For the antivirus engines, we
use VirusTotal, an online service that provides over 70 antivirus
scanners to detect malicious files and URLs. We find that 60 scanners
are always available while the others are not stable. Therefore, we
include these 60 scanners in our evaluation. All antivirus engines
fall into the black-box category as the attacker has no specific
knowledge about them.
5.2 Datasets and Model Training
In our experiments, we conduct testings using an Android dataset
and a WinPE dataset.
The Android Application Package (APK) is the package file for-
mat used by the Android operating system for distribution of mobile
apps. We use the well-studied Drebin [ 24] dataset, which contains
123,453 benign samples and 5,560 malicious. We also include 8,351
malware samples that have been uploaded on VirusShare [ 15]. Since
the ratio of malicious and benign apps is unbalanced, we randomly
select 5,560 benign and 5,560 malicious samples, making up 11,120
samples. Further, we create a random 50:20:30 split of samples for
training, validation, and testing, to train a LightGBM model. 3,000
test cases are generated from 3,000 randomly selected malicious
samples. The details about the WinPE dataset establishing and
model training are provided in §6.4.
To train the ML models mentioned above, we employ Andro-
guard [ 2] to extract raw features from APK samples. Androguard is
a python tool to analyze and manipulate Android files. It disassem-
bles an APK file and converts its byte code and resource files into a
readable and structured format. We further extract features from
the manifest file and from the Dalvik Executable (dex) file. These
features are then used to train and evaluate the machine learning
based detectors. All Android features are manipulable as they are
independent to each other.6 TESTING FRAMEWORK RESULTS
We next employ our explainability-guided test framework to eval-
uate the robustness of the detectors. Specifically, we compare the
detection rates between original samples and the test cases gener-
ated by our proposed strategy. To choose the number of features to
manipulate, we conduct pilot experiments on Android and WinPE
datasets.
6.1 Pilot Experiment
Number of Features. To choose the number of features to manip-
ulate in the explainability-guided test case generation, we conduct
pilot experiments on the Android and WinPE datasets. Here we
only report the experiment on the Android dataset as they follow
the same strategy. The pilot experiment compares the detection
rate of the LGBM model while manipulating 10, 25, 50, 75, 100,
125, and 150 features on 20 sets of 100 seed samples (2,000 samples
in total). As shown in Figure 3, with more features manipulated,
the detection rate decreases. The trend turns at 75 features, with
5.1% test cases detected. We therefore choose 𝑁=75for the APK
binaries.
6.2 Testing Results on Android Malware
Detectors
In our Android malware detector testing, we generate APK test
cases from the LGBM model, and test on 8 machine learning-based
detectors using 2 feature extraction methods and 4 models (1 in
white-box and 3 in black-box), and 60 antivirus engines (black-box)
from VT.
Testing machine learning detectors. All machine learning-based
detectors have reasonable detection rate (above 85% on average)
on the original malware samples, as shown in Figure 4. Note, the
y-axis refers to the detection rates of samples and each detector is
presented on the x-axis. On the Drebin-based detectors, the test
cases averagely reduce the detection rate by 74.11% (ranging from
50.37% on Drebin-RF to 98.97% on Drebin-SVM). Noticeably, all
test cases bypass the detection of Drebin-SVM. This may be attrib-
utable to ( i) our feature extraction method being close to Drebin;
and ( ii) the SVM, being a simple linear model, making its predic-
tion easier to flip. We further analyze the robustness of the SVM
model as a case study in §7. While on MaMaDroid-based detectors,
considering that MaMaDroid utilizes call graph features, which
are indirectly related to our API call features extracted from An-
droid source code, it is expected that fewer test cases can bypass
the detection. Specifically, the detection rates of MaMaDroid-based
detectors decrease 52.50% on average (ranging from 49.76% on
MaMaDroid-RF to 55.35% on MaMaDroid-SVM) on test cases. The
detection rates decrease down to 36.54% (avg.) which is even lower
than random guess. We conclude that all 8 detectors involved in
our Android malware detector testing are vulnerable to the test
cases generated by the explainability-guided feature space manip-
ulation. Note, in white-box scenarios ( i.e.,the 2 detectors using
LGBM model), it is expected that the generated test cases are more
effective against white-box models. To further explore the reason
why our explainability-guided approach also works in black-box
scenarios, we present further test results on transferability in §6.3.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
Detection Rate (%)
Number of Manipulated Features020406080100
10 25 50 75 100 125 150
Figure 3: Detection rates of manip-
ulating different numbers of fea-
tures.
Drebin MaMaDroidDetection Rate (%)
LGBM SVM RF DNN LGBM SVM RF DNN LGBM SVMDetection Rate (%)
020406080100 96.87
14.3698.9796.04
90.11
0.0045.67
25.53
Seed Malware
Adversarial Samples Seed Malware
Adversarial Samples Figure 4: Testing results on machine learning-based detectors.
# of Engines that Detect the Malware20304050
Seed Malware AMM-based Adversarial
Figure 5: Number of Virus-
Total anti-virus engines that
can detect original malware
samples and test cases.
# of Antivirus Engines
Detection Rate Dropping (%)0246810
10 0 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Figure 6: Histogram of an-
tivirus engines with respect
to the detection rate decreas-
ing.
Testing VirusTotal engines. We next turn our attention to the
60 antivirus engines accessible via VirusTotal. Figure 5 plots the
number of virus engines that successfully flag the seed malware and
test cases as malicious. The average detection rate of seed malware
is 53.40%, i.e.,on average 32.04 VT detectors detect a sample as
malicious. In contrast, only an average of 22.65 detectors flag test
cases as malicious. This lowers the detection rate of VT to 37.75%
on average. This result indicates that not all detectors in VT are
robust against these test cases.
To illustrate the performance of each antivirus engine and ex-
plain the overlapping results between samples, Figure 6 presents a
histogram of the detection rate reductions for each antivirus engine.
The x-axis represent the range of detection rates decreasing and
the y-axis refers to the numbers of antivirus engines. To obtain a
meaningful result, 10 engines that have detection rates less than
50% on seed malware samples are excluded. According to Figure 6,
10 engines are relatively resistant to the test cases, with detection
rate reductions of under 10%. This explains the overlapping results
between the upper percentile of test cases and the mean of the seed
malware samples. In contrast, there are 22 engines with detection
rates that decrease by over 50%, indicating that these antivirus
engines are vulnerable to the AMM-based test cases.
Takeaway 1:
•Machine learning-based detectors are vulnerable to the
test cases generated by the AMM-based strategy, which
manipulates the most evasive features.
•Test cases can evade detection by the black-box antivirus
engines in VirusTotal. This indicates that the majority of
anti-malware vendors could use our testing framework to
examine and improve their detectors.
RF SVM LGBMLGBM SVM RF0
15
31015
31015
310
0 15 31 0 15 31 0 15 31
Normalized AMM V alues
0.00.20.40.60.81.0Figure 7: AMM values of top 1,024 features that have the
highest AMM values in LGBM (row 1), SVM (row 2), and RF
(row 3) models, separately.
6.3 Transferability Analysis
Transferability is the ability for a test case to be effective against
multiple learning-based detectors. To study this, taking Drebin as
an example, we next generate AMM-based test cases from each of
the detectors and input them to different detectors. Here, we seek
to understand how a manipulation guided by one detector performs
against other detectors.1Specifically, we measure the transferability
in two aspects: feature overlaps and detection rates.
Feature overlap. To explore the reason why the test cases can
transfer across detectors, we present the top 1,024 features that
have the highest AMM values in the generation models across
each detector in a heatmap, shown in Figure 7. In each subplot, we
present the features as 32 rows by 32 columns of dots (normalized
to[0,1]), where the darker dots represent higher values of AMM
(which indicates a greater possibility to be selected as a feature to be
manipulated). Further, we sort the features in the generation models
according to the AMM values in descending order. Therefore, more
darker dots scattered in the upper zone of the nine subplots indicate
that there are more features having been selected across detectors.
From the heatmap we can observe that ( i) features with large AMM
values in LGBM (dark dots) overlap with most of the counterparts
of SVM; and ( ii) many features with large AMM values in RF are out
of the scope of the counterparts of LGBM. We further explain such
overlaps with the result of detection rates across different models.
1As the calculation of SHAP matrix on DNN model requires large amount of computing
time using our facility, we conduct transferability analysis on 3 generation models and
we believe such experimental setting is sufficient.Mate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Generation Models
Machine Learning DetectorsLGBM SVM RFLGBM
SVM
RF
Detection Rate (%)050100
14.36
28.69
(0.38)
26.78
(0.12)0.00
(0.66)
0.00
(0.19)0.0045.67
(0.24)
83.75
(0.17)
39.25
Figure 8: Detection rates of three
Drebin-based detectors on test cases
generated from LGBM, SVM, and RF.
Ember
LGBM SVM RF DNNDetection Rate (%)
02040608010094.16
66.98
60.43
8.6193.79
31.1877.8499.96
Seed Malware
Adversarial SamplesFigure 9: Detection rates of four de-
tectors on WinPE seed malware and
AMM-based test cases.
Seed Malware AMM-based# of Important Features Excluded# of Important Features ExcludedDetection RateImproved Model
0%50%100%
0 50 100 150 200 250 300Figure 10: Detection rates of seed mal-
ware and AMM-based test cases detected by
Drebin-based detectors excluding different
amount of important features.
Detection rate. We further evaluate the transferability of test cases
by inspecting the detection rates. Figure 8 shows the detection
rates of test cases across machine learning detectors. The y-axis
represents three generation models, and the x-axis shows the target
Drebin-based detectors. A darker color indicates a higher detection
rate (representing lower transferability).
We use the Cosine similarity (numbers in brackets) of AMM
values of the top 1,024 features between models to quantify the
overlaps, i.e.,a higher Cosine similarity value indicates a heavier
overlap of high-AMM features between models. From the results in
Figure 8, we observe that a higher similarity value reflects stronger
transferability – for example, the transferability from LGBM to SVM
outperforms the transferability from LGBM to RF – the overlaps
resonate with the detection rate results. Thus, the overlaps explain
why the test cases transfers across learning-based detectors. Simply
put, if we manipulate enough features across different learning-
based models ( i.e.,feature overlaps), the evasion can be transferred.
Takeaway 2: .,The transferability of test cases depends on the
overlaps of features with large Accrued Malicious Magnitude
(AMM) values between different learning-based detectors.
6.4 Generalizability Analysis
To examine whether our testing framework can generalize to other
operating systems, we next conduct testing on Windows Portable
Executable (WinPE) files. We use SOREL-20M [ 45] as the WinPE
dataset in our experiment. SOREL-20M is a representative public
dataset of malicious and benign WinPE samples used for malware
classification, consisting of 2,381-dimensional feature vectors ex-
tracted from 9,470,626 benign and 9,919,251 malicious samples, as
well as corresponding malicious binaries. It leverages the feature
extraction function from Ember [ 22]. We randomly choose 10,000
benign and 10,000 malicious samples to train detectors with LGBM,
SVM, RF, and DNN models.
Feature manipulation. In a WinPE file, many of the features are
derived from the same underlying structures, potentially leading
to contradictory that cannot be manipulated concurrently. For in-
stance, each addition of a writable section, the overall section count
inevitably rises. Previous work [ 61] shows that only 17 features
can be modified directly and indirectly to preserve the function-
ality of WinPE binaries. The pilot experiment on WinPE dataset
suggests that we should choose 𝑁as 17. We leverage LIEF [ 69] to
Detection Rate (%) Prediction(a) Original Detector (b) m i (c) m a
S m S a S iS m S a S i
S m S a S iS m S a S i
S m S a S iS m S a S iFigure 11: Detection rates and prediction values of the origi-
nal model and two improved models.
extract features, and pefile [ 10] to apply feature manipulation on
the WinPE binaries.
Testing results. Figure 9 shows the detection rates of 4 Ember-
based detectors on original malware samples and test cases. The test
cases have remarkable evasion performance on the LGBM, SVM,
and RF detectors: On average, the detection rates are decreased
to 35.59% across the three detectors. However, since most WinPE
features correlate with each other, the method of parsing and gen-
erating WinPE binaries ( i.e.,directly modifying values and adding
empty sections) may negatively affect the evasion, illustrated by
the DNN. In a nutshell, the test result shows that our proposed
explainability-guided testing framework is also effective at identi-
fying limitations in Windows malware detectors.
6.5 Revisiting AMM with Improved Detectors
Our evaluation shows that machine learning-based detectors are
vulnerable to test cases generated by AMM. Therefore, we seek
an interpretive approach to improve the robustness of existing
detectors.
Improving detectors. We first follow the methodology in §4.4
and generate an improved Drebin-LGBM detector 𝑚𝑖by excluding
SAGE-based important features in the training phase. Specifically,
we first generate new machine learning detectors each with a dif-
ferent number of features excluded from the training set. The trend
of detection rates on seed malware and AMM-based test cases are
shown in Figure 10. From the result, we find that excluding 220 im-
portant features allows the improved detector to attain the highest
detection rate (80.56%) on test cases. We therefore employ excluding
220 important features in the following experiment. We also gen-
erate another improved detector 𝑚𝑎by excluding fragile features.
These are features that can be manipulated to flip the prediction,
i.e.,features with high AMM values but low SAGE values, taking 0.2ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
Figure 12: Distributions of evaded test cases.
as a threshold (the minimal AMM value of 75 features we selected
in the pilot experiment is 0.2).
Measuring improved detectors. We further generate two groups
of test cases, 𝑆𝑖(by SAGE) and 𝑆𝑎(by AMM). Meanwhile we intro-
duce the seed samples 𝑆𝑚and the original Drebin-LGBM detector
as a benchmark. In the experiment, we leverage 5,459 seed malware
to generate test cases where we randomly select 300 samples for
20-round tests on each detector. Figure 11 presents the detection
rates and prediction values. We present results for three malware
datasets: seed malware set 𝑆𝑚, test case sets 𝑆𝑎and𝑆𝑖. We define
a sample as malicious when the prediction value is greater than
or equals to 0.5. On the original detector, less than 15% of samples
in both𝑆𝑎and𝑆𝑖are classified as malicious, indicating a poor ro-
bustness against test cases. On 𝑚𝑖, the average detection rate of the
𝑆𝑎samples increase to 67.3% while their prediction values range
from 0.23 to 0.82; in contrast, the detection rates of 𝑆𝑖on𝑚𝑎are
around 78.2%, while their prediction values range from 0.69 to 0.91,
which means that 𝑚𝑎can detect more test cases than 𝑚𝑖. Note,
the detection rate of 𝑚𝑎on seed malware has been improved to
87.78%, compared with the 80.56% detection rate of 𝑚𝑖. From the
experiment result, a trade-off to apply AMM on the improvement
of anti-malware detector is presented: compared with the origi-
nal detector, 7.34% detection rate degradation on seed malware vs.
more than 55% increasing on the detection rate against test cases.
This result further indicates that models with important features
removed (𝑚𝑖) is inefficient against test cases with AMM-based fea-
tures manipulated ( 𝑆𝑎). Meanwhile, improved detectors guided by
AMM values ( 𝑚𝑎) have better robustness on seed malware and
adversarial detection.
Comparison of AMM and SAGE. Next, we compare how fragile
and important features impact the detection. Figure 12 illustrates
the distribution of top-75 AMM and SAGE featues (26 features are
selected both by AMM and SAGE). The x-axis indicates normalized
AMM values; the y-axis is normalized SAGE values; the size of the
scatter point indicates the number of evaded samples manipulat-
ing the corresponding features. As shown in the figure, samples
that manipulate important features alone account for only a small
portion of the evaded samples while most evaded samples are gen-
erated by manipulating features with large AMM values (pink vs.
blue), which indicates that AMM is more efficient than SAGE to
generate test cases. In addition, this result also explains why AMM-
based test cases can bypass the improved model, even they removed
important features, since these models are still vulnerable to test
cases that only manipulate fragile features with large AMM values.
(a) (b)Figure 13: (a) Decision function values of samples with dif-
ferent numbers of features manipulated; (b) Distribution of
weights of features in SVM model.
Takeaway 3:
•Machine learning-based antivirus products should consider
improving the detectors with our AMM approach.
•AMM selects the fragile features and values that are efficient
to flip the prediction results.
7 DISCUSSION
In this section, we conduct two case studies to understand why
some test cases can or cannot evade detection, and further discuss
threats to validity of our testing framework.
7.1 A Case Study on SVM Robustness
In prior experiments, the Drebin-SVM detector could not detect
test cases from all three generation strategies. Here we conduct
a case study to explore the detection robustness of SVM against
test cases. First, we generate test cases by manipulating between
1 and 80 features (selected from Drebin-LGBM) on one seed. We
then calculate the decision function value for each test cases, which
represents the distance from the test case to the decision boundary.
Positive decision function values represent malicious while neg-
ative ones represent benign. As shown in Figure 13(a) test cases
generated by AMM-based strategy invert the prediction results
after manipulating 16 features and push the generation towards be-
nign with more features manipulated. From the result, we speculate
that the features selected from Drebin-LGBM may occupy large
weights in the Drebin-SVM, so that they can invert the prediction
quickly. To verify this, we export the weights of each feature in the
SVM detector and compare the weight values of selected features.
Figure 13(b) illustrates the weight values of the selected features,
where the y-axis represents the weight of each feature. We see that
most weight values of features selected by the AMM strategy from
Drebin-LGBM have relatively large negative values in the SVM
model, making the prediction decision values negative ( i.e.,benign),
which matches the result in Figure 7. This case study confirms that
features selected from LGBM occupy large negative weights in the
SVM, making the prediction result of the adversarial sample benign.
7.2 A Case Study on Seed Selection
Our prior results have shown that not all test cases can evade de-
tection. The reason could be either that the number of manipulable
features in a seed is not enough to invert the prediction, or that the
manipulated features have a limited impact on the prediction. ToMate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
(a) Original Sample 1 (b) T est case generated from Sample 1 (c) Original Sample 2 (d) T est case generated from Sample 2
Figure 14: SHAP values of two APK samples before and after test case generation.
explore the reason, we choose two seed malicious APK examples,
Sample 1 and Sample 2 , to generate their test cases. We further
generate SHAP values of the original and test cases (with 𝑁= 75
features selected) of Sample 1 andSample 2 to analyze the impact
of the manipulated features.
The x-axis in Figure 14 indicates the prediction value, and the
y-axis is the feature ID. 𝑓(𝑥)and𝑓(𝑥𝑎)are raw scores of the origi-
nal and test cases given by the Drebin-LGBM detector. We use red
bars to indicate positive SHAP values, and blue bars to highlight
negative SHAP values of each feature ( i.e.,𝜙𝑗in Equation 2). Feature
IDs shown in the figure are parts of manipulated features that had
the greatest impact on the two samples. The test case of Sample 1
inverts its prediction as benign, and that of Sample 2 remains ma-
licious. Figure 14(b) shows that the SHAP values of manipulated
features change significantly towards negative (blue bars), thereby
pushing the output, 𝑓(𝑥𝑎), towards negative. In contrast, the SHAP
values of the features of Sample 2 , shown in Figure 14(d), change
far less. Specifically, only features 46227, 40271, 39950 and 73533
are manipulated towards negative with less magnitude comparing
toSample 1 , while 40960 is not towards negative at all. This means
that we cannot manipulate enough features to force the decision
making towards benign for Sample 2 . This result indicates that the
manipulated features have limited impact on Sample 2 to invert the
result from malicious to benign. In practice, after we increasing the
number of manipulated features to 290, Sample 2 is identified as
benign. Therefore, the capacity of a seed depends on how many
features have malicious-oriented values that we can manipulate in
the sample. However, infinitely increasing the number of selected
features would lead to a heavy computational load and decrease
the efficiency of measurement.
7.3 Threats to Validity
Adaptive attacks against our testing framework. Existing
technology against adversarial generation, for example, adversarial
training [ 55] and differential privacy (DP) [ 20,38,51], could be
effective against our proposed testing framework. For adversarial
training, a machine learning-based detector could be trained with
AMM generated test cases to falsely raise the detection rate on test
cases. However, this may also increase the false positive rate on
benign samples as the model will be forced to learn benign features
as malicious, leading to a degraded performance. On the other hand,
DP-based robust machine learning techniques cannot bypass our
tests, because unbounded random perturbations may break the
generated samples’ functionality.
Dynamic detection. Since we only insert static unreachable in-
structions into the malware sample, a detector with dynamic detec-
tion will easily pass our testing. Feature-space manipulation andproblem-space obfuscation rely on static syntactic and structural
modification. These modifications can be used to test static ma-
chine learning-based detectors and rule-based antivirus engines.
However, the malicious behaviors preserved in the test cases will
still be exposed during run-time and identified by the detectors
that adopt dynamic analysis. Considering that dynamic feature
detection consumes more resources to monitor, this approach may
be impractical on a large scale and static approaches are still widely
used in practice. In this research, we focus on exposing the weak-
nesses of malware detectors with an explainable method.
8 CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed an explainability-guided malware detector
testing framework. The framework performs test case generation,
relying on Accrued Malicious Magnitude (AMM) to guide the fea-
ture selection and a binary builder to map feature-space manipu-
lations onto problem-space binaries. We then use our framework
to test the robustness of state-of-the-art malware detectors. Our
research includes the following key findings: ( i) commercial an-
tivirus engines and state-of-the-art machine learning detectors are
vulnerable to AMM-based test cases; ( ii) the transferability of AMM
test cases relies on the overlaps of features with large AMM values
between different machine learning models; and ( iii) AMM values
can effectively measure the fragility of features and explain the ca-
pability of flipping classification results. According to our findings,
we suggest that machine learning-based AV products should con-
sider using the AMM values to improve their robustness. Exploring
the latter constitutes our key line of future work, as we believe
this could prompt a new approach to defending against malware
evasion attacks.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The source code, excluding the test case generator, of this project is
publicly available at https://github.com/Immor278/AMM. Consid-
ering the potential security issues, we will not release the test case
generator and any test cases, as well as the information of commer-
cial antivirus involved in our evaluation, except for academic uses
that are approved by our institutional ethics committee.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been supported by the Cyber Security Research Cen-
tre Limited whose activities are partially funded by the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Program. Minhui Xue
and Ruoxi Sun are the corresponding authors of this paper.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA R. Sun, M. Xue, G. Tyson, T. Dong, S. Li, S. Wang, H. Zhu, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal
REFERENCES
[1][n. d.]. AI and machine learning. https://www.avast.com/en-us/technology/ai-
and-machine-learning.
[2] [n. d.]. Androguard documentation. https://androguard.readthedocs.io/en/lates
t/.
[3][n. d.]. Apktool - A tool for reverse engineering Android APK files. https:
//androguard.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[4][n. d.]. Cyber security statistics. https://purplesec.us/resources/cyber-security-
statistics/.
[5] [n. d.]. ESET smart security. https://www.eset.com/.
[6][n. d.]. How anti-virus software works. https://cs.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/
cs201/projects/viruses/anti-virus.html.
[7][n. d.]. Kaspersky cyber security solutions for home & business. https://www.ka
spersky.com.au/.
[8] [n. d.]. Kiteshield. https://github.com/GunshipPenguin/kiteshield.
[9] [n. d.]. More than free antivirus. https://www.avast.com.
[10] . pefile. https://github.com/erocarrera/pefile.
[11] [n. d.]. RelocBonus. https://github.com/nickcano/RelocBonus.
[12] . Smali. https://github.com/JesusFreke/smali.
[13] [n. d.]. Sonicwall research malware attacks 2019. https://www.msspalert.com/cy
bersecurity-research/sonicwall-research-malware-attacks-2019/.
[14] . Virbox protector. https://www.sense.com.cn/VirboxProtector.html.
[15] . VirusShare. https://www.virusshare.com.
[16] . VirusTotal. https://www.virustotal.com.
[17] [n. d.]. VMProject software protection. https://vmpsoft.com/.
[18] 2021. Global antivirus software market report 2021: COVID-19 growth and
change. https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/5505347/global-antivirus-
software-market-report-2021.
[19] 2022. As tanks rolled into Ukraine, so did malware. https://www.nytimes.com/
2022/02/28/us/politics/ukraine-russia-microsoft.html.
[20] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov,
Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep learning with differential privacy. In
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security .
[21] Hyrum S Anderson, Anant Kharkar, Bobby Filar, David Evans, and Phil Roth. 2018.
Learning to evade static PE machine learning malware models via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08917 (2018).
[22] Hyrum S Anderson and Phil Roth. 2018. Ember: An open dataset for training
static PE malware machine learning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04637
(2018).
[23] Simone Aonzo, Gabriel Claudiu Georgiu, Luca Verderame, and Alessio Merlo.
2020. Obfuscapk: An open-source black-box obfuscation tool for Android apps.
SoftwareX (2020).
[24] Daniel Arp, Michael Spreitzenbarth, Malte Hubner, Hugo Gascon, and Konrad
Rieck. 2014. Drebin: Effective and explainable detection of Android malware in
your pocket. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) .
[25] Erin Avllazagaj, Ziyun Zhu, Leyla Bilge, Davide Balzarotti, and Tudor Dumitra s,.
2021. When Malware Changed Its Mind: An Empirical Study of Variable Program
Behaviors in the Real World. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
21). 3487–3504.
[26] Federico Barbero, Feargus Pendlebury, Fabio Pierazzi, and Lorenzo Cavallaro.
2022. Transcending transcend: Revisiting malware classification with conformal
evaluation. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .
[27] Haipeng Cai. 2020. Assessing and improving malware detection sustainability
through app evolution studies. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology (TOSEM) 29, 2 (2020), 1–28.
[28] Yuxin Cao, Xi Xiao, Ruoxi Sun, Derui Wang, Minhui Xue, and Sheng Wen. 2023.
StyleFool: Fooling Video Classification Systems via Style Transfer. In 44th IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (IEEE S&P) . 818–835.
[29] Nicholas Carlini, Anish Athalye, Nicolas Papernot, Wieland Brendel, Jonas
Rauber, Dimitris Tsipras, Ian Goodfellow, Aleksander Madry, and Alexey Ku-
rakin. 2019. On evaluating adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06705
(2019).
[30] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2017. Towards evaluating the robustness of
neural networks. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .
[31] Sen Chen, Minhui Xue, Lingling Fan, Lei Ma, Yang Liu, and Lihua Xu. 2019. How
can we craft large-scale Android malware? An automated poisoning attack. In
International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Mobile (AI4Mobile) .
[32] Yizheng Chen, Shiqi Wang, Dongdong She, and Suman Jana. 2020. On train-
ing robust{PDF}malware classifiers. In 29th{USENIX}Security Symposium
({USENIX}Security 20) . 2343–2360.
[33] Ian Covert, Scott M Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. 2020. Understanding global feature
contributions with additive importance measures. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33 (2020), 17212–17223.
[34] Luca Demetrio, Battista Biggio, Giovanni Lagorio, Fabio Roli, and Alessandro
Armando. 2021. Functionality-preserving black-box optimization of adversarial
windows malware. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security (2021).
[35] Luca Demetrio, Battista Biggio, Giovanni Lagorio, Fabio Roli, and Alessandro
Armando. 2021. Functionality-Preserving Black-Box Optimization of AdversarialWindows Malware. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 16
(2021), 3469–3478. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2021.3082330
[36] Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Battista Biggio, Davide Maiorca, Daniel Arp,
Konrad Rieck, Igino Corona, Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. 2017. Yes, machine
learning can be more secure! A case study on Android malware detection. IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2017).
[37] Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Maura Pintor, Matthew Jagielski, Battista Biggio,
Alina Oprea, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Fabio Roli. 2019. Why do adversarial
attacks transfer? Explaining transferability of evasion and poisoning attacks. In
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) .
[38] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam D. Smith. 2006. Cali-
brating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography,
Third Theory of Cryptography Conference (TCC) .
[39] Kevin Eykholt, Ivan Evtimov, Earlence Fernandes, Bo Li, Amir Rahmati, Chaowei
Xiao, Atul Prakash, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Dawn Song. 2018. Robust physical-
world attacks on deep learning visual classification. In IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition .
[40] Joshua Garcia, Mahmoud Hammad, and Sam Malek. 2018. Lightweight,
obfuscation-resilient detection and family identification of android malware.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 26, 3 (2018),
1–29.
[41] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and
harnessing adversarial examples. International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (2015).
[42] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan, Michael Backes, and
Patrick McDaniel. 2016. Adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks
for malware classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04435 (2016).
[43] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan, Michael Backes, and
Patrick McDaniel. 2017. Adversarial examples for malware detection. In European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security .
[44] Mahmoud Hammad, Joshua Garcia, and Sam Malek. 2018. A large-scale empirical
study on the effects of code obfuscations on Android apps and anti-malware
products. In International Conference on Software Engineering . 421–431.
[45] Richard Harang and Ethan M. Rudd. 2020. SOREL-20M: A large scale benchmark
dataset for malicious PE detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07634 (2020).
[46] Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon
Tran, and Aleksander Madry. 2019. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are
features. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[47] Jinho Jung, Chanil Jeon, Max Wolotsky, Insu Yun, and Taesoo Kim. 2017. AVPASS:
Leaking and bypassing antivirus detection model automatically. In Black Hat
USA Briefings (Black Hat USA) .
[48] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma,
Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2017. LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting
decision tree. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2017).
[49] TaeGuen Kim, BooJoong Kang, Mina Rho, Sakir Sezer, and Eul Gyu Im. 2018. A
multimodal deep learning method for Android malware detection using various
features. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security (2018).
[50] Dhilung Kirat and Giovanni Vigna. 2015. MalGene: Automatic extraction of
malware analysis evasion signature. In ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security .
[51] Mathias Lécuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman
Jana. 2019. Certified robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy.
InIEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .
[52] Deqiang Li, Tian Qiu, Shuo Chen, Qianmu Li, and Shouhuai Xu. 2021. Can we
leverage predictive uncertainty to detect dataset shift and adversarial examples in
Android malware detection? Annual Computer Security Applications Conference
(ACSAC) (2021).
[53] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions. In International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
[54] Wanlun Ma, Derui Wang, Ruoxi Sun, Minhui Xue, Sheng Wen, and Yang Xiang.
2023. The “Beatrix” resurrections: Robust backdoor detection via Gram matrices.
Inthe Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) .
[55] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and
Adrian Vladu. 2018. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations .
[56] Davide Maiorca, Davide Ariu, Igino Corona, Marco Aresu, and Giorgio Giacinto.
2015. Stealth attacks: An extended insight into the obfuscation effects on Android
malware. Computers & Security (2015).
[57] Enrico Mariconti, Lucky Onwuzurike, Panagiotis Andriotis, Emiliano De Cristo-
faro, Gordon Ross, and Gianluca Stringhini. 2017. MAMADROID: Detecting
Android Malware by Building Markov Chains of Behavioral Models. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual Symposium on Network and Distributed System Security
(NDSS) .
[58] Fabio Pierazzi, Feargus Pendlebury, Jacopo Cortellazzi, and Lorenzo Cavallaro.
2020. Intriguing properties of adversarial ML attacks in the problem space. In
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .
[59] Matteo Pomilia. 2016. A study on obfuscation techniques for Android malware.
Sapienza University of Rome (2016).Mate! A re You Real ly Aware ? An Explainability-Guided Testing Framework for Robustness of Malware Detectors ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
[60] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. “Why should I
trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining .
[61] Giorgio Severi, Jim Meyer, Scott Coull, and Alina Oprea. 2021. Explanation-guided
backdoor poisoning attacks against malware classifiers. In USENIX Security Sym-
posium (USENIX Security) .
[62] Maryam Shahpasand, Len Hamey, Dinusha Vatsalan, and Minhui Xue. 2019.
Adversarial attacks on mobile malware detection. In International Workshop on
Artificial Intelligence for Mobile (AI4Mobile) .
[63] SkyLight. [n. d.]. Cylance, I kill you! https://skylightcyber.com/2019/07/18/cylan
ce-i-kill-you/.
[64] Wei Song, Xuezixiang Li, Sadia Afroz, Deepali Garg, Dmitry Kuznetsov, and Heng
Yin. 2022. MAB-Malware: A Reinforcement Learning Framework for Blackbox
Generation of Adversarial Malware. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security .
[65] Octavian Suciu, Radu Marginean, Yigitcan Kaya, Hal Daume III, and Tudor
Dumitras. 2018. When does machine learning FAIL? generalized transferability
for evasion and poisoning attacks. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium . 1299–
1316.
[66] Ruoxi Sun, Wei Wang, Minhui Xue, Gareth Tyson, Seyit Camtepe, and Damith C.
Ranasinghe. 2021. An Empirical Assessment of Global COVID-19 Contact Trac-
ing Applications. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on SoftwareEngineering (ICSE) . 1085–1097.
[67] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017. Axiomatic attribution
for deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning .
[68] Microsoft Defender Security Research Team. 2019. New machine learning model
sifts through the good to unearth the bad in evasive malware. https://www.mi
crosoft.com/security/blog/2019/07/25/new-machine-learning-model-sifts-
through-the-good-to-unearth-the-bad-in-evasive-malware/.
[69] Romain Thomas. 2017. LIEF - Library to instrument executable formats. https:
//lief.quarkslab.com/.
[70] Xabier Ugarte-Pedrero, Davide Balzarotti, Igor Santos, and Pablo G Bringas. 2015.
SoK: Deep packer inspection: A longitudinal study of the complexity of run-time
packers. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 659–673.
[71] Giovanni Vigna and Davide Balzarotti. 2018. When Malware is {Packin’}Heat.
InEnigma 2018 (Enigma 2018) .
[72] Ke Xu, Yingjiu Li, and Robert H. Deng. 2016. ICCDetector: ICC-based malware
detection on Android. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security
(2016).
[73] Ke Xu, Yingjiu Li, Robert H. Deng, and Kai Chen. 2018. DeepRefiner: Multi-
layer Android malware detection system applying deep neural networks. In IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy .
[74] Weilin Xu, Yanjun Qi, and David Evans. 2016. Automatically evading classifiers.
InNetwork and Distributed Systems Symposium .