Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for
Industrial Elevators
Qinghua Xu
Simula Research Laboratory and University of Oslo
Oslo, Norway
qinghua@simula.noShaukat Ali
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, Norway
shaukat@simula.no
Tao Yue
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, Norway
tao@simula.noMaite Arratibel
Orona
San Sebastian, Spain
marratibel@orona-group.com
ABSTRACT
Digital twins are increasingly developed to support the develop-
ment, operation, and maintenance of cyber-physical systems such
as industrial elevators. However, industrial elevators continuously
evolve due to changes in physical installations, introducing new
software features, updating existing ones, and making changes
due to regulations (e.g., enforcing restricted elevator capacity due
to COVID-19), etc. Thus, digital twin functionalities (often built
on neural network-based models) need to evolve themselves con-
stantly to be synchronized with the industrial elevators. Such an
evolution is preferred to be automated, as manual evolution is time-
consuming and error-prone. Moreover, collecting sufficient data
to re-train neural network models of digital twins could be expen-
sive or even infeasible. To this end, we propose unceRtaInty-aware
tranSfer lEarning enriched Digital Twins (RISE-DT ), atransfer
learning based approach capable of transferring knowledge about
the waiting time prediction capability of a digital twin of an in-
dustrial elevator across different scenarios. RISE-DT also leverages
uncertainty quantification to further improve its effectiveness. To
evaluate RISE-DT , we conducted experiments with 10 versions of
an elevator dispatching software from Orona, Spain, which are
deployed in a Software in the Loop (SiL) environment. Experiment
results show that RISE-DT , on average, improves the Mean Squared
Error by 13.131% and the utilization of uncertainty quantification
further improves it by 2.71%.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Empirical software valida-
tion;Software evolution ;Maintaining software ;Embedded
software .
KEYWORDS
Digital Twin, Transfer Learning, Uncertainty, Industrial Elevators
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558957ACM Reference Format:
Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, and Maite Arratibel. 2022. Uncertainty-
Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22),
November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558957
1 INTRODUCTION
Elevators are commonly used in our daily lives, especially in high-
rise buildings. Consequently, their incorrect operations or poor
performance affect user experiences to various extents and, in ex-
treme cases, may compromise users’ safety [ 40]. To ensure robust
and safe operations of elevator systems, digital twin technologies
(DT) are promising solutions [ 18]. El Saddik defined a DT as "a
digital replica of a living or non-living physical entity" [ 21]. Sev-
eral researchers extend this concept and equip DTs with neural
network models [ 60,63]. However, elevator systems are prone to
changes continuously due to, for instance, the variability in phys-
ical installation conditions, software updates and configurations
caused by regulations, performance enhancements, etc [ 47,58].
Therefore, to maintain its evolution – one of the key characteristics
of DT technologies, a DT has to evolve its own functionalities to
be able to continuously keep synchronized with its counterpart,
i.e., the industrial elevator [ 64]. Such an evolution is expected to
be automated, because it is error-prone and time-consuming (thus
expensive) to manually update the DT.
Moreover, it is well-known that neural networks require a large
amount of labeled training data to be effective; however, it is often
expensive (if feasible) to collect sufficient data to re-train neural
network models of the DT due to its evolution. Thus, there is an
indispensable need for transferring knowledge gained in one oper-
ating scenario of an elevator to another, for important DT function-
alities built with neural network models. To this end, we propose
RISE-DT , a novel approach that utilizes transfer learning for evolv-
ing the passengers’ waiting time prediction capability of DTs of
industrial elevators across various elevator operating scenarios.
Our industrial partner is Orona1– a Spanish company that man-
ufactures elevators for different types of building configurations
and setups. Data required for transfer learning were systematically
collected via a Software in the Loop (SiL) simulation setting of an
1https://www.orona-group.com/
1257
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
industrial elevator dispatching software from Orona and a commer-
cial software–Elevate2. Elevate has been successfully applied in the
literature for supporting validations of elevator systems [3, 4].
To further improve the performance of transfer learning, we also
employ uncertainty quantification (UQ), which was initially de-
signed to evaluate the robustness of machine learning models [ 52].
Current UQ methods (e.g., Bayesian methods [ 39] or ensemble
methods [ 45]) mostly quantify the uncertainty of either a dataset
or a model itself. Researchers have also developed several open
source UQ tools, such as Uncertainty Wizard [ 61] and Uncertainty
Toolbox [ 12]. Especially, Uncertainty Toolbox is a Pytorch-based
tool, which can be easily integrated into our Pytorch-based imple-
mentation of RISE-DT . We therefore employ Uncertainty Toolbox
to calculate the calibration and sharpness metrics for the purpose
of selecting the most uncertain samples from the source dataset.
Calibration demonstrates the consistency between the prediction
distribution and the observation, while sharpness shows the con-
centration of the prediction distribution [ 25]. However, directly
picking these samples from the source dataset leads to the missing
of context information. Therefore, we feed selected uncertain sam-
ples into a multi-head attention module [ 57], aiming at preserving
context information in new sample vectors.
As previously said, we evaluated RISE-DT with 10 versions of an
industrial dispatching software from Orona in a SiL setting enabled
with Elevate, which simulates elevator hardware, buildings, etc. We
performed experiments on four different elevator scenarios and
10 dispatchers. Results show that, on average, RISE-DT improves
Mean Squared Error (MSE) by 13.131% with transfer learning and
the UQ further improves its performance by 2.71%.
Our key contributions are that: 1) We propose a novel model,
RISE-DT, which takes advantage of both neural networks and DTs.
Neural networks help us to learn complex patterns in elevator data,
while DTs simulate the elevator in real-time. Combining neural
networks and DTs allows RISE-DT to make accurate predictions in
unforeseen situations, e.g., long waiting times for elevator passen-
gers; 2) We mitigate the data scarcity problem of neural networks
by introducing transfer learning. Transfer learning transfers knowl-
edge across different elevator scenarios, which differs in dispatching
algorithms or traffic templates; and 3) We employ the Uncertainty
Toolbox [ 12] to perform UQ for each data sample (i.e., properties
for passengers such as destination and mass), and a multi-head
attention mechanism for preserving context information, i.e., infor-
mation of previous passengers.
We present the industrial context in Section 2. Section 3 intro-
duces RISE-DT , Section 4 describes experiment design, and Section
5 presents results. We present the related work in Section 6 and
conclude the paper in Section 7.
2 INDUSTRIAL CONTEXT
Orona– a Spanish company, develops various types of vertical trans-
portation systems for buildings. Each building is typically installed
with a set of elevators. A dedicated controller controls the move-
ments of an elevator. All the controllers are linked to a component
called traffic master with a dedicated software component called
dispatcher deployed, which is responsible for optimal scheduling
2https://peters-research.com/index.php/elevate/of the elevators by providing the best possible Quality of Service
(QoS), e.g., the minimized average waiting time (AWT). AWT, for
instance, tells how much, on average, passengers have to wait for
an elevator in a given time period.
Elevator installations vary from one building to another. How
the elevators are used, i.e., traffic , also varies based on various
parameters such as the building type, time of the day, and day of
the week. To be cost-effective in supporting new installations, new
types of traffic of elevators, and new versions of dispatchers, DTs
of the elevators should adapt to such new changes timely. Thus, it
is needed to learn knowledge gained, e.g., from one installation to
another installation, one traffic type to another, or one version of a
dispatcher to another.
Collecting operating data from physical elevators is expensive as
physical data collection devices need to be set up. So, we collect data
in a Software in the Loop (SiL) setting with industrial dispatchers
from Orona situated in the commercial simulator Elevate. Elevate
allows you to create various operating scenarios via configuring
building types, passengers, etc. A notable feature is traffic template ,
which simulates traffic of a specific elevator scenario. For example,
theLunch Peak template simulates traffic in an office building where
passengers are taking elevators to go to the floor where the canteen
is located.
In this paper, we focus on predicting waiting times of passengers.
For convenience, we first define the concept of Elevator Scenario .
An elevator scenario 𝐶has two parts: an elevator dispatcher and
its traffic template. First, an elevator dispatcher is usually deployed,
in practice, in a particular setting, such as a configured SiL or real
operation with particular settings (e.g., building setup). The dis-
patcher schedules passenger calls of elevators, by ensuring optimal
QoS (e.g., minimal waiting time), and deals with various traffic
patterns specified as traffic templates for SiL. Such traffic templates
correspond to the real passenger traffic in the real operation con-
figuration. Data generated from any of these configurations can
be used for the construction of a neural network-based DT, which
consists of two components: DT model (DTM) and DT capability
(DTC). DTM is a live simulation of the elevator scenario, while
DTC is built with machine learning algorithms for specific tasks,
i.e. predicting waiting time 𝑤𝑡for passengers in this context.
We aim to address three main challenges. First, like in any other
domain, the good performance of neural network models comes
from training on sufficient labeled data, in our case, which is about
elevator data with waiting time for each passenger. However, suffi-
cient labeled data for certain elevator scenarios can be unavailable.
For example, if we have a newly upgraded elevator dispatcher, it is
impossible to get operational data before it is actually deployed in
the real environment. Our solution to this challenge is to transfer
knowledge from other elevator scenarios with data ready to use.
Second, manually transferring knowledge across elevator sce-
narios requires significant time and expertise. To do this transfer
learning manually, one needs to distill common knowledge shared
among scenarios, e.g., passenger properties that potentially lead
to unexpected long waiting time. If this is successful, expertise is
required to apply this knowledge in the target scenario, which is
about building a new model for the target scenarios. In comparison,
our solution is to develop a neural network-based transfer learning
architecture that can accomplish this transfer automatically.
1258Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Third, potential elevator scenarios that can be used as trans-
fer learning sources are insufficient. To make full use of transfer
learning, we expect source elevator scenarios to be abundant and
preferably heterogeneous, so that the final model can generalize
well. However, this cannot be guaranteed in our case, as we have
limited elevator scenario data. Hence, RISE-DT uses UQ to select
the most uncertain samples, whose Shannon entropy tends to be
higher and thus contains more information [ 42], which motivates
us to take full advantage of these uncertain samples. Thus, we
perform UQ to select most uncertain samples. However, elevator
scenario samples are interdependent given their time series nature,
so selecting such samples without considering their dependencies
could potentially lose context information. To overcome this prob-
lem, we employ a multi-head attention module to preserve context
information. We use the output of attention module as new vectors
for each sample. In short, we aim to improve the effectiveness of
transfer learning with the help of UQ and multi-head attention.
3 APPROACH
The core of RISE-DT is transfer learning, which transfers knowl-
edge from one elevator scenario to another. We use two types of
transfer learning: pretraining and domain adaptation. Accordingly,
we divide the training process of RISE-DT into two phases: pre-
training phase and fine-tuning phase (Figure 1). In both of the
phases, the model takes the elevator data as the input and performs
transfer learning from source scenarios to target scenarios. Let 𝑆
be the source elevator scenario and 𝑇be the target elevator sce-
nario. The goal is to improve 𝑇with knowledge transferred from
𝑆. In the pretraining phase, we first pretrain the original model
ofRISE-DT with source elevator scenarios 𝑆1𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑆2𝑝𝑟𝑒,...,𝑆𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑒and
target elevator scenarios 𝑇1𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑇2𝑝𝑟𝑒,...,𝑇𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑒, instead of𝑆and𝑇. In
the fine-tuning phase, we perform transfer learning from 𝑆to𝑇
with the pretrained RISE-DT .
Figure 1: Overview of RISE-DT
As shown in Figure 2, the design of RISE-DT mainly involves
three main techniques: DT,transfer learning andUQ, and the overall
process builds two separate DTs for the source and target elevator
scenarios. For the source DT, we first perform UQto select MostUncertain Samples and feed them into the source DT. We then
usetransfer learning to train the target DT. In the following
subsections, we provide details about DT in Section 3.1, followed
by the use of transfer learning and UQ, in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.
Figure 2: Architecture of RISE-DT .DTM ,DTC andWTdenote
DT Model, DT Capability, and Waiting Time, respectively.
3.1 Digital Twin
As shown in Figure 2, RISE-DT ’s DT has two key components:
theDTM and the DTC. The goal of the DTM is to simulate the
real world elevator scenario by predicting/generating passenger
properties (e.g., destination, weight), while the DTC tries to predict
waiting time with the input of both real-world passenger properties
and generated passenger properties from the DTM. The generated
passenger proprieties can provide the DTC with more information
because these two types of inputs are different despite of the same
format due to two main reasons discussed below.
First, the DTM is trained with historical data, while the DTC
is trained with only real-time data. After training, the parameters
of the DTM converge at local optimal. This process incorporates
information of the historical data into these trained parameters, and
in turn passes to the generated passenger properties. As a result,
using generated passenger properties as input introduces more
information (from the historical data) into the DTC.
Second, the DTM simulates the elevator’s behavior. Ideally, it
should accurately predict how the elevator should operate at any
given time if it is in a normal state. This process inevitably in-
troduces a learning bias which induces the DTM to assume the
elevator system is operating normally. However, the real passenger
properties may lead to abnormality, causing a discrepancy between
1259ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
real and generated passenger properties. Therefore, we argue that
generated passenger properties focus on different aspects compared
to real passenger properties. The DTC takes both generated and
real passenger properties as input and makes predictions based on
their own features as well as the discrepancy between them.
Given that elevator scenario data is in a time series form, the
literature has shown the superiority of sequence models for han-
dling such data [ 15]. Examples include Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [ 38] and Gated Recurrent Unit networks (GRUs) [ 11]. We
performed a preliminary analysis comparing RNN and GRU with a
subset of SWaT as the validation dataset, and observed that GRU
outperforms RNN in predictive performance. Hence, we employ
GRUs in both the DTM and DTC to capture temporal characteris-
tics of a scenario. The GRU-based DTM simulates the real-world
operation of elevator scenarios by predicting/generating passenger
properties, containing information about a passenger’s loading/un-
loading time, weight, capacity, arrival floor, destination floor, etc.
Such a generated profile, along with real-time elevator scenario data,
are fed into the GRU-based DTC component of RISE-DT , which
hence predicts waiting time for each passenger.
3.1.1 Digital Twin Model. DTMs are often built as behavior mod-
els [53]. However, considering that sequence models (e.g., GRU)
have shown their successes in various domains, we design our DTM
as a GRU-based neural network. This model consists of four layers:
the linear layer, activation layer, GRU layer, and prediction layer.
Let𝑢𝑡be the passenger’s property vector at time point 𝑡.
Linear layer transforms the passenger’s property ( 𝑢𝑡) vector into
hidden vectors ( 𝑥𝑡). In Equation 1, 𝑊and𝑏are the weight matrix
and bias vector.
𝑥𝑡=𝑊𝑑𝑡𝑚·𝑢𝑡+𝑏𝑑𝑡𝑚 (1)
Activation layer applies the ReLU activation function to add non-
linearity on the hidden vectors as in Equation 2.
𝑥𝑡=𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑢(𝑥𝑡) (2)
GRU layer introduces two types of gates into the DTM: update
gate𝑧and reset gate 𝑟. Letℎ𝑡∈𝑅𝐻be the hidden state vector of
GRU and𝑊,𝑈,𝑏 are all weight matrices. The update rules of GRU
are as follows:
𝑧𝑡=𝜎𝑔(𝑊𝑧𝑥𝑡+𝑈𝑧ℎ𝑡−1+𝑏𝑧) (3)
𝑟𝑡=𝜎𝑔(𝑊𝑟𝑥𝑡+𝑈𝑟ℎ𝑡−1+𝑏𝑟) (4)
ˆℎ𝑡=𝜙ℎ(𝑊ℎ𝑥𝑡+𝑈ℎ(𝑟𝑡·ℎ𝑡−1)+𝑏ℎ) (5)
ℎ𝑡=(1−𝑧𝑡)·ℎ𝑡−1+𝑧𝑡·ˆℎ𝑡 (6)
Prediction layer transforms the hidden vectors into the label space.
A single passenger has multiple properties. We build a separate
prediction layer for each property (Figure 2). But they are trained
at the same time in a multi-task learning manner.
Loading time prediction . Loading time denotes time needed for
a passenger to get in an elevator. Predicting loading time as a
regression task potentially leads to over-fitting due to limited data
volume. We simplify this prediction by discretizing loading time
into 10 categories and convert this problem into a classification
problem. Equation 7 shows the linear prediction layer for loadingtime.𝑊𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔∈𝑅𝐻×10is the weight matrix.
𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑡=𝑊𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 (7)
Unloading time prediction . Unloading time denotes time needed
for a passenger to get off an elevator. Similar to loading time, we
also discretize unloading time into 10 categories. Equation 8 shows
the linear prediction layer for unloading time. 𝑊𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔∈𝑅𝐻×10
is the weight matrix.
𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡=𝑊𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 (8)
Weight prediction . Similar to loading time prediction, we convert
this continuous prediction task into a less fine-grained classification
task with only 5 category labels to avoid over-fitting. Equation 9
shows the linear prediction layer for passenger weight. 𝑊𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡∈
𝑅𝐻×5is the weight matrix.
𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑡=𝑊𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (9)
Capacity prediction . The capacity denotes passengers’ willing-
ness to get in an elevator based on the percentage of the elevator
occupied with passengers. For example, a passenger with a capacity
value of 0.6 will not enter, when an elevator 60% or more full. To
prevent over-fitting, we convert it into a 5-category classification
task. Equation 10 shows the linear prediction layer for the passenger
capacity.𝑊𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦∈𝑅𝐻×5is the weight matrix.
𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑡=𝑊𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 (10)
Arrival floor prediction . The arrival floor denotes which floor a
specific passenger arrives and makes a call. This property is dis-
crete by nature. This prediction layer is designed as a 𝑁categories
classification problem, where 𝑁denotes the number of floors this
building has. Equation 11 shows the linear prediction layer for the
arrival floor. 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙∈𝑅𝐻×𝑁is the weight matrix.
𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑡=𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙 (11)
Destination floor prediction . The destination floor denotes the
floor a specific passenger intends to go. This property is also discrete
and can been designed as a 𝑁categories classification problem
similar as the arrival floor prediction layer. Equation 12 shows
the linear prediction layer for the destination floor. 𝑊𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛∈
𝑅𝐻×𝑁is the weight matrix.
𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑡=𝑊𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛ℎ𝑡+𝑏𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (12)
Combining all these properties, we acquire complete passenger
properties ˆ𝑥𝑡with the help of the DTM. Then we feed ˆ𝑥𝑡along with
real-time data into the DTC for the prediction of waiting time.
3.1.2 Digital Twin Capability. The DTC of RISE-DT predicts the
waiting time of a passenger by employing GRU. As for the DTM,
the DT capability has four layers: the linear, activation, GRU, and
waiting time prediction layers.
Linear layer concatenates the generated passenger profile vec-
torˆ𝑥𝑡and real-time profile 𝑥𝑡as an input vector 𝑢𝑡∈𝑅𝐻, then
transforms it into the hidden space:
𝑢𝑡=𝑊𝑑𝑡𝑐·𝑢𝑡+𝑏𝑑𝑡𝑐 (13)
Activation layer increases the DTC’s non-linearity with ReLU:
𝑢𝑡=𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑢(𝑢𝑡) (14)
1260Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
GRU layer captures temporal characteristics of elevator data, and
introduces updating rules in Equation 3.
Prediction layer makes predictions about waiting time for each
passenger, which is a continuous task.
3.2 Uncertainty Quantification
DT (Section 3.1) can potentially perform well with sufficient labeled
data. However, we rarely have access to abundant labeled data
from the target elevator scenario. Therefore, RISE-DT has to learn
from a source elevator scenario, where data are not all valuable
in terms of improving the prediction performance of RISE-DT in
target scenario. This inspires us to utilize UQfor selecting the most
uncertain samples for transfer learning. The overview of the UQ
component of RISE-DT is presented in Figure 2, which contains
two types of modules: Uncertainty Toolbox Modules andMulti-head
Attention Modules .
Uncertainty Toolbox is a tool for predictive UQ. In RISE-DT , we
use it to calculate two metrics for each sample: calibration 𝑐and
sharpness𝑠. We normalize these two metrics into the range of (0,1),
making the addition of these metrics feasible. We define a new
metric𝑚as the weighted sum of these two metrics, as shown in
Equation 15, where 𝜆is a hyperparameter.
𝑚=𝜆𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑐)+(1−𝜆)𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑠) (15)
With this metric, we can rank all the samples we have and select
𝑀samples with the highest uncertainty scores with Equation 16
𝑈′=𝑡𝑜𝑝([𝑢0,𝑢1,...,𝑢𝑛]) (16)
Multi-head Attention. Though with UQ, we identify high uncer-
tain (therefore most valuable) samples in the source domain, we
cannot completely ignore other samples. Doing so will lose infor-
mation about context and time. Therefore, we use a multi-head
attention module [57] to encode this information into sample vec-
tors. This attention module has two sub-modules: attention module
and feed-forward module.
Attention Module takes most uncertain samples 𝑈′as the input and
uses positional encoding to incorporate position information as
shown in Equation 17.
𝑈′=𝑈′+𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 _𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑈′) (17)
We duplicate this vector into three identical vectors and perform
a linear transformation on them. The outputs of this transforma-
tion are:𝑈𝑘,𝑈𝑣and𝑈𝑞.𝑈𝑘and𝑈𝑣are for calculating the atten-
tion weight of each vector. With this weight, we then calculate a
weighted sum of 𝑈𝑞. Equation 18 shows the calculation of attention.
𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 _𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 =𝑈𝑣𝑈𝑇
𝑣 (18)
𝑈𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 _𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑈𝑣 (19)
Then, a residual connection between the input vectors and the
output of attention module is built, as shown in Equation 20.
𝑈𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑈′+𝑈𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛) (20)
Feed-forward Module takes the output of attention module as its
input and feeds it into a feed-forward network (Equation 21).
𝑈=𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑈𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (21)
𝑈𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑑=𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑢(𝑈) (22)Then, a residual connection between the attention output and the
feed-forward output is built (Equation 23).
𝑈𝑜𝑢𝑡=𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒(𝑈𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑈𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑑) (23)
3.3 Transfer Learning
With the encoded samples generated in Section 3.2, transfer learning
transfers knowledge from the source elevator scenario to the target
one, by aligning vectors. As shown in Figure 2, transfer learning
calculates two types of losses: marginal and conditional distribution
loss, which align data distributions and prediction distributions,
respectively. Reducing these two losses brings both the source and
target vectors into an intermediate space, which represents the
common knowledge shared between the two elevator scenarios.
For marginal distribution loss, we calculate the KL-divergence
of the output vectors from the GRU layers of the source and target
domains, as shown in Equation 24.
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐾𝐿=∑︁
𝑢𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒
𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑢𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑖(24)
For conditional distribution loss, we calculate the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD) of the prediction layer outputs from the source
and target domains, as shown in Equation 25.
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑀𝑀𝐷 =||1
𝑛𝑠𝑛𝑠∑︁
𝑖=1𝑢𝑠
𝑖−1
𝑛𝑡𝑛𝑡∑︁
𝑖=1𝑢𝑡
𝑖|| (25)
=𝑇𝑟(𝑈𝑀𝑈𝑇) (26)
These two losses are then summed as the final loss (Equation 27).
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠=𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐾𝐿+𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑀𝑀𝐷 (27)
4 EXPERIMENT DESIGN
To evaluate RISE-DT , we propose four research questions (RQs), as
discussed in Section 4.1, followed by the introduction of the subject
system employed (Section 4.2). Section 4.3 presents the evaluation
metrics and statistical tests used in this paper. Section 4.4 discusses
how we chose hyperparameters and about experiment execution.
4.1 Research Questions
The four RQs are described in Table 1. RQ1 evaluates if RISE-DT is
effective in terms of transferring knowledge from a source traffic
template to a target traffic template. With RQ2, we aim to see if
RISE-DT is effective in handling cases in which we only have access
to data generated with an earlier version of an industrial elevator
dispatcher but need to learn a prediction model for the latest version
of the dispatcher. The application contexts of both RQ1 and RQ2
are commonly seen in the real-world operation of elevators. RQ3
evaluates the effectiveness of introducing UQ to RISE-DT , i.e., using
UQ to select uncertain samples from the source data and input
them to transfer learning. RQ4 considers the practical usefulness
ofRISE-DT by evaluating its time cost.
4.2 Subject System
The subject system is from Orona, who provided us with 10 ver-
sions of an elevator dispatcher. Each version is considered as an
individual dispatcher in the rest of the paper. We deployed them in
Elevate, which simulates the procedure of passengers arriving at
1261ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
Table 1: Experiment Design
Scenarios
RQ Metric Type Instance
RQ1: How effective
isRISE-DT when
transferring knowl-
edge across scenarios
with different traffic
templates?MSE UpBest→ LunchBest;
LunchBest→UpBest1
RQ2: How effective
isRISE-DT when
transferring knowl-
edge across scenarios
with different ver-
sions of an elevator
dispatcher?MSE UpWorse→ UpBest;
LunchWorse→LunchBest10
RQ3: Is UQ effective
in transfer learning?MSE UpBest→ LunchBest;
LunchBest→ UpBest;
UpWorse→ UpBest;
LunchWorse→LunchBest11
RQ4: IsRISE-DT
practically useful in
terms of time cost?Time UpBest→ LunchBest;
LunchBest→ UpBest;
UpWorse→ UpBest;
LunchWorse→LunchBest11
floors, making calls, boarding arrived elevators, making car calls,
and arriving destinations. Elevate provides interfaces that allow us
to simulate various elevator scenarios. We consider the following
four elevator scenarios: LunchBest (orLunchWorse ) denoting the
scenario of the best (or a worse) elevator dispatcher operating dur-
ing lunch peak (12:15pm - 13:15pm), while UpBest (orUpWorse )
denoting the best (or a worse) elevator dispatcher operating during
up peak (8:30am - 9:30am).
4.3 Metrics and Statistical Tests
4.3.1 Mean Squared Error (MSE). Since RISE-DT predicts the wait-
ing time for each passenger, we employ MSE– a commonly used
metric for regression prediction tasks, which computes the average
square of errors. Let 𝑌be the vector of observed values and ˆ𝑌be
the predicted value. MSE is defined as in Equation 15.
𝑀𝑆𝐸 =1
𝑛𝑛∑︁
𝑖−1(𝑌𝑖−ˆ𝑌𝑖)2(28)
4.3.2 Uncertainty. To answer RQ2, we need to calculate the uncer-
tainty of each neural network model of the DT corresponding to
each dispatcher with Equation 29.
𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖)=Í𝑛−1
𝑗=0𝑚𝑗
𝑛(29)
where𝑚𝑗denotes the uncertainty value for sample 𝑗as in Equation
15. The uncertainty of each sample is calculated based on the pre-
diction distribution produced by the neural network model of the
DT of each dispatcher. Hence, the calculated sample uncertainty
can also reflect the uncertainty of the dispatcher.4.3.3 Training Time. We used training time for the evaluation of
cost. To this end, we consider two types of training time: pretrain-
ing time and fine-tuning time, as RISE-DT has these two phases
(Figure 1). Let 𝑆be the source elevator scenario and 𝑇be the target
elevator scenario for transfer learning. Pretraining of RISE-DT is
performed on 𝑁scenarios that do not include 𝑆and𝑁. We define
convergence time for one transfer as in Equation 30.
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 =𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑙𝑦 _𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔 _𝑒𝑛𝑑−𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 (30)
In Equation 31, we calculate the pretraining time by summing
the convergence time on each single transfer.
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 =𝑁∑︁
𝑖=0𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑆𝑖,𝑇𝑖) (31)
where𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑙𝑦 _𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔 _𝑒𝑛𝑑denotes the early stopping time point
(no improvement for 5 consecutive epochs) and 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 denotes
the starting time point of training. Equation 32 defines the fine-
tuning time as convergence time on source 𝑆and target𝑇.
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑛𝑒 =𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑆,𝑇) (32)
4.3.4 Statistical Testing. To deal with randomness in neural net-
work training, we repeat each experiment 30 times and perform
the Mann-Whitney U test [ 2] to study the statistical significance of
the improvements. We test all the pair-wise comparisons ( Method
AandMethod B ) in each RQ. The null hypothesis is that there is
no significant difference between the two methods. If the null hy-
pothesis is rejected, we conclude that Method A andMethod B are
not equivalent. Furthermore, we follow the suggestions in [ 2] and
choose the Vargha and Delaney’s A12 as the effect size. A12 shows
the chances that Method A will get better results than Method B . If
A12 is greater than 0.5, we can conclude that Method A has a higher
chance of getting better results than Method B , and vice versa. We
also use the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient to evaluate
the correlation between dispatcher uncertainty and MSE [ 27] (Sec-
tion 5.5). Spearman correlation is a non-parametric measure which
is calculated with the rankings of two variables. The correlation
coefficient tends to be high if observations from the two variables
have a similar rank relative position label and vice versa. This value
takes values between −1and1.
4.4 Settings and Execution
Manually assigning hyperparameter values can introduce bias. To
reduce such bias, we performed a 10-fold cross validation to se-
lect a best hyperparameters: splitting the dataset into 10 chunks
sequentially, with the first 9 of them used for training and the last
for validation. As a result, we set the weight of calibration and
sharpness𝜆as 0.9, the hidden size as 350, and used the bidirectional
2 layers GRU in both of the DTM and DTC of RISE-DT . The neural
network layers were built with the PyTorch framework [ 41]. The
experiments were performed on one node from Simula Research
Laboratory’s eX3 infrastructure with 2x Intel Xeon Platinum 8186,
1x NVIDIA V100 GPUs.
1262Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
5 RESULTS AND ANALYSES
In this section, we provide results and analyses for answering each
RQ, followed by the threats to validity.
5.1 RQ1–Transferring Knowledge across
Scenarios With Different Traffic Templates
We compare RISE-DT with and without transfer learning in two
setups: from scenario UpBest to LunchBest and from LunchBest to
UpBest. We observe from Table 2 that transfer learning from UpBest
to LunchBest improves MSE by 26.97 (149.08-122.13), whereas
from LunchBest to UpBest the MSE improvement is 21.350 (153.49-
132.14). The p-values for both scenarios are smaller than 1𝑒−3sug-
gesting that RISE-DT with transfer learning is significantly better
than RISE-DT without transfer learning in the context of transfer-
ring across traffic templates, which we call traffic-template-variant
transfer in short. The A12 values show that RISE-DT with transfer
learning has a higher probability of yielding better results than
RISE-DT without transfer learning since both A12 values are less
than 0.5. Furthermore, with UQ, MSE is further reduced (see Table
2) for both scenarios. The top two boxplots in Figure 3 show the
MSE distributions of the two traffic-template-variant transfers. We
observe that the distributions with transfer learning have less vari-
ance than those without transfer learning, suggesting that with UQ
the transfer of knowledge seems more reliable.
Conclusion: RQ1
We observe an improvement in terms of MSE and a reduc-
tion of variance when comparing RISE-DT without and with
traffic-template-variant transfer learning. Thus, RISE-DT with
transfer learning can effectively transfer knowledge across
elevator DTs built for different traffic templates.
Table 2: Results for traffic-template-variant transfer learning
for two scenarios (RQ1). W/oandWdenote without and with.
UpBest->LunchBest LunchBest->UpBest
Mean p-value A12 Mean p-value A12
W/o transfer 149.08 - - 153.49 - -
W/ transfer 122.10 0 0 132.14 0 0.14
W/ UQ 117.95 0 0.14 130.33 1.7e-3 0.28
5.2 RQ2–Transferring Knowledge across
Scenarios With Different Dispatchers
Table 3 shows the results of transferring knowledge across sce-
narios with different dispatchers, which we call dispatcher-variant
transfer learning in short. We performed experiments on 10 eleva-
tor scenarios with worse performance than our best dispatcher. The
third row in Table 3 presents the MSE metric of RISE-DT on the Up-
peak (149.076) and Lunchpeak (153.49) traffic templates of the best
dispatcher. We performed 10 separate experiments, transferring
knowledge from 10 worse performing dispatchers to the best one.
By doing so, the best dispatcher can gain knowledge about worse-
performing dispatchers’ specific cases that are rarely seen in their
own scenario data. We can observe from Table 3 that transfer learn-
Figure 3: MSE results (in boxplots) of the 30 runs of the traffic-
template transfer learning (RQ1) and the dispatcher-variant
transfer learning (the bottom two figures) (RQ2).
ing from all the 10 dispatchers to the best one brings a reduction
of MSE with the Uppeak traffic template by 15.58 (149.08-133.50)
and Lunchpeak traffic template by 15.57 (153.49-137.92), on average.
With Uppeak, transferring from dispatcher 2 reaches the lowest
MSE as 122.07, while transferring from dispatcher 7 reaches the
lowest MSE as 130.904 with Lunchpeak. Statistical testing results
for these dispatcher-variant transfers show that most p-values are
smaller than 1e-2 (except for dispatcher 5 with Lunchpeak), indicat-
ing that transfer learning from the worst-performing dispatchers to
the best one improves MSE significantly. Most of the A12 results are
also strong, i.e., much lower than 0.5. One plausible explanation is
because of the increased data volume. More specifically, with trans-
fer learning, RISE-DT takes advantage of data from elevator scenar-
ios that are previously unavailable, which, as similar to data aug-
mentation, increases data volume and hence potentially improves
the performance of deep neural networks [ 49]. Moreover, in our
context, best-performing dispatchers refer to newer versions of dis-
patchers, which does not necessarily mean that a best-performing
dispatcher has all the information of a worst-performing dispatcher.
Conclusion: RQ2
We observe an improvement of MSE for both the Uppeak
and Lunchpeak traffic templates, when comparing RISE-DT
with and without dispatcher-variant transfer learning. Thus,
RISE-DT can effectively transfer knowledge across different
elevator DTs built corresponding to different dispatchers.
5.3 RQ3–Effectiveness of UQ
We evaluate the effectiveness of UQ in both traffic-template-variant
and dispatcher-variant transfer learning. From the last row of Ta-
ble 2, we can observe that, for traffic-template-variant transfer learn-
ing, UQ improves transfer learning from UpBest to LunchBest by
1263ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
4.16 (122.10-117.95) and from LunchBest to UpBest by 1.81 (132.14-
130.33), respectively. Statistical test results show that both improve-
ments are statistically significant, with confidence level equal to
99%, p-values smaller than 1𝑒−3, and strong A12 values (being
0.14 and 0.28, respectively, which are lower than 0.5).
Table 3 shows that UQ generally improves dispatcher-variant
transfer learning on average by 4.46 (133.50-129.04) and 4.24 (137.92-
133.68), for the Uppeak and Lunchpeak, respectively. Transferring
from dispatcher 2 to our best dispatcher reaches the lowest MSE as
120.41 for Uppeak, while for Lunchpeak, dispatcher 10 achieved the
lowest MSE. The results are statistically significant for most of the
cases except for dispatcher 5 with Lunchpeak. This means that UQ is
effective in boosting transfer learning’s performance in dispatcher-
variant transfer learning. Moreover, the A12 values mostly are much
lower than 0.5 (except for dispatcher 5 with Lunchpeak), telling
that RISE-DT with UQ has a better chance of yielding better MSE.
Conclusion: RQ3
We observe significant improvement of MSE, hence, the bene-
fit of introducing UQ to transfer learning across traffic tem-
plates and dispatchers.
Table 3: Results for dispatcher-variant transfer learning (RQ2
and RQ3). The lowest values are highlighted in bold. Disp
denotes dispatcher; W/oandWdenote without and with UQ.
Uppeak Lunchpeak
Disp UQ MSE p-value A12 MSE p-value A12
Best W/o 149.08 - - 153.49 - -
1W/o 125.38 <1e-3 0 132.26 <1e-3 0
W 122.22 <1e-3 0.03 131.10 3e-3 0.28
2W/o 122.07 <1e-3 0 138.75 <1e-3 0
W 120.41 <1e-3 0.14 131.40 <1e-3 0
3W/o 126.37 <1e-3 0 144.96 <1e-3 0
W 124.95 <1e-3 0.16 141.14 <1e-3 0.05
4W/o 126.83 <1e-3 0 141.56 <1e-3 0
W 120.85 <1e-3 0 137.44 <1e-3 0.01
5W/o 126.12 <1e-3 0 151.27 0.21 0.43
W 121.87 <1e-3 0 147.79 <1e-3 0.29
6W/o 146.90 <1e-3 0.30 134.40 <1e-3 0
W 135.66 <1e-3 0 131.01 <1e-3 0.01
7W/o 143.54 <1e-3 0 130.90 <1e-3 0
W 139.68 <1e-3 0.01 129.27 <1e-3 0.27
8W/o 140.27 <1e-3 0 136.02 <1e-3 0
W 132.39 <1e-3 0 132.92 <1e-3 0.04
9W/o 136.96 <1e-3 0 135.34 <1e-3 0
W 135.43 0.001 0.26 128.09 <1e-3 0
10W/o 140.53 <1e-3 0 133.71 <1e-3 0
W 136.98 <1e-3 0 126.69 <1e-3 0
AverageW/o 133.50 - - 137.92 - -
W 129.04 - - 133.69 - -
5.4 RQ4–Time Cost
We measure the time cost of the pretraining and fine-tuning phases
ofRISE-DT . Table 2 shows results for the four transfers: UpBest
to LunchBest and LunchBest to UpBest for traffic-template-variant
transfer learning, and UpWorse to UpBest and LunchWorse to
LunchBest for dispatcher-variant transfer learning.The pretraining times for all the four transfers are between 50.1
and 65.4 hours, which are practically acceptable considering that
pretraining is performed only once. In the fine-tuning phase, col-
umn w/o Transfer shows the time required to build the DT directly
from elevator scenario data. Columns Transfer andTransfer+UQ
show the time spent on transferring knowledge of the DT with and
without UQ. RISE-DT without transfer learning took the maximum
of 4.1 hours (LunchBest->UpBest), while RISE-DT with transfer
learning (but without UQ) took only 1.4 hours in the worst case
(LunchWorse->LunchBest). We argue that this reduction of time
cost is due to the transferred knowledge from other elevator sce-
narios, which helps RISE-DT find the optimal parameters faster
compared to random initialization. The time cost for transfer learn-
ing with UQ is increased as applying it introduces a complex neural
network module (i.e. the Multi-head attention module, Figure 2).
Conclusion: RQ4
Time cost of RISE-DT is practically acceptable and lower than
time required for building DTs from scratch, i.e., without using
transfer learning. Thus, deploying RISE-DT in real world is
feasible in terms of time cost.
Table 4: Results of time cost in hours (RQ4)
Pretraining Fine-tuning
Transfer Time w/o Transfer w/ Transfer Transfer + UQ
UpBest -> LunchBest 62.3h 3.7h 1.2h 1.5h
LunchBest -> UpBest 65.4h 4.1h 1.2h 1.5h
UpWorse -> UpBest 58.5h 2.9h 1.1h 1.3h
LunchWorse -> LunchBest 50.1h 2.7h 1.4h 1.9h
5.5 Discussion
Transfer Learning–An Effective Mechanism to Transfer
Knowledge across DTs. The results of RQ1 and RQ2 (Section
5.1 and Section 5.5) showed that RISE-DT is effective on perform-
ing both traffic-template-variant and dispatcher-variant transfer
learning. There are two main reasons. First, transfer learning intro-
duces more data for training, which, to a certain extent, alleviates
over-fitting in neural networks due to insufficient training data.
We have access to several elevator scenarios, but each elevator
scenario differs in either dispatcher or traffic template. As a result,
this difference leads to discrepancies in elevator scenario data dis-
tribution. Directly training target RISE-DT with data from other
elevator scenarios can cause a reduction of performance due to this
discrepancy. Transfer learning elegantly tackles this challenge by
aligning the source and target data distribution in an intermediate
space (Section 3.3). In particular, we align the data by reducing both
marginal and conditional loss, which, as a result, generates a new
set of vectors with minimal discrepancy between the source and
target data. These vectors identify the common knowledge shared
between source and target data, and thus complete the transfer
learning. Second, the source elevator scenario is different from the
target elevator scenario, but related; therefore, transfer learning
can find common knowledge shared between them. Such common
knowledge increases the generalization ability in our model, as
1264Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Figure 4: Correlations of mean MSE and uncertainty
learning from multiple sources of data prevents models from con-
verging quickly on a single dataset [10].
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ)–An Effective Mechanism
to Improve the Accuracy of Knowledge Transfer across DTs.
The results of RQ3 (Section 5.3) show that UQ further improves the
effectiveness of transfer learning. Though UQ was mainly devel-
oped to evaluate a model’s robustness [ 1], we use it to select the
most uncertain samples since such samples contain important (in
terms of uncertainty) information that can improve the effective-
ness of transfer learning. This idea is very similar to importance
sampling in statistics, which has been applied in deep learning
for optimizing RNNs, CNNs, etc. [ 30], where weights are assigned
based on the variance of each sample. In the future, in addition to
UQ, we will investigate other importance sampling mechanisms to
further enhance the effectiveness of transfer learning.
Strong Correlation between MSE and Uncertainty. We noted
that the MSE values vary from dispatcher to dispatcher. We make
an assumption that this difference is correlated with dispatchers’
uncertainties. To test the assumption, we calculated the uncertainty
for each dispatcher with Equation 29, and plotted the correlation
in Figure 3. The Spearman’s correlation rank values for Uppeak
and Lunchpeak are 0.79 and 0.77, respectively, indicating a strong
positive correlation between uncertainty and MSE. The p-values
are 0.00096 and 0.014, which indicate that the correlations are sta-
tistically significant. The grey areas in both figures present the 95%
confidence interval. In both figures, only two data points fall out
of the grey area. Based on this result, we can then recommend to
calculate the uncertainty of a dispatcher with experimental data
before its deployment, which could potentially indicate its MSE in
operation and thus improve the safety and security of the elevator
system at an early stage.
Practical Implications. First, our work is valuable for Orona
since the DTs developed with RISE-DT can be used as a prior knowl-
edge to test or assess a new dispatcher before deploying it in the
real operation. Thus, DTs built with transferred knowledge will
facilitate the evolution and maintenance of new dispatcher versions.
Second, transferring knowledge of DTs for different elevator sce-
narios will reduce the development and maintenance cost of DTs,
as our experiments also demonstrated. Third, our results with UQ
provide evidence showing that uncertainty can affect the predic-
tions made with DTs; thus, the industry shall consider uncertainties
explicitly during the design, development, and operation of elevator
systems and their corresponding DTs.5.6 Threats to Validity
We identify four key threats to the validity. First, our experiments
were conducted on a simulator of elevator. Though the interfaces
provided by this simulator allow us to choose from real industrial
elevator dispatcher and elevator scenarios, it is SiL, thus different
from elevator systems operating in the real world. However, using
Elevate is the current practice of our industrial partner Orona and
SiL is a common practice in many domains. Second, we use trans-
fer learning and UQ. For transfer learning, we align data from the
source and target elevator scenario. For UQ, we use Uncertainty
Toolbox. We are aware that there are other methods and techniques
that could accomplish transfer learning (e.g. Bayesian methods [ 35])
and UQ (e.g. Uncertainty Wizard [ 61]). In the future, we will exper-
iment with such techniques. Third, we use only MSE for evaluating
the effectiveness of the waiting time prediction. We choose this
metric because this is a commonly used metric in regression pre-
diction tasks. However, we are aware of other metrics such as Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) [ 9] and Coefficient of determination
(𝑅2score) [ 29], which will be investigated in the future. Fourth, the
core neural network used in our DT building is GRU. We know that
there are other sequences models, e.g., RNN [ 48] and LSTM [ 48].
We performed preliminary experiments on these sequence models
but results show that GRU performs better.
6 RELATED WORK
We discuss the related work from three aspects: CPS and DTs (Sec-
tion 6.1), transfer learning (Section 6.2) and UQ (Section 6.3).
6.1 Cyber-physical Systems and DTs
Passenger waiting time has already been an important QoS indicator
of elevators, there have been several works proposed for reducing
it by optimizing elevator scheduling algorithms [ 17,22,54] with
dynamic fuzzy logic, evolution algorithm, etc. To compare with
these works, our goal is about predicting passenger waiting time,
not reducing/optimizing it, which, we consider, is about evolving
industrial elevators themselves.
When looking at CPS, in general, they are typically susceptible
to risks from the physical and cyber spaces. To mitigate such risks,
many security and safety enhancement techniques have been pro-
posed, e.g., [ 5,28,37,43]. Along with the increased deep learning
use to enhance CPS security and safety [ 31,50,62], more and more
researchers and practitioners realize that obtaining labeled data for
real world CPS is very expensive, even infeasible in some contexts.
The scarcity of labeled data hinders the training process of deep
learning models. Thus, in this paper, we follow this research line by
designing RISE-DT as a deep learning method. RISE-DT introduces
transfer learning and UQ to mitigate the challenge of the scarcity
of labeled data in the CPS domain.
Moreover, security and safety risks evolve over time. The liter-
ature mostly focus on statically training models with offline CPS
log data (e.g., [ 26,46]), which is vulnerable to previously-unknown
attacks or faults [ 36]. CPS in operation, continuously generates
data, which can potentially evolve a statically generated method
to identify emerging security and safety issues. However, most
existing methods can not take advantage of this newly generated
data without full-scale retraining. DT technologies bring a novel
1265ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
way to overcome this challenge by synchronizing with CPS in real-
time [ 6,7,14,18–20,55]. Particularly, Bécue et al. [ 6] proposed to
use DTs for analyzing how CPS should be engineered under attack.
Eckhart et al. [ 18] equipped DTs with logic and network features,
for analyzing if an attacker can compromise programmable logic
controllers. Bitton et al. [ 7] proposed to perform tests on a DT, in-
stead of real CPS. Damjanovic-Behrendt [ 14] used DTs for privacy
assessment of real smart car systems. These works show the supe-
riority of DT technologies. But, to the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to focus on building DTs for elevator systems waiting
time prediction.
6.2 Transfer Learning
There are four strategies for transfer learning. The model control
strategy performs transfer learning at the model level. For instance,
Duan et al. [ 16] proposed Domain Adaptation Machine (DAM),
which uses multiple source domain data, builds a classifier for
each domain, and adopts regularizers to control the complexity of
the final model. The parameter control strategy assumes that the
parameters of a model reflect the knowledge it has learned. For
instance, Zhuang et al. [ 69] proposed a transfer learning approach
for text classification, which shares parameters directly between
the source and target models. The model ensemble strategy performs
transfer learning by combining several source models together. For
example, Gao et al. [ 23] proposed to train several weak classifiers of
different model structures on multiple source domains and compute
the final model as a weighted vote of these weak classifiers. Deep
learning transfer techniques transfer knowledge between two deep
learning models, by aligning the representations of corresponding
layers from the source and target models. Along this line, Zhuang et
al. [69] proposed transfer learning with autoencoder, which aligns
reconstruction, distribution and regression representations. Tzeng
et al. [ 56] extended this method by adding an adaptation layer. Long
et al. [ 34] performed this alignment in multiple layers in their model
Deep Adaptation Networks.
In conclusion, model control and parameter control strategies
are early strategies that perform knowledge transfer with intu-
itive methods such as adding regularizer and sharing parameters.
Their performance is as good as model ensemble and deep learning
transfer techniques. Model ensemble works the best with multiple
heterogeneous source domains and requires a lot of computing
resources. Deep learning transfer techniques works for transferring
knowledge between two neural network models. Since our RISE-DT
is a neural network-based DT, we follow this research line, and
align the representation of the GRU layer and prediction layer.
6.3 Uncertainty Quantification and Analyses
Many UQ methods are based on Bayesian techniques. For instance,
Wang et al. [ 59] proposed to use the probability theory to interpret
parameters of neural networks. Later on, Srivastava et al. [ 51] used
Monte Carlo dropout as a regularization term for the prediction
uncertainty computation to avoid posterior probability calculation.
Salakhutdinov et al. [ 44] proposed a stochastic gradient Markov
chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) method, which only needs to es-
timate the gradient on small sets of mini-batches requiring far
less computing than estimating the posterior distribution directly.Neural networks are also being used for estimating the posterior
distribution. For instance, Ghosh et al. [ 24] proposed a variational
autoencoder (VAE) with an encoder and decoder both having the
neural network structure. Other UQ methods include deep Gaussian
processes [13] and ensemble-based UQ [33].
Several open-source UQ tools are available to use. Uncertainty
wizard [ 61] is a TensorFlow Keras plugin supporting common quan-
tification methods, e.g., Bayesian and ensemble-based methods. Un-
certain toolbox [ 12] is built on Pytorch also providing commonly
applied Bayesian and ensemble UQ methods, along with other
metrics such as calibration, sharpness and accuracy. We opted for
Uncertainty Toolbox because our model is coded with the Pytorch
library, which makes it easier to use a Pytorch-based tool like un-
certainty toolbox.
Generic UQ methods encourage researchers to employ them in
specific application domains. For instance, Catak et al. [ 8] proposed
NIRVANA for prediction validation of deep learning models based
on uncertainty metrics. In addition, in the domain of CPS, some
methods have been proposed to enable uncertainty-aware analyses.
For instance, Han et al. [ 32] proposed an approach to systematically
classify uncertainties with the Cynefin framework and assess the
robustness of industrial elevator systems based on uncertainty
classification results. Zhang et al. [ 65–68] proposed a series of
methods in dealing with CPS uncertainties.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We propose RISE-DT to build DTs of industrial elevators with neural
networks to support the evolution of DTs. RISE-DT employs transfer
learning with Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) to learn knowledge
from source elevator scenario and perform accurate predictions
on target elevator scenario with DT. We conducted experiments
with four different types of scenarios and 10 different dispatchers.
The results showed an average reduction of mean square error of
13.131% with transfer learning and a further reduction of 2.71% with
UQ, which proves the effectiveness of both transfer learning and
UQ. In the future, we will employ adversarial samples for transfer
learning, which can potentially further improve the performance
since more data will be included in the source domain. Moreover,
we want to explore additional transfer learning techniques, DT
construction methods, and UQ techniques followed by performing
more comprehensive experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Qinghua Xu is supported by the security project funded by the Nor-
wegian Ministry of Education and Research. Shaukat Ali and Tao
Yue are supported by Horizon 2020 project ADEPTNESS (871319)
funded by the European Commission and project Co-tester (#314544)
funded by Research Council of Norway.
REFERENCES
[1]Moloud Abdar, Farhad Pourpanah, Sadiq Hussain, Dana Rezazadegan, Li Liu, Mo-
hammad Ghavamzadeh, Paul Fieguth, Xiaochun Cao, Abbas Khosravi, U. Rajendra
Acharya, Vladimir Makarenkov, and Saeid Nahavandi. 2021. A review of uncer-
tainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges.
Information Fusion 76 (2021), 243–297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.008
arXiv:2011.06225
[2]Andrea Arcuri and Lionel Briand. 2011. A practical guide for using statistical
tests to assess randomized algorithms in software engineering. Proceedings -
1266Uncertainty-Aware Transfer Learning to Evolve Digital Twins for Industrial Elevators ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
International Conference on Software Engineering (2011), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1985793.1985795
[3]Aitor Arrieta, Jon Ayerdi, Miren Illarramendi, Aitor Agirre, Goiuria Sagardui,
and Maite Arratibel. 2021. Using Machine Learning to Build Test Oracles: an
Industrial Case Study on Elevators Dispatching Algorithms. 30–39. https://doi.
org/10.1109/AST52587.2021.00012
[4]Jon Ayerdi, Sergio Segura, Aitor Arrieta, Goiuria Arratibel, and Maite Arratibel.
2020. QoS-aware Metamorphic Testing: An Elevation Case Study. 104–114.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE5003.2020.00019
[5]Ayan Banerjee, Krishna Venkatasubramanian, Tridib Mukherjee, and Sandeep
Gupta. 2012. Ensuring Safety, Security, and Sustainability of Mission-Critical
Cyber-Physical Systems. Proc. IEEE 100 (10 2012), 283–299. https://doi.org/10.
1109/JPROC.2011.2165689
[6]A Bécue, Y Fourastier, I Praça, A Savarit, C Baron, B Gradussofs, E Pouille, and C
Thomas. 2018. CyberFactory#1 — Securing the industry 4.0 with cyber-ranges and
digital twins. In 2018 14th IEEE International Workshop on Factory Communication
Systems (WFCS) . 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/WFCS.2018.8402377
[7]Ron Bitton, Tomer Gluck, Orly Stan, Masaki Inokuchi, Yoshinobu Ohta, Yoshiyuki
Yamada, Tomohiko Yagyu, Yuval Elovici, and Asaf Shabtai. 2018. Deriving a Cost-
Effective Digital Twin of an ICS to Facilitate Security Evaluation: 23rd European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security, ESORICS 2018, Barcelona, Spain,
September 3-7, 2018, Proceedings, Part I. 533–554. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-99073-6_26
[8]Ferhat Ozgur Catak, Tao Yue, and Shaukat Ali. 2022. Uncertainty-Aware Pre-
diction Validator in Deep Learning Models for Cyber-Physical System Data.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 31 (01 2022). https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3527451
[9]Tianfeng Chai and R. Draxler. 2014. Root mean square error (RMSE) or mean
absolute error (MAE)? Geosci. Model Dev. 7 (01 2014). https://doi.org/10.5194/
gmdd-7-1525-2014
[10] Quanjun Chen, Xuan Song, Harutoshi Yamada, and Ryosuke Shibasaki. 2016.
Learning Deep Representation from Big and Heterogeneous Data for Traffic
Accident Inference. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
30 (02 2016). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10011
[11] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
Empirical Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1412.3555
[12] Youngseog Chung, Ian Char, Han Guo, Jeff Schneider, and Willie Neiswanger.
2021. Uncertainty Toolbox: an Open-Source Library for Assessing, Visualizing,
and Improving Uncertainty Quantification. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
2109.10254
[13] Andreas C. Damianou and Neil D. Lawrence. 2012. Deep Gaussian Processes.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1211.0358
[14] Violeta Damjanovic-Behrendt. 2018. A Digital Twin-based Privacy Enhancement
Mechanism for the Automotive Industry. In 2018 International Conference on
Intelligent Systems (IS) . 272–279. https://doi.org/10.1109/IS.2018.8710526
[15] Ludovic Denoyer and Patrick Gallinari. 2014. Deep Sequential Neural Network.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1410.0510
[16] Lixin Duan, Ivor Tsang, Dong Xu, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2009. Domain adaptation
from multiple sources via auxiliary classifiers. Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference On Machine Learning, ICML 2009 382, 37. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1553374.1553411
[17] Mahir Dursun. 2010. Estimation Of Passenger Waiting Time In Elevator Systems
With Artificial Neural Network. Intelligent Automation & Soft Computing 16 (01
2010), 101–110. https://doi.org/10.1080/10798587.2010.10643067
[18] Matthias Eckhart and Andreas Ekelhart. 2018. Securing Cyber-Physical Systems
through Digital Twins. Ercim News 115 (2018), 22–23.
[19] Matthias Eckhart and Andreas Ekelhart. 2018. A Specification-based State Replica-
tion Approach for Digital Twins. 36–47. https://doi.org/10.1145/3264888.3264892
[20] Matthias Eckhart and Andreas Ekelhart. 2018. Towards Security-Aware Virtual
Environments for Digital Twins. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Cyber-
Physical System Security (Incheon, Republic of Korea) (CPSS ’18) . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 61–72. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3198458.3198464
[21] Abdulmotaleb El Saddik. 2018. Digital Twins: The Convergence of Multimedia
Technologies. IEEE MultiMedia 25 (04 2018), 87–92. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MMUL.2018.023121167
[22] J. Fernandez, Pablo Cortés, Jesús Muñuzuri, and J. Guadix. 2014. Dynamic Fuzzy
Logic Elevator Group Control System With Relative Waiting Time Consideration.
Industrial Electronics, IEEE Transactions on 61 (09 2014), 4912–4919. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TIE.2013.2289867
[23] Jing Gao, Wei Fan, Jing Jiang, and Jiawei Han. 2008. Knowledge transfer via
multiple model local structure mapping. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 283–291.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1401890.1401928
[24] Partha Ghosh, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Antonio Vergari, Michael Black, and Bernhard
Schölkopf. 2019. From Variational to Deterministic Autoencoders. https:
//doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1903.12436[25] Tilmann Gneiting, Fadoua Balabdaoui, and Adrian E Raftery. 2007. Probabilistic
forecasts, calibration and sharpness. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Statistical Methodology) 69, 2 (2007), 243–268. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
9868.2007.00587.x
[26] Yoshiyuki Harada, Yoriyuki Yamagata, Osamu Mizuno, and Eun Hye Choi. 2017.
Log-based anomaly detection of CPS using a statistical method. Proceedings - 8th
IEEE International Workshop on Empirical Software Engineering in Practice, IWESEP
2017 (2017), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/IWESEP.2017.12 arXiv:1701.03249
[27] Jan Hauke and Tomasz Kossowski. 2011. Comparison of Values of Pearson’s
and Spearman’s Correlation Coefficients on the Same Sets of Data. Quaestiones
Geographicae 30 (06 2011), 87–93. https://doi.org/10.2478/v10117-011-0021-1
[28] Abdulmalik Humayed, Jingqiang Lin, Fengjun Li, and Bo Luo. 2017. Cyber-
physical systems security—A survey. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 4, 6 (2017),
1802–1831. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2017.2703172
[29] Julian Karch. 2020. Improving on Adjusted R-Squared. Collabra: Psychology 6 (09
2020), 45. https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.343
[30] Angelos Katharopoulos and Francois Fleuret. 2018. Not All Samples Are Created
Equal: Deep Learning with Importance Sampling. In Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, Vol. 80) , Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (Eds.). PMLR, 2525–2534.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/katharopoulos18a.html
[31] Jay Lee, Moslem Azamfar, Jaskaran Singh, and Shahin Siahpour. 2020. Integration
of digital twin and deep learning in cyber-physical systems: towards smart
manufacturing. IET Collaborative Intelligent Manufacturing 2, 1 (2020), 34–36.
https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-cim.2020.0009
[32] Han Liping, Yue Tao, Ali Shaukat, Arrieta Aitor, and Arratibel Maite. 2022. Are
Elevator Software Robust Against Uncertainties? Results and Experiences from
an Industrial Case Study. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering . https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.355895
[33] Jeremiah Liu, John Paisley, Marianthi-Anna Kioumourtzoglou, and Brent Coull.
2019. Accurate uncertainty estimation and decomposition in ensemble learning.
advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019). https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.1911.04061
[34] Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. 2015. Learning
transferable features with deep adaptation networks. In International conference
on machine learning . PMLR, 97–105. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1502.02791
[35] Jie Lu, Vahid Behbood, Peng Hao, Hua Zuo, Shan Xue, and Guangquan Zhang.
2015. Transfer learning using computational intelligence: A survey. Knowledge-
Based Systems 80 (2015), 14–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2015.01.010
[36] Yuan Luo, Ya Xiao, Long Cheng, Guojun Peng, and Danfeng Daphne Yao.
2020. Deep Learning-Based Anomaly Detection in Cyber-Physical Systems:
Progress and Opportunities. 1, 1 (2020), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453155
arXiv:2003.13213
[37] Chen Lv, Yang Xing, Junzhi Zhang, Xiaoxiang Na, Yutong Li, Teng Liu, Dongpu
Cao, and Fei-Yue Wang. 2017. Levenberg–Marquardt backpropagation training of
multilayer neural networks for state estimation of a safety-critical cyber-physical
system. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 8 (2017), 3436–3446.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2017.2777460
[38] Larry R Medsker and LC Jain. 2001. Recurrent neural networks. Design and
Applications 5 (2001), 64–67. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420049176
[39] Todd A Oliver and Robert D Moser. 2011. Bayesian uncertainty quantification
applied to RANS turbulence models. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series ,
Vol. 318. IOP Publishing, 042032. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/318/4/042032
[40] Seung-Tae Park and Bo-Suk Yang. 2010. An implementation of risk-based inspec-
tion for elevator maintenance. Journal of mechanical science and technology 24,
12 (2010), 2367–2376. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12206-010-1004-1
[41] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al .2019.
Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances
in neural information processing systems 32 (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
1912.01703
[42] R. Renner and S. Wolf. 2004. Smooth Renyi entropy and applications. In In-
ternational Symposium onInformation Theory, 2004. ISIT 2004. Proceedings. 233–.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2004.1365269
[43] Giedre Sabaliauskaite and Aditya P Mathur. 2015. Aligning cyber-physical system
safety and security. In Complex Systems Design & Management Asia . Springer,
41–53. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12544-2_4
[44] Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Andriy Mnih. 2008. Bayesian probabilistic matrix
factorization using Markov chain Monte Carlo. In Proceedings of the 25th interna-
tional conference on Machine learning . 880–887. https://doi.org/10.1145/1390156.
1390267
[45] Roman Schefzik, Thordis L Thorarinsdottir, and Tilmann Gneiting. 2013. Uncer-
tainty quantification in complex simulation models using ensemble copula cou-
pling. Statistical science 28, 4 (2013), 616–640. https://doi.org/10.1214/13-STS443
[46] Tabea Schmidt, Florian Hauer, and Alexander Pretschner. 2020. Automated
Anomaly Detection in CPS Log Files. In International Conference on Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security . Springer, 179–194. https://doi.org/0.1007/978-3-
1267ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Qinghua Xu, Shaukat Ali, Tao Tue, and Maite Arratibel
030-54549-9_12
[47] Erwin Schoitsch. 2012. Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)-What Can We Learn from
Disasters with Respect to Assessment, Evaluation and Certification/Qualification
of" Systems-of-Systems"?. In IDIMT . 69–82.
[48] Alex Sherstinsky. 2020. Fundamentals of recurrent neural network (RNN) and
long short-term memory (LSTM) network. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 404
(2020), 132306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2019.132306
[49] Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. 2019. A survey on image data
augmentation for deep learning. Journal of big data 6, 1 (2019), 1–48. https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0
[50] Daniel Sonntag, Sonja Zillner, Patrick van der Smagt, and András Lörincz. 2017.
Overview of the CPS for smart factories project: Deep learning, knowledge
acquisition, anomaly detection and intelligent user interfaces. In Industrial
internet of things . Springer, 487–504. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42559-
7_19
[51] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. 2014. Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from
overfitting. The journal of machine learning research 15, 1 (2014), 1929–1958.
[52] Timothy John Sullivan. 2015. Introduction to uncertainty quantification . Vol. 63.
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-23395-6
[53] Fei Tao, He Zhang, Ang Liu, and A. Y. C. Nee. 2019. Digital Twin in Industry: State-
of-the-Art. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15, 4 (2019), 2405–2415.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2873186
[54] Emre Oner Tartan, Hamit Erdem, and Ali Berkol. 2014. Optimization of waiting
and journey time in group elevator system using genetic algorithm. In 2014 IEEE
International Symposium on Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications (IN-
ISTA) Proceedings . IEEE, 361–367. https://doi.org/10.1109/INISTA.2014.6873645
[55] Markus Tauber and Christoph Schmittner. 2018. Enabling security and safety
evaluation in industry 4.0 use cases with digital twins. ERCIM News (2018).
[56] Eric Tzeng, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. 2014.
Deep domain confusion: Maximizing for domain invariance. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.3474 (2014). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1412.3474
[57] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems . 5998–6008.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1706.03762
[58] Luis Villar-Fidalgo, Adolfo Crespo Márquez, Vicente González-Prida, Antonio
De la Fuente, Pablo Martínez-Galán, and Antonio Jesús Guillén López. 2018.
Cyber physical systems implementation for asset management improvement: A
framework for the transition. Safety and Reliability–Safe Societies in a Changing
World: Proceedings of ESREL 2018, June 17-21, 2018, Trondheim, Norway (2018).https://doi.org/10.1201/9781351174664-383
[59] Kuan-Chieh Wang, Paul Vicol, James Lucas, Li Gu, Roger Grosse, and Richard
Zemel. 2018. Adversarial distillation of bayesian neural network posteriors. In
International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 5190–5199.
[60] Tian Wang, Jiakun Li, Yingjun Deng, Chuang Wang, Hichem Snoussi, and Fei
Tao. 2021. Digital twin for human-machine interaction with convolutional neural
network. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 34, 7-8
(2021), 888–897. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2021.1925966
[61] Michael Weiss and Paolo Tonella. 2021. Uncertainty-wizard: Fast and user-
friendly neural network uncertainty quantification. In 2021 14th IEEE Conference
on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST) . IEEE, 436–441. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICST49551.2021.00056
[62] Chathurika S Wickramasinghe, Daniel L Marino, Kasun Amarasinghe, and Milos
Manic. 2018. Generalization of deep learning for cyber-physical system security:
A survey. In IECON 2018-44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society . IEEE, 745–751. https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2018.8591773
[63] Yan Xu, Yanming Sun, Xiaolong Liu, and Yonghua Zheng. 2019. A digital-twin-
assisted fault diagnosis using deep transfer learning. Ieee Access 7 (2019), 19990–
19999. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2890566
[64] Tao Yue, Paolo Arcaini, and Shaukat Ali. 2020. Understanding digital twins
for cyber-physical systems: a conceptual model. In International Symposium on
Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods . Springer, 54–71. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-83723-5_5
[65] Man Zhang, Shaukat Ali, and Tao Yue. 2019. Uncertainty-wise test case generation
and minimization for cyber-physical systems. Journal of Systems and Software
153 (2019), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.03.011
[66] Man Zhang, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, Roland Norgren, and Oscar Okariz. 2019.
Uncertainty-wise cyber-physical system test modeling. Software & Systems
Modeling 18, 2 (2019), 1379–1418. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-017-0609-6
[67] Man Zhang, Bran Selic, Shaukat Ali, Tao Yue, Oscar Okariz, and Roland Norgren.
2016. Understanding uncertainty in cyber-physical systems: a conceptual model.
InEuropean conference on modelling foundations and applications . Springer, 247–
264. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42061-5_16
[68] Man Zhang, Tao Yue, Shaukat Ali, Bran Selic, Oscar Okariz, Roland Norgre, and
Karmele Intxausti. 2018. Specifying uncertainty in use case models. Journal of
Systems and Software 144 (2018), 573–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2018.06.
075
[69] Fuzhen Zhuang, Xiaohu Cheng, Ping Luo, Sinno Jialin Pan, and Qing He. 2017.
Supervised representation learning with double encoding-layer autoencoder for
transfer learning. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST)
9, 2 (2017), 1–17.
1268