Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between
Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity
Zachary Karas
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
zackar@umich.eduAndrew Jahn
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
ajahn@umich.edu
Westley Weimer
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
weimerw@umich.eduYu Huang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
yhhy@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
Medical imaging studies of software engineering have risen in
popularity and may reveal the neural underpinnings of coding
activities. To date, however, all studies in computer science venues
have treated brain regions independently and in isolation. Since
most complex neural activity involves coordination among multiple
regions, previous analyses may overlook neural behavior.
We propose to apply functional connectivity analysis to medi-
cal imaging data from software engineering tasks. Informally, this
analysis treats the brain as a graph, rather than a series of indepen-
dent modules, and statistically infers relevant edges. We present a
functional connectivity analysis of existing data, which elucidates
the interconnections between code writing and prose writing, es-
pecially regarding higher mathematics and semantic processing.
First, we found a significant link between Broca’s Area (language)
and the Number Form Area (higher mathematics) for coding. This
both refines previous interpretations that code writing and natural
language are distinct from each other, and may also contribute to
the understanding of the Number Form Area in the Psychology
literature. Second, we identify an area with important functional
connectivity for both prose writing and coding, unlike previous
analyses that associated it with coding. This advances our neural
understanding of coding and prose writing, and was only exposed
by using functional connectivity analysis. Third, for coding, we find
a strong functional connectivity result for a brain region involved in
semantic processing for language, with implications for CS training.
Finally, we find a neural relationship between coding and expertise,
including a more grounded explanation than prior work.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8562-6/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468579CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software creation and man-
agement ;•Social and professional topics →User characteris-
tics.
KEYWORDS
functional connectivity, fMRI, code writing, expertise
ACM Reference Format:
Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang. 2021. Con-
necting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writ-
ing with Functional Connectivity. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Eu-
ropean Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21), August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468579
1 INTRODUCTION
Neuroimaging techniques, such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), provide researchers with a wealth of information
related to brain activity, and are being applied more frequently
to study the cognitive processes of programming [ 25,35,55,63,
78,86,87]. These studies have examined code review [ 35], data
structure manipulation [ 55], debugging [ 15], code reading [ 86], and
code writing [ 63], reporting activity in regions associated with
working memory, top-down control, and spatial reasoning, among
others. Some studies have also compared coding with prose pro-
cessing [ 63] or spatial reasoning [ 55]. These neurological findings
have led to longitudinal studies exploring transfer training in CS
undergraduate education [ 29]. Imaging studies unveil the neurolog-
ical foundations of, and provide new approaches for, investigating
and understanding programming activities, which paves the way
for effectively improving CS pedagogy, technology transfer, and
workforce retraining [ 35,55,63]. However, prior work in CS has
only shown what specific brain regions are involved in program-
ming. Brain areas do not function in isolation, but interact and are
connected structurally and functionally [27, 52, 103].
Standard fMRI analyses are modular , meaning activity is modeled
individually for each region in the brain, and these modules are
assumed to be independent from one another [ 71]. Ignoring how
disparate regions interact to accomplish complex coding tasks may
result in overlooked connections and missed information. Suppose,
informally, that debugging involves brain region Ainteracting with
767
ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
Figure 1: High-level illustration. The proposed functional
connectivity analysis reveals brain interactions mediating
writing tasks, language, and expertise, which may be over-
looked by standard modular analyses.
region B, while coding involves region Ainteracting with region C.
Although how Aconditionally interacts is critical, modular analyses
will not see Aas distinguishing or contrasting them (since it is
active for both tasks); we desire an analysis that sees A→Band
A→Cedges. To gain a better understanding of programming on
a neurological level, we present a functional connectivity analysis
of an archival dataset on code writing. As shown conceptually in
Figure 1, we investigate programming tasks using more than the
standard localized analyses, present results that were not discovered
before, and indicate the potential of functional connectivity analysis
on cognitive processes of programming.
Instead of localizing brain activities to certain brain areas, func-
tional connectivity analysis is based in graph theory, and provides
information about interactions between brain regions by quantify-
ing the statistical correlations of neurophysiological activity [ 26,38].
Functional connectivity analysis can reveal (1) which regions of
brain activations are significantly correlated and (2) how much they
are correlated with each other in a statistical manner, which cannot
be covered by standard modular analysis. Furthermore, there are
no additional requirements on fMRI data collection for functional
connectivity analysis, making it feasible and relatively easy for
software engineering researchers to adapt it to archival data. Still
new to computer science, functional connectivity has been widely
used in cognitive and clinical psychology to understand complex
neural processes. For instance, it has been effective in testing new
medications for depression [ 2] and attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) [ 62]. It has revealed new information about the
neural substrate of schizophrenia [ 3] and Alzheimer’s disease [ 22],
which cannot be localized to any specific region in the brain. Fur-
thermore, functional connectivity analysis has resolved conflicting
evidence in cognitive psychology, such as for apraxia of pantomime
(incapability of mimicking the use of a tool without holding it, e.g.,
brushing one’s teeth without holding a toothbrush)) [ 90]. With
functional connectivity analysis, researchers found this behavior
was due to a breakdown in communication between multiple areas,
rather than any particular localized region [ 90]. These studies in
cognitive and clinical psychology provide models and motivationsfor analyzing functional connectivity in software engineering tasks
like code writing (which have potentially-conflicting evidence).
Since the pioneering work by Siegmund et al. on understanding
cognitive processes in software engineering with fMRI in 2014 [ 86],
there has been a growth of interest in the community [ 14,24,31,
35,54–56,73]. In recent years, fMRI has also been adapted to other
computer science domains to help researchers understand and im-
prove their design models [ 95]. Since fMRI is relatively higher-cost,
researchers in software engineering have begun releasing their
de-identified fMRI datasets [ 35,54,55]. We use this particular fMRI
dataset because it is the most recent to compare code writing and
prose writing, but the choice was otherwise arbitrary. Even though
this dataset or others may not have been made with functional
connectivity analysis in mind, there are no special requirements to
run these analyses. It is therefore feasible and relatively easy for
software engineering researchers to apply functional connectivity
analyses to archival data.
To the best of our knowledge, only one previous paper in the psy-
chology literature has considered connectivity and computing [ 15],
and no such studies have been published in computing venues. We
present a study that applies functional connectivity in software
engineering. Our approach operates on an archival fMRI dataset
and results in new findings that were overlooked before but are
revealed in terms of of connectivity.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•The first study that uses functional connectivity analysis to
investigate code writing. We present the value and feasibility
of such analyses to software engineering researchers.
•The first study in software engineering that operates entirely
on archival fMRI data. Such examples reduce the barrier to
entry by demonstrating new insights without new, expensive
experiments.
•Functional connectivity results that clarify and advance pre-
vious understandings. We find a significant link between
the higher mathematics and language areas for coding. We
identify an area with important functional connectivity for
both prose writing and coding. We find a strong connectivity
result between coding and language processing. Finally, we
also find a relationship between coding and expertise.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we introduce the basic idea of functional connec-
tivity analysis and how it can reveal important findings in medical
imaging. We also discuss the motivation of adapting functional
connectivity analysis to software engineering. We finish by summa-
rizing the neurological findings for code and prose writing from a
previous fMRI study [ 63], which we re-analyze but with a different
approach and new findings.
2.1 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging technology
that uses the magnetic properties of biological tissue to differentiate
between structures [ 99].Functional MRI (fMRI) applies this to oxy-
genated and de-oxygenated blood in the brain, which have slightly
different magnetic properties, and can be used as a proxy to mea-
sure brain activation [ 23]. These scanners are incredibly precise,
768Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
and can measure brain activity in 1-millimeter cubes, called voxels
(“volume” and “pixel”). When activity in a given region spikes, there
is a short lag followed by a blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) re-
sponse, which provides that region with oxygen and nutrients [ 17].
Researchers can measure these BOLD responses to make infer-
ences about which brain regions are enlisted for a task. Scientists
might design different experimental conditions, such as looking at
houses or faces [ 93], and by subtracting the patterns of activation
elicited by both types of stimuli, they can determine which patterns
of activation are due to visual processing, and which are due to
stimuli-specific processing. Such subtractions are called contrasts .
2.2 Functional Connectivity
Functional connectivity is defined as the temporal coincidence of
spatially distant neurophysiological events [ 37]. In this type of anal-
ysis, two regions are considered to show functional connectivity
when there is a statistical relationship between the time series of
recorded brain activations [ 26]. To give an analogy, standard anal-
ysis looks at activity in the brain as if each region is a worker in
a cubicle, while connectivity analysis models brain activity like a
cooperative environment where hubs of specialized activity col-
laborate with other regions to work on complex tasks. Similar to
standard analysis, functional connectivity analysis does not indi-
cate causality or chemical mechanisms underlying brain activations.
Instead, it applies to the voxel-level and provides information of
time-course correlations between brain regions.
In modern psychology, researchers developed functional connec-
tivity analysis to model the brain as a network system character-
ized by principles of segregation and integration [ 5,6]. Segregation
is similar to the idea of localization, where brain functions map
onto specific regions, but segregation assumes regions and their
processes are interactive [ 38]. The Human Connectome Project
began in 2009 to map all the distinct regions of the brain, finding
180 areas per hemisphere that are separated by function, cortical
architecture, or connectivity patterns [ 40]. There are temporal clas-
sifications as well, with some processes happening on the scale of
milliseconds [ 61] and other processes, such as learning or memory,
happening on the scale of weeks or years [ 42]. This modularity is in-
tegral for the brain’s adaptability, where one component can change
without affecting the rest of the system [ 5]. Informally phrased in
terms of graph theory, these modules represent nodes [6].
Regions are integrated with one another, communicating in-
formation to accomplish complex tasks, and are connected with
structural white matter [ 27,70]. These links between regions can
be considered edges between nodes in the brain [ 49]. Researchers
have found that a region’s intrinsic and extrinsic connections are
entirely unique, going so far as to call each region’s pattern of
connections its ‘fingerprint’ [ 77]. It is important to note, however,
that two regions do not have to be structurally connected to be
functionally connected [ 53]. It is therefore difficult to understand
a module’s impact and role in a larger network without having
measures of its structural and functional connections.
In terms of graph theory or distributed systems, to the best
of our knowledge it is still unknown in the Psychology litera-
ture what the analogue of a message traveling between modules
is, but it is clear that complex behaviors and properties emergethrough an interaction between regions or nodes. Viewed from a
top-down perspective, these emergent behaviors and neural pro-
cesses are non-reducible [ 75]. With vision for example, we recog-
nize faces [ 39] and perceive motion [ 59], but even though vision
is a cohesive experience, these processes rely on the coordination
of different areas [ 100]. Participants have self-reported that prose
writing feels similar to code writing [ 63], but the unreliability of self-
reporting [ 55] warrants the use of neuroimaging and network-level
measurements to unravel the nuanced processes of coding.
Functional connectivity analysis has successfully been applied to
both resting-state and task-based experiments [ 36,91]. In a resting-
state experiment design, participants are not presented any stimuli
and researchers can observe the spontaneous connections between
regions [ 12]. These analyses have been used to identify differences
between populations due to training [ 8], expertise [ 79], or even
creativity [ 68]. Similarly, task-based analyses can also recover the
same basic networks [ 30,98]. In this paper, we apply functional
connectivity analysis to task-related designs to explore differences
in functional connectivity between different writing tasks.
2.3 Motivation: Functional Connectivity for SE
Functional connectivity analysis has been employed with increasing
regularity in the cognitive science community, with over 130,000
functional connectivity studies published in the last ten years alone
[74]. Connectivity analyses have had a greater clinical impact than
fMRI on its own [ 36]. For example, these analyses have provided
insight for conditions such as depression [ 2], attention deficit hyper-
activity disorder (ADHD) [ 62], schizophrenia [ 3], and Alzheimer’s
disease [ 22], which cannot be localized to any specific region in
the brain. For depression, the effectiveness of medications can be
measured by calculating changes in correlation between regions
before and after treatment [ 2]. Researchers have been able to un-
cover atypical connections in hub regions for bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia, which are conditions affecting large networks in
the brain and are not traceable to specific modules [ 3]. Inspired
by research on functional connectivity in psychology, we believe
similar benefits for software engineering may be available.
We hypothesize that functional connectivity can clarify prevail-
ing ambiguities about the neurological basis of coding. Current
neuroimaging studies report activity in language areas as well as
spatial and mathematical reasoning areas while coding, but these
findings are not consistent across tasks [ 63,86]. Researchers have
reported that code comprehension tasks elicit activity in language
and attention areas [ 86,87], suggesting code comprehension is akin
to reading. In direct contrasts of code writing with prose writing
however, researchers have found comparatively more activity in
mathematical and spatial reasoning areas for programming [ 35,55].
It is possible code comprehension is closer to prose reading than
code writing is to prose writing, but we do not know for sure. Array
and tree manipulation have elicited activity in regions associated
with spatial and mathematical reasoning [ 55], so it is also possible
only select subsets of coding activities rely on such processes.
Taken together, these findings suggest code reading and writing
are similar yet distinct from natural language processes. This dis-
tinction was broadly characterized by Floyd et al. who found the
769ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
patterns of activation for code reading and prose reading can be dis-
tinguished with high accuracy [ 35], but this has not led to a closer
understanding of the network-level interactions that enable some-
one to write code. Looking to cognitive psychology, researchers
used functional connectivity in a similar situation where the find-
ings were different depending on researchers’ perspectives [ 90].
Castelhano et al. used a functional connectivity analysis to identify
a network involved in debugging, so we aim to build off their find-
ings and apply functional connectivity analysis to help reconcile
contradictory evidence in the field.
Functional connectivity is a theoretical shift in neuroimaging
analysis more than a technological advancement [ 6,67], so further
data collection is not always necessary. Functional connectivity
analysis can be applied to existing neuroimaging data [ 83,90]. In the
present study, we report on findings from a connectivity analysis
applied to fMRI data from Krueger et al. [63], which compares the
neural processes of programming and prose writing. The previous
publication by Krueger et al. found activity in left inferior frontal,
bilateral parietal, and bilateral temporo-occipital regions. In using
data from a previous experiment, we aim to demonstrate the efficacy
of reexamining archival data as our analysis techniques improve.
3 STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS
We claim no novelty in the experimental design, participant recruit-
ment or data acquisition associated with the archival dataset we
analyze. On the contrary, we view the applicability of functional
connectivity analysis to previously-collected archival data acquired
without knowledge of this technique as an advantage of our pro-
posed approach. This particular dataset comparing code writing
and prose writing was chosen because it is the most recent on the
topic, but the choice was otherwise arbitrary. We present a brief
summary of the study, tasks, and participants in the archival dataset
to provide context for interpreting our novel results, but clarify that
our contribution is in an analysis of, and discovery of new results
from, this existing data, and the proposal that others do the same,
rather than in the initial collection of this data.
3.1 Archival Data
Study Overview .In this paper, we reuse the data from a study
conducted by Krueger et al. [63] involving 30 (valid data from
29 of the participants) right-handed English speaking students (9
female, 1 fluid gendered) between the ages of 19–25 ( M=21.0,
SD=1.73) at a university in the United States. All participants were
either undergraduate or graduate computer sciences students and
conducted both code and prose writing tasks under an fMRI scan.
Demographic data, and cumulative GPA were also collected from
all participants. An MRI-safe keyboard was developed and used for
the purposes of data acquisition for that experiment [ 63, Sec. 3.4].
In total, that previous study provides a dataset of approximately
700 Gigabytes of raw fMRI scan data.
Writing Tasks .In the Krueger et al. study, participants com-
pleted blocks of 17 fill-in-the-blank (FITB) questions and 9 free-
response (FR) questions (as shown in Figure 2, retrieved from [ 63]).
In between each question or trial was a rest period during which a
fixation cross was presented on the screen for a random duration
of 2–10 seconds. There was a code writing condition and a proseTable 1: Demographics of the participants from the Krueger
et al. [63] archival data analyzed in this paper.
Demographic Variables # Participants
SexMale 16
Female 6
GenderMen 16
Women 5
Fluid 1
writing condition for each type of block, FITB or FR, meaning there
were four blocks total (FITB Code, FITB Prose, FR Code, FR Prose).
Each block took about 20 minutes, and their order was pseudo-
randomized. For both sets of FITB questions, participants had 30
seconds to respond. FITB code questions were created from estab-
lished exercises in which part of the solution was replaced with a
blank line, and FITB prose questions were created from adapted
SAT questions specifically using non-math terms associated with
quantitative reasoning [ 63]. Participants had 60 seconds to respond
for all FR questions. FR prose questions were chosen from English
as a Second Language (ESL) prompts.
Participants .The Krueger et al. study produced raw fMRI scan
data from 22 participants after filtering for truncated or missing scan
files. The 22 participants (5 female, 1 fluid gendered) were between
the ages of 19 and 25 ( M=21.2;SD=1.93). The demographics of
the 22 participants is shown in Table 1. On average, participants
had a GPA of 3.4/4 ( min=2.7,max=4,SD=0.29).
3.2 Functional Connectivity Analysis
Functional connectivity analysis finds statistical relationships be-
tween the time series of recorded brain activations [ 26], establishing
the temporal coincidence of spatially distant neurophysiological
events [ 37]. Very informally, for a computing audience, this analysis
approach treats the brain as a graph in which the nodes correspond
to regions of the brain (e.g., separated by brain architecture, using
well-established bases such as the Human Connectome Project [ 40])
and the potential edges correspond to white matter links between
regions [49]. Medical imaging captures information over time: for
an individual carrying out a task, this corresponds to a time series of
snapshots of the same graph nodes but with different nodes active
at different points in time. The goal is to determine which of the
potential edges are actually used for coordination during a particu-
lar task and thus which connections are associated with complex
or emergent behavior. This is done via statistical inference: if the
pattern of activation in one node over time matches the pattern of
activation in another node over time, those nodes are said to be
functionally connected . See Section 2.2 for background information
on this technique.
In a typical fMRI study, the amplitude of the BOLD response for
each condition is estimated and then contrasted to determine where
in the brain activity is greater for one condition than another [ 35,
Sec. IV]. This type of analysis has the benefit of averaging over
multiple trials of the same condition to form a robust estimate of
the activity for that condition. However, this comes at the cost
of reducing the entire time-series to a single value per condition,
770Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
Fill in the blank below.
Angered that the book arrived in the mail in such
shabby condition, Elliot insisted that the book-
seller it with a new copy.
(a) Prose Fill-in-the-Blank
What would happen if everyone lived in space?
(e.g., what type of houses would they live in?
What type of clothing would they wear?) (b) Prose Free Response
Given two 3 ×5 2D arrays of integers x1andx2,
write the code needed to copy every value from x1
to its corresponding element in x2.
1for (int i=0; i < j; i++) {
2 for (int j=0; j < 5; j++) {
3 /* YOUR CODE HERE */
4 }
5} (c) Code Fill-in-the-Blank
Implement a function issorted that accepts a
vector of integer values and returns true if it is
non-decreasing, and false otherwise. (d) Code Free Response
Figure 2: Illustrative examples of four categories of stimuli covering code and prose in fill-in-the-blank and free response
scenarios. This figure is reproduced from Krueger et al. [63] to provide background information on the task types in the
archival dataset used in this paper.
which essentially ignores most of the data collected during an fMRI
scan and potentially loses valuable information.
Functional connectivity, on the other hand, uses the entire time-
series to match the pattern of the BOLD response between different
regions of the brain. Although the directionality of the functional
connectivity cannot be determined — in other words, a significant
correlation between regions does not provide information about
whether one regionâĂŹs activity is causing the other regionâĂŹs
activity [ 9] — it can nevertheless serve as an indicator of the orga-
nization of the brain. For example, functional connectivity shows
reliable correlations between functionally similar areas such as the
motor cortices [ 4], and functional connectivity between regions is
strongly correlated with the underlying structural connectivity of
the white matter tracts connecting those same regions [50].
This suggests that significant functional connectivity indicates
not just co-activation, but the transfer of information between
distant brain regions. Consequently, this method was best suited
for our objective of determining whether and where there were
differences in connectivity between conditions. This allows for
more sophisticated inferences about the communication between
brain regions under different cognitive conditions than is afforded
by traditional univariate analyses.
Medical imaging data provides a high-resolution time series of
snapshots of neural activity. Given that data, the key challenges
are thus: (1) to abstract a large number of three-dimensional voxels
into a small number of regions (nodes); and (2) to infer active
edges based on statistical correlations between time series of node
activations. We consider each challenge in turn. We used the CONN
toolbox software for our numerical analysis, which is a widely
used functional connectivity analysis package with well-maintained
updates reflecting best practices [ 102]. The CONN toolbox is also
compatible with other popular Matlab Packages used for fMRI data
analysis (e.g., SPM).
3.2.1 Regions of the Brain. Multiple approaches have been pro-
posed for partitioning the brain into regions or nodes, called regions-
of-interest (ROIs) in the literature. Two common approaches include
the Brodmann Areas (BAs) [ 69] and the the Harvard-Oxford At-
las [18], both of which represent well-established ways of dividing
the brain based on behavior, anatomy and connectivity. In this pa-
per we use the Harvard-Oxford Atlas, the default cortical atlas in
the CONN toolbox.
Functional connectivity is typically computed one of three ways:
between every pair of voxels (called a voxel-to-voxel analysis),between a seed area and and every other voxel (called a seed-to-
voxel analysis), or between pairs of regions (called an ROI-to-ROI
analysis). Because the number of voxels is large (e.g., hundreds of
thousands of voxel measurements may be taken in minutes [ 35,
Sec. IV-A]) but the number of regions is typically much smaller
(e.g., 48 cortical and 21 subcortical structural areas in the Harvard-
Oxford Atlas), voxel-to-voxel analyses may complicate statistical
analyses or otherwise suffer from scalability concerns [ 102, p. 129].
By contrast, the high level of abstraction in ROI-to-ROI analyses
can lead to false positive concerns.
Since ROI-to-ROI and voxel-to-voxel approaches are more ex-
ploratory, we follow established practice in Psychology and use the
seed-to-voxel analysis to uncover connectivity patterns given prede-
termined ROIs. We propose the use of seed-to-voxel analyses for the
analysis of such software engineering data: they “show high reliabil-
ity for well-characterized seed locations in resting state functional
connectivity, both when using correlation- and regression-based
measures to characterize functional connectivity” [ 102, p. 137]. This
is appropriate in this context because previous work has identi-
fied and characterized seed regions relevant for various software
engineering tasks. That is, the archival data that we propose to
analyze, and other previously-published papers in software engi-
neering (e.g., [ 63,86]), already report regions of interest as a natural
output of their non-connectivity analyses. Theoretically, functional
connectivity analysis can be done independently (i.e., without any
prior knowledge of pre-determined ROIs) with the ROIs selected by
researchers. In practice, standard modular analysis (e.g., [ 63]) can
first provide knowledge about ROIs to guide connectivity analysis
while connectivity analysis can reveal truth that may be overlooked
in modular analysis.
For our analysis, seed regions were chosen using results the
published results of Krueger et al. [63]. In that paper, the authors
reported localized brain activity based on Brodmann Areas [ 69],
which were mapped to the Harvard-Oxford Atlas [ 18] automati-
cally [ 102]. In particular, BA regions reported as having significant
activity for the coding condition [ 63, Sec. 5.2–5.4] were taken as a
potential ROIs. For this analysis, we chose a subset based on their
overlap with the language network [ 33], and the peak regions of
activity shown in Figures 5 and 7 of Krueger et al. [63]. Table 2 lists
the seed regions used in this study as well as their associated BA
regions.
3.2.2 Connectivity Inference. In this domain, resting-state func-
tional connectivity is the correlation between two time-series from
different regions of the brain. We employ a seed-to-voxel approach,
771ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
which first averages the time-series of all the voxels within a given
region of interest. This averaged time-series is then correlated with
the time-series of every other voxel in the brain to generate a whole-
brain connectivity map.
The correlation coefficient rcan be calculated by cross-correlating
the static time-series of an ROI, represented by x, with the time-
series of another voxel, represented by y:
r=(xt·x)1/2·b·(yt·y)−1/2
Where brepresents the bivariate regression coefficient, calculated
with the following formula:
b=(xt·x)−1·(xt·y)
Once ris calculated, it is then transformed to a z-value using Fish-
erâĂŹs inverse hyperbolic tangent function to make the values
more closely approximate a normal distribution [ 102]. This is done
to ensure that the assumption of normality is not violated for a
second-level general linear model, as the untransformed correlation
values tend to be skewed in the positive direction [102].
This zvalue is subsequently considered for significance during
a two-step threshold to correct for false positives and multiple
comparisons at the group level. In our analyses, an initial voxel-
wise threshold of p<0.001creates clusters that are composed of
individual voxels each passing a p<0.001threshold, and then
a further cluster-wise alpha threshold of p<0.05only lets pass
those clusters that, informally, we would see 5% of the time or less
due to chance. The relatively conservative voxel-wise threshold we
employ is to keep the nominal false positive rate below the 5% level,
due to high autocorrelation in the fMRI signal [28].
3.2.3 Analysis Summary. The ultimate result of this analysis is a
set of statistically-significant functional connections for a particular
task (e.g., code writing). Informally, these are edges in the brain
graph that denote temporal correspondences between spatially-
distant neural regions. Because many complex cognitive activities
involve coordination between multiple brain regions, functional
connectivity has the potential to reveal insights and relationships
not visible to previous, typical fMRI analyses.
4 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we investigate the following research questions,
especially considering the relevant comparisons to the research
questions explored in Krueger et al. [63]:
RQ1. How are brain regions involved in coding functionally con-
nected to one another? Are there connections to brain re-
gions involved in prose writing?
RQ2. How do fill-in-the-blank tasks compare to free response tasks
in coding and prose writing?
RQ3. Do regions involved in the language network directly inter-
act with regions involved in coding?
RQ4. What connections between brain regions are mediated by
expertise in software engineering?
To answer the research questions, we analyze and discuss the re-
sults of functional connectivity analysis. All results are summarized
in Table 2. For each seed region (column Seed Regions ), we list the
brain regions with which it has significant functional connectivity
for three contrasted conditions: Code >Prose ,FR Code >FR Prose ,andFITB Code >FITB Prose . Table 2 also lists the covariate analysis
results of functional connectivity on expertise (measured by GPA).
In this table, the BA Regions column lists the corresponding BA
regions for every seed region to make it easier for readers to cross-
reference with the original results [ 63], from which we obtained
the archival dataset. Figures 3 and 4 accompany the table with
visual plots of results from the connectivity analysis (voxel-wise
p<0.001, cluster corrected at p<0.05).
4.1 RQ1 — High Level Code Writing vs. Prose
Writing in Connectivity Analysis
Figure 3 summarizes our functional connectivity results for multiple
seed regions; to explore general differences between the connectiv-
ity patterns of code writing and prose writing, we consider the Code
>Prose) row. This row aggregates across both fill-in-the-blanks
and free response tasks and corresponds to (FITB Code +FR Code
>FITB Prose +FR Prose) . Values associated with the figure can be
found in Table 2. For clarity, we separate the statistical results from
the implications.
Statistical Results. Using the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC,
BA 6, 8) as a seed region revealed no significant differences in
functional connectivity for code writing compared to prose writ-
ing. Using the left middle temporal gyrus (LMTG, BA 19, 37) as a
seed region revealed significant functional connectivity for cod-
ing compared to prose in the left inferior temporal gyrus (LITG,
BA 37; MNI :−54,−46,−8) with a cluster of 422 voxels and a peak
t-statistic of 6.45 ( p<0.001). The right superior parietal lobule
(RSPL, BA 5, 7) demonstrated significant functional connectivity
with numerous regions, primarily for prose writing, including the
right supramarginal gyrus (BA 40; MNI : 54,−20,28;k=1333; peak
t-statistic =−8.24;p<0.001), the central opercular cortex (BA 41;
MNI:−40,2,12;k=178; peak t-statistic =−4.9;p=0.03), and
the right insular cortex (MNI : 40,2,−2;k=176; peak t-statistic
=−4.83;p=0.03). The RSPL also demonstrated significant func-
tion connectivity with the left middle-frontal gyrus (LMFG, BA
46; MNI :−30,10,34) for coding ( k=344; peak t-statistic =5.72;
p=0.001). Using the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG, BA 44) as a
seed region revealed a significant functionally connected cluster in
the right inferior temporal gyrus (RITG, BA 37; MNI : 50,−44,−8)
for coding ( k=428; peak t-statistic =5.89;p<0.001). Using the
right inferior frontal gyrus (RIFG, BA 44) as a seed region revealed
significant functional connectivity in a cluster in the anterior cin-
gulate cortex for writing (MNI :−6,−6,30;k=210; peak t-statistic
=−6.90;p=0.015). The FR Code >FR Prose contrast revealed signif-
icant functional connectivity with two seed regions: the LMTG with
the left temporal pole (LTP, BA 38; MNI :−34,18,−28;k=393; peak
t-statistic =−6.09;p<0.001), and the RSPL with the right supra-
marginal gyrus (MNI : 56,−22,30;k=226; peak t-statistic =−5.55;
p=0.01). The FITB Code >FITB Prose contrast also revealed sig-
nificant functional connectivity with two seed regions: the LMTG
with the LITG (MNI :−60,−52,−12;k=324; peak t-statistic =6.6;
p<0.01) and the RSPL with the right perietal operculum cortex
(RPOC, BA 41; MNI : 44,−40,32;k=244; peak t-statistic =−5.52;
p<0.01).
772Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
Table 2: Seed regions and regions revealed by the functional connectivity analysis ( k= cluster size (voxels); t= peak t-statistic;
p= voxel-wise p-value; “—” = no significant result).
Seed Regions BA Regions Code >Prose FR Code >FR Prose FITB Code >FITB Prose GPA
MPFC (6,8) — — — —
LMTG (19,37)•LITG (−54,−46,−8)•LTP (−34,18,−28)•LITG (−60,−52,−12)—k=422;t=6.45;p<0.001 k=393;t=−6.09;p<0.001 k=324;t=6.6;p<0.01
RSPL (5,7)•RSG (54,−20,28) FR Code >FITB Code:
k=1333; t=−8.24;p<0.001 •LLOC (−34,−86,28)
•LMFG (−30,10,34) k=218;t=−5.88;p<0.05
k=344;t=5.72;p<0.001•RSG (56,−22,30)•RPOC (44,−40,32)•RAG (64,−40,40)
•COC (−40,2,12) k=226;t=−5.55;p<0.05 k=244;t=−5.52;p<0.01 (k=188;t=4.79;p<0.05)
k=178;t=−4.9;p<0.05 FR Code >FR Prose:
•RIC (40,2,−2) •LFOC (−26,46,−10)
k=176;t=−4.83;p<0.05 k=523;t=−5.34;p<0.001
LIFG (44)•RITG (50,−44,−8)— — —k=428;t=5.89;p<0.001
RIFG (44)•ACC (−6,−6,30)— — —k=210;t=−6.9;p<0.05
Brain region acronyms: MPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; LMTG = left middle temporal gyrus; RSPL = right superior parietal lobule; LIFG = left inferior frontal gyrus; RIFG = right
inferior frontal gyrus; LITG = left inferior temporal gyrus; RSG = right supramarginal gyrus; LMFG = left middle frontal gyrus; COC = central opercular cortex; RIC = right insular
cortex; RITG = right inferior temporal gyrus; ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; LTP = left temporal pole; RPOC = right parietal operculum cortex; LLOC = left lateral occipital cortex;
RAG = right angular gyrus; LFOC = left frontal orbital cortex.
Figure 3: Function connectivity results using five seed regions (listed in the Seed location row): the medial prefrontal cortex
(MPFC), left middle temporal gyrus (LMTG), right superior parietal lobule (RSPL), left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), and right
inferior frontal gyrus (RIFG), ( p < 0.05 , uncorrected). Red corresponds to positive numbers in the contrast (left of the >symbol),
and blue corresponds to negative numbers (right of the >symbol) in Table 2.
Implications. Krueger et al. reported higher brain activity for
prose writing in the LMTG and higher brain activity for code writ-
ing in the LITG. Here we report significant functional connectivity
between the LMTG and the LITG. These regions are adjacent to
one another and implicated in semantic language processes [ 21].Activity in both regions has been reported in previous code compre-
hension [ 86] and debugging studies [ 24], but we present the first
evidence of significant functional connectivity between the two.
We also find the RSPL has more functional connectivity on the
right hemisphere for prose writing compared to code writing, as
773ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
seen in Figure 3. Notably, this region displays significant functional
connectivity with other regions for both code writing and prose
writing, demonstrating that this area is involved in both processes.
Previous findings reported higher activity for code writing in the
RSPL [ 63], while we find stronger functional connectivity in this
region for prose writing. We claim these findings are not necessarily
contradictory since both analyses are measuring different features
of brain functionality.
Previous findings report activity in the LIFG for both prose and
code writing, but higher activity for prose writing in the FR Code >
FR Prose contrast. This region was significantly functionally con-
nected to the right inferior temporal gyrus (RITG). The LIFG is a
component of the language network [ 33] and the RITG has been im-
plicated in mathematical operations [ 51]. These results have larger
implications for code writing and prose writing, which are discussed
in more detail in Research Question 3. Activity was previously found
for code writing in the anterior cingulate cortex [ 63], which is im-
plicated in a broad array of higher cognitive functions [ 13]. We find
this region demonstrates significant functional connectivity with
the RIFG which has been implicated in inhibitory functions [47].
We find an overlap of functional connectivity patterns for code
writing and prose writing. There is a stronger connection for
code writing among regions associated with semantic processing
in natural language. Previous SE studies reported activity in
both regions in different contexts, but we show a functional link
between the two . The right superior parietal lobule, associated
with visuospatial functions, shows significant connectivity with
other regions for both code and prose writing.
4.2 RQ2 — Effects of Task and Language Types
on Brain Function Connections
To explore the varying demands of the fill-in-the blank tasks and
free response tasks, we analyzed FR Code >FITB Code andFR Prose
>FITB Prose contrasts. These tasks did not yield any significant
differences in functional connectivity, and are not shown in a table
or figure. This might suggest there is a main effect of either coding
or prose writing that outweighs any differences in functional con-
nectivity between the two tasks. A slightly different interpretation
might be there is little variation in the cognitive demands of both
types of tasks. A task difference is uncovered for FR Code >FITB
Code when participants’ GPA is included as a covariate, which can
be seen in the rightmost column of Table 2. These results related to
expertise are discussed in more detail in Research Question 4.
Significant functional connectivity differences among brain re-
gions exist between language types (code vs. prose) but not be-
tween task types (fill in the blank vs. long response).
4.3 RQ3 — Language and Coding Connections
To investigate if the regions of the language network interact with
regions involved in code writing, we consider the significant func-
tional connectivity between the LIFG and the RITG in the Code >
Prose contrast (MNI : 50,−44,−8;k=428; peak t-statistic =5.89;
p<0.001, uncorrected), which is shown in the Code >Prose row
Figure 4: Functional connectivity results for expertise anal-
ysis using GPA. Only correlations that reached significance
are plotted ( p<0.05). These were in the FR Code >FR Prose
andFR Code >FITB Code contrasts with the right superior
parietal lobule (RSPL) as a seed region. Red corresponds to
FR Code in both images, and blue corresponds to FR Prose
andFITB Code , from left to right.
andLIFG column of Figure 3. Table 2 shows the values associated
with the figure.
The LIFG is historically one of the primary regions associated
with language production, called Broca’s Area, and has been im-
plicated in grammar as well as syntactic and semantic processing
[45]. The RITG is known as the Number Form Area (NFA), and has
been associated with visual processing of arabic numbers [ 105],
nonsymbolic mathematics [ 51], geometry [ 1], and equation com-
prehension [ 1]. Activity in the RITG was reported previously by
Krueger et al. in contrasts comparing code writing and prose writ-
ing. While activity in this region was then interpreted as evidence
that code writing and prose writing are distinct from one another,
here we show a strong link between language and mathematical
processing. This suggests the answer to the question whether cod-
ing is the same as or different from prose writing is more nuanced.
Both processes overlap with language regions, but coding involves
at least one region (the NFA) unique to the complex cognitive task
of programming.
Unlike previous work that found code and prose writing to be
distinct, we find a significant functional connection ( p<0.001)
between Broca’s area, a primary region of the language network
involved in grammar and semantics, and a coding region involved
in higher level mathematical operations, the Number Form Area.
4.4 RQ4 — Expertise in Code Writing
We explored the effects of expertise on changes in functional con-
nectivity for code writing compared to prose writing. Figure 4 and
the rightmost column of Table 2 show the functional connectivity
between regions that is significantly impacted by participants’ GPA.
774Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
As in previous questions, we see that the RSPL shows the highest
amount of connectivity out of the seed regions chosen. For the
FR Code >FR Prose contrast, activity in the RSPL becomes signifi-
cantly more correlated with activity in the left frontal orbital cortex
(MNI :−26,46,−10;k=523; peak t-statistic =−5.34;p<0.001)
as GPA increases. For the FR Code >FITB Code contrast, as GPA
increases we find activity in the RSPL becomes significantly more
correlated with activity in the right angular gyrus (RAG, BA 40;
MNI: 64,−40,40) for free response as opposed to fill in the blank
(k=188; peak t-statistic =479;p=0.03) and the left lateral occipi-
tal cortex (LLOC, BA 19, 39; MNI :−34,−86,28) for prose ( k=218;
peak t-statistic =−5.88;p=0.01).
Previous results cited activity in the fusiform gyrus as potential
evidence of expertise [ 63], but cognitive psychologists are effec-
tively using functional connectivity analysis to determine how
the interaction between regions is mediated by proficiency [ 79].
Here we measure expertise in computer science by considering
CS students’ cumulative GPA. We find the RSPL, which has been
implicated in visuospatial processing [ 16], exhibits different pat-
terns of functional connectivity for both code and prose writing
as GPA increases. These regions include the RAG for coding and
the LLOC for prose. Increased functional connectivity with the
RAG is particularly interesting within the coding tasks, as research
finds this region is involved in math competence [ 44], mental arith-
metic [ 43], and memory specifically related to mathematics [ 43],
such as maintaining a mental representation of a number line [ 41].
We find functional connectivity from the right superior parietal
lobule as a seed region is significantly modulated by GPA in
theFR Code >FITB Code contrast with a region involved in
mathematical calculation and memory . The RSPL again shows
the highest amount of connectivity in our present findings.
5 LIMITATIONS
The first potential limitation in the current study is the intrinsic
susceptibility to noise in functional connectivity analysis, especially
to participants’ motion in the scanner [ 97]. Considering functional
connectivity analysis seeks to correlate patterns of brain activity
between regions, participants moving their heads can affect entire
brain scans at once, potentially leading to false positive results. To
mitigate these effects, participants were preemptively instructed
to remain still during the experiment. The data used in the current
experiment are also processed and denoised specifically for these
types of noise artifacts by preprocessing software [ 102]. Scan data
are considered usable for functional connectivity if less than 10% of
volumes are flagged as problematic due to scanner issues or motion.
No participants in the current analysis met that threshold.
Recently, there have been concerns related to the reliability of
functional connectivity results. Researchers have identified im-
portant factors for increasing reliability, such as scan length, task
design, and number of subjects. The current experiment follows
guidelines presented by Noble et al. [76], even though the tasks
were originally designed without considering reliability measures
for functional connectivity. For instance, the average scan length
analyzed by Noble et al. was 9.7 minutes ( SD=6.56). Participants
in the data analyzed here completed 4 scans, each of which wasroughly 20 minutes long, well above the average considered for
good reliability. Noble et al. also report greatest reliability for ex-
perimental designs in which participants were awake and engaged
in a task. Participants in the data analyzed here completed timed
fill-in-the-blank and free response questions with breaks of 2–10
seconds in between trials, so there was little chance for subjects
to sleep. Group level results also show functional connectivity in
areas associated with attention and working memory, empirically
suggesting subjects were actively engaged. Another potential limi-
tation of the current study is the sample size. The samples analyzed
here are comparable to other fMRI studies considered by Noble et
al.(M=25.59;SD=12.92, corrected for outliers).
We acknowledge the use of cumulative GPA as a proxy for ex-
pertise may not effectively measure programming proficiency in
computer science undergraduate and graduate students. Coding
expertise has proved difficult to gauge [ 35,64]. GPA has been found
to correlate with learning as well as aptitude [ 89]. Previous work
in the field has also used GPA [ 35], self-reporting measures [ 64],
and status as either an undergraduate or graduate student [ 101].
We also note that functional connectivity analyses can be applied
to this archival dataset with relative ease, even though the dataset
was collected with modular analyses in mind.
The authors of the dataset we analyze considered threats to va-
lidity as well [ 63], which we will summarize here. Krueger et al.
were primarily concerned with task design and whether chosen
prompts genuinely tapped into the neurological processes of code
writing and prose writing. This was accounted for in the experi-
mental design by including both fill-in-the-blank questions and free
response questions. Those authors also cited concerns that reading
the prompts themselves affected brain activity measurements. This
possible confound was accounted for in experimental contrasts,
where overlapping activity between the two tasks was cancelled
out. Lastly, the dataset authors considered the homogeneity of the
subjects’ experience with computer science. Participants had, on
average, taken 5.2 semesters worth of computer science course-
work, but no significant findings were claimed at the individual
level, only at the group level.
6 RELATED WORK
In this section, we present our findings in context with previous
research.
Neuroimaging in Computer Science .There is a growing in-
terest in understanding the neural basis of software engineering
[15,19,24,31,35,54,56,57,73,78,86], most of which have been
conducted in the last five years. Recent studies have primarily used
fMRI [ 54,55,63,78,86], fNIRS [ 31,54,56,73], and occasionally
EEG [ 19] to explore the neurological patterns in programming
activities. These studies investigated code comprehension [ 86], ex-
pertise [ 64], code review [ 54,96], debugging [ 15,24], data structure
manipulation [55], and code writing [63].
We consider the work of Krueger et al. to be closest to our cur-
rent work because we use the same fMRI data [ 63]. Their study
examined code writing against prose writing to compare the under-
lying cognitive bases of the two processes. Two types of questions,
fill-in-the-blank and free response, were used to further hone in on
the nuanced distinctions between the two.
775ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
Functional Connectivity .In the 1990s, researchers first mea-
sured the functional interactions between brain regions [ 37]. Friston
defined functional connectivity in 1993 as “temporal correlations be-
tween remote neurophysiological events” [ 37], finding that verbal
fluency relied on different networks in the brain. Functional con-
nectivity analysis today has been used with increasing frequency
to study a wide range of cognitive processes. Functional connec-
tivity has been used to examine the effects of acupuncture [ 81],
meditation [ 94], aging [ 32], and even baseball [ 85]. These versa-
tile analyses have had a great clinical impact [ 36], such as set-
tling contradictory neuroimaging results to advance researchers’
understanding [ 90,104], and elucidating neurological changes re-
lated to expertise [ 68,79]. These findings helped form the basis for
the current study. We present findings that illustrate neurological
differences related to expertise on code writing, which has been
overlooked using localization-based analysis, and help classify the
neural substrates of programming. We are aware of one previous
paper that applies functional connectivity analysis to neuroimaging
data in software engineering [ 15]. This study identified a top-down
network involved in decision making and error detection associated
with debugging.
Expertise in Programming .Several studies examining the cog-
nitive processes of coding have looked at programming expertise
and whether there are generalized differences between experts and
novices. In their 2014 paper, Siegmund et al. found both positive and
negative correlations between activation strength of certain brain
regions and programming experience. Floyd et al. ’s work found
the neural representations of natural and programming languages
to be distinct, but that those differences are modulated by exper-
tise [ 35]. However, Krueger et al. ’s study, the closest study to this
presented work, reported no significant evidence indicating the
effects of expertise on the contrast between code and prose writ-
ing. Our primary objective with applying functional connectivity
analysis was to clarify previous findings, and our results show the
interaction between two distinct regions is mediated by expertise
(see Section 4.4). Siegmund et al. used BA 40 in their analysis of
expertise, which overlaps with the angular gyrus reported in our re-
sults. Interestingly, Siegmund et al. find a weak positive correlation
between Java knowledge and this region on code comprehension.
Instead of investigating the effect of expertise on brain activation
patterns and associated functions, other work has tried to judge
differences between novices and experts by measuring cognitive
effort with neuroimaging. For exmaple, Lee et al. used EEG and
found experts showed more high-frequency brain waves compared
to novices in the left prefrontal and left premotor regions in code
comprehension [64].
Code, Prose, and Writing .There is a long-standing interest
in improving programming productivity in software engineering.
Researchers have designed software tools and interfaces to increase
developers’ productivity [ 88], and have investigated different pro-
gramming languages for different user groups [ 82] to develop ef-
fective CS education strategies [ 84]. Before the first medical imag-
ing study examining the neurological patterns of code writing by
Krueger et al. in 2020, researchers conducted behavioral studies to
understand the psychology of code writing, including the cognitive
load [11] and impact of expertise [106] on code writing.In comparison, prose writing has been investigated on both be-
havioral and neurological levels for a much longer span of time. For
example, psychologists have proposed a theory of the cognitive pro-
cesses of writing in early 1980s [ 34], and have studied the effects of
expertise and second-language proficiency to the second-language
writing performance [ 20], effective methods for developing exper-
tise in English as a Second Language students [ 65], and a social
apprenticeship model for gaining writing expertise [ 7]. Further-
more, with medical imaging and the standard modular analyses,
researchers have located brain activity for prose writing in the
left hemisphere, particularly the left superior parietal lobe [ 72].
Other medical imaging studies have been conducted to investigate
the brain’s writing center during both left- and right-handed writ-
ing tasks [ 92] and to identify brain regions that are consistently
involved in prose writing tasks [ 80]. Moreover, functional connec-
tivity analysis has also been used in prose writing. For instance,
in handwriting, researchers used traditional modular analyses and
found regions-of-interest that distinguished motor processes from
cognitive processes, and later only by employing functional con-
nectivity analysis clarified those links [ 104]. The results presented
in this paper follow exactly that pattern (e.g., Krueger et al. [63]
and Ivanova et al. [57] identified regions of interest via modular
analyses that served as the basis for our connectivity analysis), and
we anticipate more such results to come from connectivity analysis
applied to software engineering.
7 DISCUSSION
In this section we consider our results from a broader perspective
and propose directions for future research.
Perhaps most intriguing is the finding of a functional link be-
tween Broca’s area in the left inferior frontal gyrus and the Number
Form Area in the right inferior temporal gyrus. Broca’s area was
identified by Paul Broca in 1865 as an integral region of the lan-
guage network [ 10], which has been consistently supported by
modern medical imaging studies examining language [ 33]. The
number form area has been studied extensively as well, finding this
area is involved in equation comprehension [ 1], and nonsymbolic
mathematics [ 51]. To the best of our knowledge, no psychology
research studying this area has examined coding, or reported a
connection between the NFA and coding (cf. [1, 46, 105]).
Finding a significant, functionally connected cluster between
the NFA and Broca’s area implies the neural basis of coding is
intrinsically tied to language processes, but intuitively, is set apart
from language by enlisting nonsymbolic mathematical operations.
This has implications for computer science education and training,
especially considering findings reported by Endres et al. that spatial-
like processing was less correlated with improved performance for
novices learning to program [ 29]. The results were unexpected for
Endres et al. , but are supported by our current findings.
This link between code writing and prose writing is further sup-
ported by our other results, including the significant functional
connectivity between two left temporal regions involved in seman-
tic processing. This evidence again suggests coding relies on similar
processes as natural language. Future research may consider par-
ticular hypotheses to untangle the basis for this finding, such as
776Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
whether or not participants maintain values assigned to variables
in working memory.
Our finding that a single region on the right hemisphere demon-
strates significant functional connections with areas for both code
writing and prose writing exposes avenues for future research as
well. This region had the most connections compared to the other
seed regions, and on both hemispheres, which might suggest this
region acts as a hub. Many of the destination areas have been im-
plicated in sensation [ 48], attention [ 58], and working memory
[66]. For our analysis of expertise, we find the RSPL becomes more
functionally connected to the RAG, which is associated with men-
tal calculation [ 43] and mathematical memory [ 41]. Disentangling
these various connections might provide a more fine-grained un-
derstanding of the differences between code writing and prose
writing.
At a high level, the new findings revealed in the functional con-
nectivity analysis about the connections between code and prose
writing (as discussed above) may also bring in more thoughts on
new programming paradigms as described in Knuth’s early work on
literate programming [ 60]. We hope our work can provide a starting
methodology for future investigations on functional connectivity
in software engineering tasks.
Measures of localized brain activity have provided the first look
at the neural substrate of programming, but characterizing these
complex processes in terms of brain activations has led to ambiguity
and conflicting evidence. Uncovering these new results by applying
functional connectivity analysis to archival fMRI data indicates
the viability of this approach, and its potential to advance our
understanding of the cognitive processes of coding.
8 CONCLUSION
Standard analyses of fMRI data assume brain regions are inde-
pendent from one another, and may overlook or mischaracterize
neurological findings. Brain regions are inherently interactive, con-
nected to one another structurally and functionally. We propose that
computer scientists use functional connectivity analyses, which
consider temporal connections between spatially-distinct brain re-
gions. We applied functional connectivity analysis to archival data
to uncover new results related to the neural basis of code writing
and coding expertise. We find the left inferior frontal gyrus, known
as Broca’s area, is functionally connected to the left inferior tempo-
ral gyrus, known as the Number Form Area for coding compared
to prose writing ( p<0.001). Researchers in psychology are still
studying this region to understand its role in mathematical pro-
cesses, and to the best of our knowledge, have not reported findings
related to coding in this area. Showing a functional link between
Broca’s Area and the Number Form Area uncovers a strong link
between language and mathematics in characterizing the neural
basis of coding.
We find the right superior parietal lobule (RSPL) exhibits signifi-
cant functional connectivity with numerous regions across tasks,
and may act as a hub for code writing and prose writing. The func-
tional connectivity of the RSPL was modulated by expertise as well,
which was measured using participants’ GPAs. As participants’
GPAs increased, the functional connectivity between the RSPL and
the RAG increased for free-response coding questions compared tofill-in-the-blank coding questions ( p<0.05). Processes related to
mental calculation and mathematical memory have been attributed
to the RAG, suggesting expertise might modulate the correlation
between visuospatial processing and mental calculation. Previous
studies have used different metrics to locate neurological differences
attributable to expertise. We build off these findings by showing a
significant link between two regions that varies with proficiency.
While one study in the psychology literature has considered
connectivity for computing, to the best of our knowledge this is the
first to perform a large-scale, seed-to-voxel functional connectivity
analysis on archival data and explain the technique for a computing
audience. We demonstrate this analysis technique can uncover
new results in archival data, clarify ambiguities, and advance our
understanding of coding in the brain.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the partial support of US Na-
tional Science Foundation (NSF) (CCF-1908633). We also thank Tyler
Santander and Zohreh Sharafi for early discussions and comments
on this work and thank Madeline Endres for her feedback to early
drafts.
REFERENCES
[1]Marie Amalric and Stanislas Dehaene. 2016. Origins of the brain networks for
advanced mathematics in expert mathematicians. PNAS 113, 18 (2016).
[2]A Anand, Y Li, Y Wang, J Wu, S Gao, L Bukhari, VP Mathews, A Kalnin, and
MJ Lowe. 2005. Antidepressant effect on connectivity of the mood-regulating
circuit: an FMRI study. Neuropsychopharmacology 30, 7 (2005).
[3]M Argyelan, T Ikuta, P DeRosse, RJ Braga, KE Burdick, M John, PB Kingsley, AK
Malhotra, and PR Szeszko. 2014. Resting-state fMRI connectivity impairment in
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Schizophrenia bulletin 40, 1 (2014).
[4]B Biswal B, F Z Yetkin, V M Haughton, and J S Hyde. 1995. Functional con-
nectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 34, 4 (1995), 537–541.
[5]Danielle S Bassett and Michael S Gazzaniga. 2011. Understanding complexity
in the human brain. Trends in cognitive sciences 15, 5 (2011), 200–209.
[6]Danielle S Bassett and Olaf Sporns. 2017. Network neuroscience. Nature
neuroscience 20, 3 (2017), 353–364.
[7]Anne Beaufort. 2000. Learning the trade: A social apprenticeship model for
gaining writing expertise. Written communication 17, 2 (2000), 185–223.
[8]Alexander Belden, Tima Zeng, Emily Przysinda, Sheeba Arnold Anteraper, Susan
Whitfield-Gabrieli, and Psyche Loui. 2020. Improvising at rest: Differentiating
jazz and classical music training with resting state functional connectivity.
NeuroImage 207 (2020), 116384.
[9]Bharat B Biswal. 2012. Resting state fMRI: a personal history. Neuroimage 62, 2
(2012), 938–944.
[10] Paul Broca. 1861. Remarques sur le siège de la faculté du langage articulé, suivies
dâĂŹune observation dâĂŹaphémie (perte de la parole). Bulletin et Memoires
de la Societe anatomique de Paris 6 (1861), 330–357.
[11] J. S. Bruner, J. J. Goodnow, and G. A. Austin. 1956. A study of thinking . New
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
[12] Randy L Buckner and Justin L Vincent. 2007. Unrest at rest: default activity and
spontaneous network correlations. Neuroimage 37, 4 (2007), 1091–1096.
[13] George Bush, Phan Luu, and Michael I Posner. 2000. Cognitive and emotional
influences in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in cognitive sciences 4, 6 (2000).
[14] João Castelhano, Isabel C. Duarte, Carlos Ferreira, João Duraes, Henrique
Madeira, and Miguel Castelo-Branco. 2018. The Role of the Insula in Intu-
itive Expert Bug Detection in Computer Code: An fMRI Study. Brain Imaging
and Behavior (May 2018).
[15] Joao Castelhano, Isabel C Duarte, Carlos Ferreira, Joao Duraes, Henrique
Madeira, and Miguel Castelo-Branco. 2019. The role of the insula in intu-
itive expert bug detection in computer code: an fMRI study. Brain imaging and
behavior 13, 3 (2019), 623–637.
[16] Maurizio Corbetta, Gordon L Shulman, Francis M Miezin, and Steven E Petersen.
1995. Superior parietal cortex activation during spatial attention shifts and
visual feature conjunction. Science 270, 5237 (1995), 802–805.
[17] David D Cox and Robert L Savoy. 2003. Functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI)âĂĲbrain readingâĂİ: detecting and classifying distributed patterns of
fMRI activity in human visual cortex. Neuroimage 19, 2 (2003), 261–270.
777ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece Zachary Karas, Andrew Jahn, Westley Weimer, and Yu Huang
[18] R Cameron Craddock, G Andrew James, Paul E Holtzheimer III, Xiaoping P Hu,
and Helen S Mayberg. 2012. A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially
constrained spectral clustering. Human brain mapping 33, 8 (2012), 1914–1928.
[19] Igor Crk, Timothy Kluthe, and Andreas Stefik. 2015. Understanding program-
ming expertise: an empirical study of phasic brain wave changes. ACM (TOCHI)
23, 1 (2015).
[20] Alister Cumming. 1989. Writing expertise and second-language proficiency.
Language learning 39, 1 (1989), 81–135.
[21] J Davey, HE Thompson, G Hallam, T Karapanagiotidis, C Murphy, I De Caso, K
Krieger-Redwood, BC Bernhardt, J Smallwood, and E Jefferies. 2016. Exploring
the role of the posterior middle temporal gyrus in semantic cognition: Inte-
gration of anterior temporal lobe with executive processes. Neuroimage 137
(2016).
[22] Emily L Dennis and Paul M Thompson. 2014. Functional brain connectivity
using fMRI in aging and AlzheimerâĂŹs disease. Neuropsychology review 24, 1
(2014), 49–62.
[23] Edgar A DeYoe, Peter Bandettini, Jay Neitz, David Miller, and Paula Winans. 1994.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) of the human brain. Journal of
neuroscience methods 54, 2 (1994), 171–187.
[24] J. Duraes, H. Madeira, J. Castelhano, C. Duarte, and M. C. Branco. 2016. WAP:
Understanding the Brain at Software Debugging. In International Symposium
on Software Reliability Engineering . 87–92.
[25] Sjoerd JH Ebisch, Dante Mantini, Roberta Romanelli, Marco Tommasi, Mauro G
Perrucci, Gian Luca Romani, Roberto Colom, and Aristide Saggino. 2013. Long-
range functional interactions of anterior insula and medial frontal cortex are
differently modulated by visuospatial and inductive reasoning tasks. Neuroimage
78 (2013), 426–438.
[26] S.B. Eickhoff and V.I. MÃĳller. 2015. Functional Connectivity. In Brain Mapping ,
Arthur W. Toga (Ed.). Academic Press, Waltham, 187 – 201.
[27] Simon B Eickhoff and Christian Grefkes. 2011. Approaches for the integrated
analysis of structure, function and connectivity of the human brain. Clinical
EEG and neuroscience 42, 2 (2011), 107–121.
[28] Anders Eklund, Thomas E. Nichols, and Hans Knutsson. 2016. Cluster failure:
Why fMRI inferences for spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates. PNAS
113, 28 (2016), 7900–7905.
[29] Madeline Endres, Zachary Karas, Xiaosu Hu, Ioulia Kovelman, and Westley
Weimer. 2021. Relating Reading, Visualization, and Coding for New Program-
mers: A Neuroimaging Study. In ICSE .
[30] Damien A Fair, Bradley L Schlaggar, Alexander L Cohen, Francis M Miezin,
Nico UF Dosenbach, Kristin K Wenger, Michael D Fox, Abraham Z Snyder,
Marcus E Raichle, and Steven E Petersen. 2007. A method for using blocked and
event-related fMRI data to study âĂĲresting stateâĂİ functional connectivity.
Neuroimage 35, 1 (2007), 396–405.
[31] Sarah Fakhoury, Yuzhan Ma, Venera Arnaoudova, and Olusola Adesope. 2018.
The Effect of Poor Source Code Lexicon and Readability on Developers’ Cogni-
tive Load. In International Conference on Program Comprehension .
[32] Luiz Kobuti Ferreira and Geraldo F Busatto. 2013. Resting-state functional
connectivity in normal brain aging. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 37, 3
(2013), 384–400.
[33] Evelyn C Ferstl, Jane Neumann, Carsten Bogler, and D Yves Von Cramon. 2008.
The extended language network: a meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on
text comprehension. Human brain mapping 29, 5 (2008), 581–593.
[34] Linda Flower and John R Hayes. 1981. A cognitive process theory of writing.
College composition and communication 32, 4 (1981), 365–387.
[35] Benjamin Floyd, Tyler Santander, and Westley Weimer. 2017. Decoding the
representation of code in the brain: An fMRI study of code review and expertise.
InInternational Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 175–186.
[36] Michael D Fox and Michael Greicius. 2010. Clinical applications of resting state
functional connectivity. Frontiers in systems neuroscience 4 (2010), 19.
[37] KJ Friston, CD Frith, PF Liddle, and RSJ Frackowiak. 1993. Functional connec-
tivity: the principal-component analysis of large (PET) data sets. Journal of
Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 13, 1 (1993), 5–14.
[38] Karl J Friston. 2011. Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain
connectivity 1, 1 (2011), 13–36.
[39] Isabel Gauthier, Michael J Tarr, Jill Moylan, Pawel Skudlarski, John C Gore, and
Adam W Anderson. 2000. The fusiform âĂĲface areaâĂİ is part of a network
that processes faces at the individual level. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 12,
3 (2000), 495–504.
[40] Matthew F Glasser, Timothy S Coalson, Emma C Robinson, Carl D Hacker, John
Harwell, Essa Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil, Jesper Andersson, Christian F Beckmann,
Mark Jenkinson, et al .2016. A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral
cortex. Nature 536, 7615 (2016), 171–178.
[41] Silke Gobel, Vincent Walsh, and Matthew FS Rushworth. 2001. The mental
number line and the human angular gyrus. Neuroimage 14, 6 (2001), 1278–1289.
[42] Philip Goelet, Vincent F Castellucci, Samuel Schacher, and Eric R Kandel. 1986.
The long and the short of long–term memoryâĂŤa molecular framework. Nature
322, 6078 (1986), 419–422.[43] Roland H Grabner, Daniel Ansari, Karl Koschutnig, Gernot Reishofer, and Franz
Ebner. 2013. The function of the left angular gyrus in mental arithmetic: evidence
from the associative confusion effect. Human brain mapping 34, 5 (2013).
[44] Roland H Grabner, Anja Ischebeck, Gernot Reishofer, Karl Koschutnig, Mar-
garete Delazer, Franz Ebner, and Christa Neuper. 2009. Fact learning in complex
arithmetic and figural-spatial tasks: The role of the angular gyrus and its relation
to mathematical competence. Human brain mapping 30, 9 (2009), 2936–2952.
[45] Yosef Grodzinsky. 2000. The neurology of syntax: Language use without Broca’s
area. Behavioral and brain sciences 23, 1 (2000), 1–21.
[46] Mareike Grotheer, Brianna Jeska, and Kalanit Grill-Spector. 2018. A preference
for mathematical processing outweighs the selectivity for Arabic numbers in
the inferior temporal gyrus. Neuroimage 175 (2018), 188–200.
[47] Adam Hampshire, Samuel R Chamberlain, Martin M Monti, John Duncan, and
Adrian M Owen. 2010. The role of the right inferior frontal gyrus: inhibition
and attentional control. Neuroimage 50, 3 (2010), 1313–1319.
[48] Gesa Hartwigsen, Annette Baumgaertner, Cathy J Price, Maria Koehnke, Stephan
Ulmer, and Hartwig R Siebner. 2010. Phonological decisions require both the
left and right supramarginal gyri. PNAS 107, 38 (2010), 16494–16499.
[49] Yong He and Alan Evans. 2010. Graph theoretical modeling of brain connectivity.
Current opinion in neurology 23, 4 (2010), 341–350.
[50] A M Hermundstad, D S Bassett, K S Brown, E M Aminoff, D Clewett, S Freeman,
A Frithsen, A Johnson, C M Tipper, M B Miller, S T Grafton, and J M Carlson. 2013.
Structural foundations of resting-state and task-based functional connectivity
in the human brain. PNAS 110, 15 (2013), 6169–6174.
[51] Ian D Holloway, Gavin R Price, and Daniel Ansari. 2010. Common and segregated
neural pathways for the processing of symbolic and nonsymbolic numerical
magnitude: An fMRI study. Neuroimage 49, 1 (2010), 1006–1017.
[52] Christopher J Honey, Rolf Kötter, Michael Breakspear, and Olaf Sporns. 2007.
Network structure of cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity on multiple
time scales. PNAS 104, 24 (2007), 10240–10245.
[53] Christopher J Honey, Olaf Sporns, Leila Cammoun, Xavier Gigandet, Jean-
Philippe Thiran, Reto Meuli, and Patric Hagmann. 2009. Predicting human
resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity. PNAS 106, 6
(2009), 2035–2040.
[54] Yu Huang, Kevin Leach, Zohreh Sharafi, Nicholas McKay, Tyler Santander, and
Westley Weimer. 2020. Biases and differences in code review using medical
imaging and eye-tracking: genders, humans, and machines. In Foundations of
Software Engineering . 456–468.
[55] Yu Huang, Xinyu Liu, Ryan Krueger, Tyler Santander, Xiaosu Hu, Kevin Leach,
and Westley Weimer. 2019. Distilling neural representations of data structure
manipulation using fMRI and fNIRS. In (ICSE) .
[56] Yoshiharu Ikutani and Hidetake Uwano. 2014. Brain activity measurement
during program comprehension with NIRS. In Software Engineering, Artificial
Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing . IEEE, 1–6.
[57] Anna A Ivanova, Shashank Srikant, Yotaro Sueoka, Hope H Kean, Riva Dhamala,
Una-May O’reilly, Marina U Bers, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2020. Comprehension
of computer code relies primarily on domain-general executive brain regions.
Elife 9 (2020), e58906.
[58] Shruti Japee, Kelsey Holiday, Maureen D Satyshur, Ikuko Mukai, and Leslie G
Ungerleider. 2015. A role of right middle frontal gyrus in reorienting of attention:
a case study. Frontiers in systems neuroscience 9 (2015), 23.
[59] Gunnar Johansson. 1975. Visual motion perception. Scientific American 232, 6
(1975), 76–89.
[60] Donald Ervin Knuth. 1984. Literate programming. Comput. J. 27, 2 (1984),
97–111.
[61] Thomas Koenig, Leslie Prichep, Dietrich Lehmann, Pedro Valdes Sosa, Elisabeth
Braeker, Horst Kleinlogel, Robert Isenhart, and E Roy John. 2002. Millisecond
by millisecond, year by year: normative EEG microstates and developmental
stages. Neuroimage 16, 1 (2002), 41–48.
[62] Kerstin Konrad and Simon B Eickhoff. 2010. Is the ADHD brain wired differ-
ently? A review on structural and functional connectivity in attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Human brain mapping 31, 6 (2010), 904–916.
[63] Ryan Krueger, Yu Huang, Xinyu Liu, Tyler Santander, Westley Weimer, and
Kevin Leach. 2020. Neurological Divide: An FMRI Study of Prose and Code
Writing. In ICSE (Seoul, South Korea) (ICSE ’20) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 678âĂŞ690.
[64] S. Lee, A. Matteson, D. Hooshyar, S. Kim, J. Jung, G. Nam, and H. Lim. 2016.
Comparing Programming Language Comprehension between Novice and Expert
Programmers Using EEG Analysis. In International Conference on Bioinformatics
and Bioengineering . 350–355.
[65] Ilona Leki. 1992. Building Expertise through Sequenced Writing Assignments.
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages Journal 1, 2 (1992), 19–23.
[66] H-C Leung, John C Gore, and Patricia S Goldman-Rakic. 2002. Sustained
mnemonic response in the human middle frontal gyrus during on-line storage
of spatial memoranda. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 14, 4 (2002), 659–671.
[67] Kaiming Li, Lei Guo, Jingxin Nie, Gang Li, and Tianming Liu. 2009. Review of
methods for functional brain connectivity detection using fMRI. Computerized
medical imaging and graphics 33, 2 (2009), 131–139.
778Connecting the Dots: Rethinking the Relationship between Code and Prose Writing with Functional Connectivity ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece
[68] Martin Lotze, Katharina Erhard, Nicola Neumann, Simon B Eickhoff, and Robert
Langner. 2014. Neural correlates of verbal creativity: differences in resting-state
functional connectivity associated with expertise in creative writing. Frontiers
in human neuroscience 8 (2014), 516.
[69] Joseph A Maldjian, Paul J Laurienti, Robert A Kraft, and Jonathan H Burdette.
2003. An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-
based interrogation of fMRI data sets. Neuroimage 19, 3 (2003), 1233–1239.
[70] AR McIntosh and F Gonzalez-Lima. 1991. Structural modeling of functional neu-
ral pathways mapped with 2-deoxyglucose: effects of acoustic startle habituation
on the auditory system. Brain research 547, 2 (1991), 295–302.
[71] Martin J McKeown and Terrence J Sejnowski. 1998. Independent component
analysis of fMRI data: examining the assumptions. Human brain mapping 6, 5-6
(1998), 368–372.
[72] V Menon and JE Desmond. 2001. Left superior parietal cortex involvement in
writing: integrating fMRI with lesion evidence. Cognitive brain research 12, 2
(2001), 337–340.
[73] Takao Nakagawa, Yasutaka Kamei, Hidetake Uwano, Akito Monden, Kenichi
Matsumoto, and Daniel M German. 2014. Quantifying programmers’ mental
workload during program comprehension based on cerebral blood flow mea-
surement: A controlled experiment. In ICSE .
[74] National Library of Medicine. [n.d.]. PubMed Search. Retrieved February, 2021
from https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=functional+connectivity.
[75] Denis Noble. 2008. The music of life: biology beyond genes . Oxford University
Press.
[76] Stephanie Noble, Dustin Scheinost, and R Todd Constable. 2019. A decade
of test-retest reliability of functional connectivity: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Neuroimage 203 (2019), 116157.
[77] Richard E Passingham, Klaas E Stephan, and Rolf Kötter. 2002. The anatomical
basis of functional localization in the cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3, 8
(2002), 606–616.
[78] Norman Peitek, Janet Siegmund, Sven Apel, Christian Kästner, Chris Parnin,
Anja Bethmann, Thomas Leich, Gunter Saake, and André Brechmann. 2018. A
look into programmersâĂŹ heads. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
46, 4 (2018), 442–462.
[79] Ana Luísa Pinho, Örjan de Manzano, Peter Fransson, Helene Eriksson, and
Fredrik Ullén. 2014. Connecting to create: expertise in musical improvisation
is associated with increased functional connectivity between premotor and
prefrontal areas. Journal of Neuroscience 34, 18 (2014), 6156–6163.
[80] Samuel Planton, Marieke Longcamp, Patrice Péran, Jean-François Demonet, and
Mélanie Jucla. 2017. How specialized are writing-specific brain regions? An
fMRI study of writing, drawing and oral spelling. Cortex 88 (2017), 66–80.
[81] Wei Qin, Jie Tian, Lijun Bai, Xiaohong Pan, Lin Yang, Peng Chen, Jianping Dai,
Lin Ai, Baixiao Zhao, Qiyong Gong, et al .2008. FMRI connectivity analysis of
acupuncture effects on an amygdala-associated brain network. Molecular Pain
4 (2008), 1744–8069.
[82] Mitchel Resnick, John Maloney, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Natalie Rusk, Eve-
lyn Eastmond, Karen Brennan, Amon Millner, Eric Rosenbaum, Jay Silver, Brian
Silverman, and Yasmin Kafai. 2009. Scratch: Programming for All. Commun.
ACM 52, 11 (Nov. 2009), 60–67.
[83] Jennifer L Robinson, Angela R Laird, David C Glahn, William R Lovallo, and
Peter T Fox. 2010. Metaanalytic connectivity modeling: delineating the func-
tional connectivity of the human amygdala. Human brain mapping 31, 2 (2010),
173–184.
[84] Jean Salac, Cathy Thomas, Chloe Butler, Ashley Sanchez, and Diana Franklin.
2020. TIPP&SEE: A Learning Strategy to Guide Students through Use-Modify
Scratch Activities. In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on
Computer Science Education . 79–85.
[85] Jia-Hong Sie, Yin-Hua Chen, Chih-Yen Chang, Nai-Shing Yen, Woei-Chyn Chu,
and Yuo-Hsien Shiau. 2019. Altered central autonomic network in baseball
players: a resting-state fMRI study. Scientific reports 9, 1 (2019), 1–10.
[86] Janet Siegmund, Christian Kästner, Sven Apel, Chris Parnin, Anja Bethmann,
Thomas Leich, Gunter Saake, and André Brechmann. 2014. Understandingunderstanding source code with functional magnetic resonance imaging. In
International Conference on Software Engineering . 378–389.
[87] Janet Siegmund, Norman Peitek, Chris Parnin, Sven Apel, Johannes Hofmeis-
ter, Christian Kästner, Andrew Begel, Anja Bethmann, and André Brechmann.
2017. Measuring neural efficiency of program comprehension. In Foundations
of Software Engineering .
[88] David Canfield Smith. 1975. Pygmalion: a creative programming environment .
Technical Report. STANFORD UNIV CA DEPT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE.
[89] Andrea Solimeno, Minou Ella Mebane, Manuela Tomai, and Donata Francescato.
2008. The influence of students and teachers characteristics on the efficacy
of face-to-face and computer supported collaborative learning. Computers &
Education 51, 1 (2008), 109–128.
[90] Christoph Sperber, Daniel Wiesen, Georg Goldenberg, and Hans-Otto Karnath.
2019. A network underlying human higher-order motor control: Insights from
machine learning-based lesion-behaviour mapping in apraxia of pantomime.
Cortex 121 (2019), 308–321.
[91] Michael C Stevens. 2016. The contributions of resting state and task-based func-
tional connectivity studies to our understanding of adolescent brain network
maturation. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 70 (2016), 13–32.
[92] Genichi Sugihara, Tatsuro Kaminaga, and Morihiro Sugishita. 2006. Interindi-
vidual uniformity and variety of the “Writing center”: a functional MRI study.
Neuroimage 32, 4 (2006), 1837–1849.
[93] James W Tanaka and Martha J Farah. 1993. Parts and wholes in face recognition.
The Quarterly journal of experimental psychology 46, 2 (1993), 225–245.
[94] AA Taren, PJ Gianaros, CM Greco, EK Lindsay, A Fairgrieve, KW Brown, RK
Rosen, JL Ferris, E Julson, AL Marsland, et al .2017. Mindfulness meditation
training and executive control network resting state functional connectivity: a
randomized controlled trial. Psychosomatic medicine 79, 6 (2017), 674.
[95] Mariya Toneva and Leila Wehbe. 2019. Interpreting and improving natural-
language processing (in machines) with natural language-processing (in the
brain). arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11833 (2019).
[96] Hidetake Uwano, Masahide Nakamura, Akito Monden, and Ken-ichi Matsumoto.
2006. Analyzing Individual Performance of Source Code Review Using Review-
ersâĂŹ Eye Movement. In Eye Tracking Research Applications .
[97] Koene RA Van Dijk, Mert R Sabuncu, and Randy L Buckner. 2012. The influence
of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Neuroimage 59, 1
(2012), 431–438.
[98] Eleanna Varangis, Christian G Habeck, and Yaakov Stern. 2021. Task-based
functional connectivity in aging: How task and connectivity methodology affect
discovery of age effects. Brain and behavior 11, 1 (2021), e01954.
[99] Marinus T Vlaardingerbroek and Jacques A Boer. 2013. Magnetic resonance
imaging: theory and practice . Springer Science & Business Media.
[100] Brian Wandell and Stephen Thomas. 1997. Foundations of vision. Psyccritiques
42, 7 (1997).
[101] Mark Weiser and Joan Shertz. 1983. Programming problem representation in
novice and expert programmers. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies
19, 4 (1983), 391–398.
[102] Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli and Alfonso Nieto-Castanon. 2012. Conn: a functional
connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain
connectivity 2, 3 (2012), 125–141.
[103] Jonathan Wirsich, Ben Ridley, Pierre Besson, Viktor Jirsa, Christian Bénar, Jean-
Philippe Ranjeva, and Maxime Guye. 2017. Complementary contributions of
concurrent EEG and fMRI connectivity for predicting structural connectivity.
NeuroImage 161 (2017), 251–260.
[104] Yang Yang, Zhentao Zuo, Fred Tam, Simon J Graham, Ran Tao, Nizhuan Wang,
and Hong-Yan Bi. 2019. Brain activation and functional connectivity during
Chinese writing: An fMRI study. Journal of Neurolinguistics 51 (2019), 199–211.
[105] Darren J Yeo, Eric D Wilkey, and Gavin R Price. 2017. The search for the
number form area: A functional neuroimaging meta-analysis. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews 78 (2017), 145–160.
[106] Edward A Youngs. 1974. Human errors in programming. International Journal
of Man-Machine Studies 6, 3 (1974), 361–376.
779