Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development:
Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work?
Yi Wang
CoCo Labs
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China
wang@cocolabs.orgMin Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
zhangmin@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
The software development profession suffers from severe gender
biases, which could be explicit and implicit. However, SE litera-
ture has not systematically explored and evaluated the methods
for reducing gender biases, especially for implicit gender biases.
This paper reports on a field experiment to examine whether the
intergroup contact theory could reduce implicit gender biases in
software development. In the field experiment, 280 undergraduate
students taking a project-centric introductory software engineering
course were assigned to 70 teams with different contact configura-
tions. We measured and compared their explicit and implicit gender
biases before and after contacts in their teams. The study yields
a rich set of findings. First, we confirmed the positive effects of
intergroup contact theory in reducing gender biases, particularly
the implicit gender biases in both general and SE-specific contexts.
We further revealed that such effects were subjected to different
contact configurations. The intergroup contact theory’s effects were
maximized in teams where the number of females is greater than
or equal to the number of males. When the female is the minority
group in a team, contacts among members contribute to reducing
male members’ implicit gender biases but fail to result in the same
scale of effects on female members’ implicit gender biases. The
findings provide insights into using intergroup contact theory in
reducing implicit gender biases in software development contexts.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Social and professional topics →Women ;•Human-centered
computing→Empirical studies in collaborative and social comput-
ing.
KEYWORDS
intergroup contact theory, gender biases, field experiment, student
SE teams
ACM Reference Format:
Yi Wang and Min Zhang. 2020. Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software
Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work?. In Proceedings of the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7043-1/20/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.340976228th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’20), November 8–
13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409762
1 INTRODUCTION
Biases against female developers are prevalent in software engi-
neering [ 50,75,76]. These biases could be explicit and implicit
[81]. SE industry and researchers have spent a tremendous effort
in reducing gender biases and made significant progress. Many
software organizations and engineers now can deal with explicit
gender biases properly and resist their impacts on decision-making,
at least partially. However, there is still a long way to go to build an
environment free of gender biases in software development [ 10],
partial due to the subtle implicit gender biases [ 66]. Implicit gender
biases are not only prevalent among software engineers but also
have significant impacts on their decision-making in various soft-
ware development scenarios, for example, assessing job candidates
and evaluating developers’ contributions [ 81]. What is even worse,
it seems that software engineers’ implicit gender biases are more
substantial than the general public’s, indicating this problem may
not be well addressed in software development organizations [ 82].
Therefore, developing empirically validated, systematic knowl-
edge of effective interventions for implicit bias reduction is neces-
sary and urgent. Given that the idea of implicit gender biases comes
from social psychology, explicitly theory-based interventions for
reducing such biases should be pursued following social psychol-
ogy’s traditions [ 20,21,74]. Such theory-driven methods have been
proven to be effective in many social scenarios [ 56]. Among many
theories having the potential to reduce implicit gender biases re-
duction, the Intergroup Contact Theory1proposed by Gordon
W. Allport [ 1] in his influential book– The Nature of Prejudices –has
many advantages. First, intergroup contact theory has been demon-
strated to be effective in dealing with many social biases in many
social sectors since its initial proposal in 1954 [ 64], for example,
biases towards social groups such as: people with autism [ 6], LGBT
[80], racial groups [ 12,46], etc. Second, it does not rely on forcing
people to change their prejudices but takes an indirect way through
utilizing the natural contacts in interpersonal interactions to reduce
people’s prejudices [ 8]. Third, it could be conveniently implemented
in an intergroup (female vs. male) team [ 61], which fits the nature
of software engineering where work activities are organized in
team collaboration. Lastly, compared with bias reduction methods
at an individual level, intergroup contact theory focuses on a group
of people, enabling it to reduce a large population’s biases [ 14].
1The “group” here refers to a social group, e.g., women, men, African American, etc.
580
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
Thus, it could be a good potential intervention for implicit gender
biases reduction in software development.
However, applying gender bias reduction interventions based on
intergroup contact theory has not yet been empirically evaluated
in software engineering contexts. We do not know if it would work
as expected. Thus, evaluating its general effectiveness should be
the top priority of the research. So, our first research question is:
RQ1:Is intergroup contact theory an effective intervention for reduc-
ing implicit gender biases in software development contexts?
Moreover, there are many possible intergroup contact configu-
rations when implementing intergroup contact theory [ 14]. When
dealing with gender-related biases, a type of configurations has par-
ticular importance is the gender compositions in a team, i.e., which
gender forms the majority group in a team. Previous literature has
shown that it could significantly influence the biases towards fe-
males in a mixed-gender team [ 3,36,85]. Thus, we may also need
to further identify which intergroup contact configuration(s) would
maximize intergroup contact theory’s effectiveness. Thus, we have
the second research question:
RQ2When applying intergroup contact theory for implicit gender
biases reduction in a software engineering team, how do intergroup
contact theory’s effects vary under different contact configurations
regarding gender compositions?
To answer the above questions, we conducted a field experi-
ment with a sample of 280 undergraduate students enrolled in two
cohorts of an introductory software engineering course at a large
northeastern university in the United States. Leveraging the 8-week
long team project component of the course, we assigned the par-
ticipants into 70 project teams. 43 teams implemented intergroup
(female and male) contact with different configurations of gender
composition. The remaining 27 teams consist of participants of the
same gender, hereby forming the control sample. We captured the
changes in participants’ gender biases after the longitudinal contact
in their project teams and made a series of comparisons.
The study yields a rich set of findings. First, we confirmed the
general effectiveness of intergroup contact theory in reducing gen-
der biases, particularly the implicit gender biases in both general
and SE-specific scenarios. We further found that its effects are sub-
jected to different contact configurations. The intergroup contact
theory’s positive effects were maximized in teams where the num-
ber of females is greater than or equal to the number of males.
When the female is the minority group in a team, though contacts
among members did help reduce male members’ implicit gender
biases, female members’ implicit biases exhibits slight increases.
Specifically, the study’s contributions are tri-fold:
(1)Drawing from social psychology literature, we introduce the
concept of intergroup contact theory, a theoretical tool in social
psychology for biases reduction, into SE research.
(2)We conduct a large-scale, theory-driven, empirical field study
with 70 student SE teams. It does not prove the general effective-
ness of intergroup contact theory in reducing implicit gender
biases in the context of student software engineering teams but
also evaluates its effectiveness under different group contact
configurations.(3)We discuss theoretical implications for research into implicit
gender biases reduction and practical implications for imple-
menting intergroup contact theory in software engineering
organizations.
Note that we fully acknowledge and agree that gender is not
binary, and those people identify themselves as non-binary genders
also suffer disadvantages in the software development profession.
However, in this article, we use “male vs. female” because the vast
majority of software engineers identify themselves as one of these
two genders, and the tensions between these two genders are most
prevalent among equality issues among different genders.
Paper Organization. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Sec-
tion 2 briefly reviews implicit gender biases and the intergroup
contact theory. Section 3 introduces the detailed design of the study.
Section 4 discusses how we analyzed the data collected from the
empirical study. Section 5 presents the results and findings. Section
6 discusses implications, as well as threats to validity. Section 7
summarized some related work. Section 8 concludes the paper.
2 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
In this section, we briefly review the related theories. We start
from the implicit gender biases theory, followed by the intergroup
contact theory, which is the candidate intervention for reducing
implicit gender biases in this study.
2.1 Implicit Gender Biases
Both cognitive and social psychology agree on the dual-process
theory that human reasoning and decision-making could be intu-
itive (type 1 process) and reflective (type 2 process) [ 23,55]. Both
processes are essential in people’s cognitions, actions, and decisions
in social contexts, including their various biases. To investigate the
biases caused by the type 1 process reasoning and decision-making,
social psychologists proposed the concept of “implicit bias” [ 32–
34]. These biases, which lead to both favorable and unfavorable
assessments, are activated involuntarily and mostly outside of ac-
tive awareness or control. For example, a team leader in a global
software development team may claim and truthfully believe that
he or she treats team members from all locations without any prej-
udices, but he or she may always assign easy work to those who in
a foreign country where people are assumed to be less competent.
Implicit gender biases refer to such unconscious biases related
to gender issues. Different from explicit gender biases, even people
who have such biases often do not know their existence. However,
literature has confirmed the prevalence of implicit gender biases, as
well as their strong impacts on decision making in many domains.
To name a few: legal [ 48], politics [ 41], business & management
[39], professional sports [ 27], health [ 71], STEM [ 13], and software
development [ 10]. Therefore, it is fair to say that achieving gender
equality could not be realized without reducing implicit gender
biases, which often requires much more effort than dealing with
explicit ones due to their unconscious nature.
2.1.1 Implicit Association Test (IAT)–Measuring Implicit Gender Bi-
ases. Implicit biases are conventionally assessed using the Implicit
Association Test (IAT) [ 33,57]. IAT is a chronometric procedure
that quantifies the strength of conceptual associations by compar-
ing a participant’s reaction latencies across conditions. In a typical
581Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
IAT, participants categorize stimuli (e.g., word, picture, etc.) repre-
senting four categories. Let us take the Gender-Career IAT as an
example to see how it works. The Gender-Career IAT was widely
used to assess the bias of associating female with home vs.male with
career . Fig. 1 shows the screenshots of two trials in Gender-Career
IAT. The four categories in the Gender-Career IAT are: { female ,
male ,family ,career } (top corners of the screenshots in Fig. 1) . Each
category has a few words to represent them; for example, “kitchen”
is a word stimulus of the category family . A participant categories
them in two different conditions: (1) categorizing female andfamily
words together with one response key, and male andcareer words
together with another response key; and (2), categorizing female
words and career words together with one response key, and male
words and family words with the other.
Career 
or
FEMALE Family 
or
MALE 
HER 
Press Q for left, P for right. 
If the red X appears, press the other key to make the X go away. Family 
or
FEMALE Career 
or
MALE 
kitchen 
Press Q for left, P for right. 
If the red X appears, press the other key to make the X go away. 
Figure 1: The screenshots of two trials in Gender-Career
IAT’s condition 1 (left) and condition 2 (right).
If an individual performs the association in condition 1 faster
than that in condition 2, he or she tends to associate female with
home vs.male with career . Thus, he or she holds the implicit gender
bias that women should value family over career. The differences in
average response latency between conditions indicate the strength
of implicit biases, which is formally defined as:
D=LC1−LC2
σLC1∪LC2(1)
With this definition, D−score ’s range is usually in the range [-2,
2]. The larger it is away from 0, the stronger the bias it indicates.
2.1.2 Implicit Gender Biases in Software Engineering. While the
problem of gender biases in the software development profession
has been well-known, implicit gender biases have not received
much attention in software engineering literature. Wang & Red-
miles [ 81] introduced the idea of implicit gender biases into gender
studies in SE contexts. They developed two customized, SE-specific
IATs; and used them to demonstrate the existence of implicit gender
biases in the software development profession. Their results also
suggested that implicit gender biases were hard to overcome in
SE-related decision-making scenarios while explicit gender biases’
negative impacts could be managed. In their following work [ 82],
they found that professional software engineers’ implicit gender
biases are even stronger than the general public’s, which further
indicates the urgency of dealing with implicit gender biases issues.
However, it is fair to say that while SE researchers are increasingly
acknowledging and concerning implicit gender biases, there are
few studies focusing on how to reduce implicit gender biases, par-
ticularly attempting to address this issue in a systematic way. The
study reported in this paper is designed to fill this gap.2.2 Intergroup Contact Theory and Allport’s
Optimal Conditions
It is natural to assume that increasing interactions between different
groups of people would possibly be helpful to reduce biases under
some conditions [ 61]. In social psychology, such a view is the central
hypothesis of the intergroup contact theory, proposed by Gordon
W. Allport, one of the most influential psychologists in the 20th
century, in 1954. Since then, a bunch of literature across various
domains has confirmed that positive “intergroup contact” does have
the potential to reduce explicit and implicit biases. Just to name
a few, researchers have shown that the effectiveness of contact
in reducing biases towards females, African American, minority
religious groups, etc [60, 69].
Of course, not all intergroup contacts will lead to positive ex-
periences and hereby reduce biases towards a specific group. For
example, interactions between groups of different statuses some-
times reinforce biases rather than reduce them. To maximize the
effect of applying the intergroup contact theory, certain conditions
have to be satisfied. Allport, the proposer of intergroup contact
theory, summarized four such conditions: equal status, intergroup
cooperation, common goals, and support by social and institutional
authorities. Tab. 1 briefly summarizes the meanings of these condi-
tions and gives some examples or counterexamples. According to
Allport’s hypothesis and much other extant theoretical and empiri-
cal work, it is critical to ensure that the “designed” contact between
two groups to realize one or more of these conditions.
Contacts occur at an individual level, but biases are at a group
level. Thus, researchers attempted to explain why and how individual-
level intergroup contacts reduce biases. There are several competing
explanations proposed by social psychologists. For example, by syn-
thesizing existing literature, Pettigrew [ 58] proposed a longitudinal
intergroup contact theory that argues the intergroup contact theory
takes a dynamic process consisting of three stages to be effective.
The first is the decategorization stage. In this stage, an individuals’
personal (not group) identities were separated from his or her group
identities in another group’s members’ cognition, thus leading to
chances for promoting interpersonal liking towards this specific
person. The second stage is salient categorization in which the indi-
viduals’ social categories become salient to achieve generalization
of positive affect to his or her group as a whole. The last stage is
recategorization . During this stage, an individual’s group identities
are replaced with a more superordinate group he or she belongs to.
Other group members change group identities from “Us vs. Them”
to more inclusive and unified identities. Therefore, in addition to
Allport’s original four conditions, the “designed” contact should
be longitudinal to allow enough time for team members to walk
through these stages.
Finally, it is worth noting that research into intergroup contact
theory is still a fast-growing area though the initial idea has been
over 50 years old. For example, technologies brought many novel
forms of intergroup contact; the scope of “group” became increas-
ingly richer. We can only briefly review the most relevant yet very
small amount of work here. Interested readers may refer to some of
Pettigrew and his colleagues’ recent meta-reviews [ 59–61]. How-
ever, the key idea behind various implementations of intergroup
contact theory keeps intact.
582ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
Table 1: Allport’s optimal conditions for intergroup contact.
Condition Explanation Example(E)/Counter Example(CE)
Equal Status The members of the two groups have equal status.
Members of one group should not be treated as
subordinate.A software development team’s project leaders and team
members are not in equal status. (CE)
Common Goals The members of the two groups should have shared goals
which could not be achieved without both teams’
commitment.Members of software engineering senior project team
have common goal to finish their project on time. (E)
Cooperation The members of the two groups should work together
towards their common goals in a non-competitive way.Developers and requirement engineers cooperatively to
develop high quality software systems. (E)
Institutional/Social
SupportThe contacts between the two groups, e.g., cooperation,
personal interactions, should be supported by the
institutional and/or social authorities.A manager of a global software development team
encourages sub-teams in two locations to collaborate. (E)
3 EMPIRICAL STUDY DESGIN
In this section, we introduce the field experiment design. The design
of the field experiment followed the guidelines and best practices
in both social psychology and software engineering [ 26,37,45,78].
However, please note that, field experiment is largely observational
by its nature, thus usually has less control and fewer random as-
signments [68].
3.1 Setting and Participants
The study was performed at a mid-sized university in the United
States. The university had roughly 15,000 undergraduate students
enrolled. The participants were recruited from the undergraduates
who took the “Introduction to Software Engineering” course during
the academic year 2018-2019’s fall and spring semesters. The course
was required for students from many computing and engineering
schools’ majors at the university. Every year, about 2,000 students
took this course. It was a project-oriented course in which the main
component of the course is a team-based project. Students were
assigned to 4-member teams to deliver an application using the
Scrum development method. No matter which major a participant
was from, he or she was required to finish at least two 45 hours
programming courses with grades no lower than “C.” Hence, our
participants had sufficient technical skills and learning ability to
deliver their projects.
Because female students only accounted for a small proportion
(≈15%) of all course attendees, conducting the experiment in one
semester could not allow us to recruit enough female participants.
We decided to split the study into two cohorts. The first cohort
happened during the fall semester, and the second happened in the
following spring semester. In the first week of each semester, we
asked if the students attending the course would like to participate
in the study. In the first semester, 249 students gave their consent
to participate in the study. However, because the study required
participants to be assigned to mixed-gender teams and the imbal-
ance between female students and male students, we could only
accommodate 156 of them (cohort 1’s sample). In the second semes-
ter, 207 students showed interest in participating. The recruiting
process kept the same. For the same reasons, we accommodated124 of them (cohort 2’s sample). Together, we had a sample of 280
participants in 70 4-member teams.
We offered $20 to all participants as compensation. We estimated
that the extra time on top of the regular coursework for partic-
ipation in the study would be less than 1.5 hours (2 sessions of
testing implicit gender biases), making the hourly rate about $13.
Doing so enabled us to comply with both federal and state laws
regulating minimum wages. Using cash compensation rather than
bonus grades of the course also made the study fair to students
who optioned not to participate and ensured the voluntariness of
the participation. No other compensation was offered.
3.2 Experiment Overview
3.2.1 Experiment Conditions. The experiment had two conditions
(Control &Treatment ).Control had two single-gender configura-
tions and served as the baselines. Treatment had three mixed-gender
configurations of different gender compositions. Tab. 2 shows the
basic information of contact configurations. As it indicates, we
assigned a code to each configuration. All-F refers to the config-
uration where a team’s four members were all females. Similarly,
All-M refers to the configuration of all-male teams. They are the
two control configurations since there was no intergroup contact.
The rest three are the treatment configurations. F-M refers to the
configurations in which the female is the majority group (3 females,
1 male). EQ-G represents the configuration where a team has an
equal number of females and males (2 females, 2 males). Of course,
M-M refers to the male-majority gender composition (1 female, 3
males).
3.2.2 Implementing Allport’s Optimal Conditions. The aforemen-
tioned four Allport’s optimal conditions were satisfied in our study.
For the first condition ( Equal Status ), all participants in a team
were first-year or second-year college students at the time of the
experiment. While acknowledging that their social-economic back-
ground may be different, there was not much difference in their
statuses within the university. For the second condition ( Common
Goals ), each project team had a common goal of delivering their
project with acceptable quality. The majority of their final project
grade (80%) was only related to the group performance rather than
583Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Table 2: The contact configurations of gender compositions in subjected teams.
Cohort 1 Cohort 2
Code Configuration No. Teams No. Participants No. Teams No. Participants No. Teams No. Participants
Control:
All-F ♀♀♀♀ 12 48 ( ♀: 48) 5 20 7 28
All-M ♂♂♂♂ 15 60 ( ♂: 60) 9 36 6 24
Treatment:
F-M ♀♀♀♂ 13 52 ( ♀: 39,♂: 13) 8 32 5 20
EQ-G ♀♀♂♂ 15 60 ( ♀: 30,♂: 30) 9 36 6 24
M-M ♀♂♂♂ 15 60 ( ♀: 15,♂: 45) 8 32 7 28
Total – 70 280 ( ♀: 132,♂: 148) 39 156 ( ♀: 70,♂: 86 ) 31 124 ( ♀: 62,♂: 62)
individual members’ performances. For the third condition ( Co-
operation ), members of a team had to cooperate with each other
to finish the tasks. The scale of the work and the interdependent
nature of software engineering projects required them to collabo-
rate. Peer evaluation among team members also helped to facilitate
cooperation. There was no direct competition among team mem-
bers. For the last condition ( Institutional/Social Support ), instructors
explicitly required a team’s members to interact with each other.
Each team was also asked to invite the instructor to join the team’s
slack channel so that the instructor could facilitate interactions
among team members. Because these projects lasted for 8 weeks,
we could expect that a team has enough time to walk through
the three stages, i.e., decategorization ,salient categorization , and
recategorization .
3.2.3 Overview of the Experiment Process. The whole experiment
process in a semester contains three main phases: (1) Experiment
Preparation : Week 1 & 2, (2) Experiment Execution. : Week 3–10, (3)
Experiment Warp-up. : Week 11. Fig. 2 visualizes the entire process
of the field experiment.
Week 1 
Week 2 
Week 3 
Week 10 
Week 11 Experiment
Preparation 
Experiment
Execution 
(Teams worked on 
their projects) 
Experiment
Wrap-up Recruiting participants and 
obtaining their consents. 
Assigning participants into teams. 
Collecting participants’ explicit and 
implicit gender biases. 
Collecting participants’ explicit and 
implicit gender biases. 
Study debriefing (2nd cohort only). Explicit: MSS 
Implicit: Gender-Career, 
SE, SE Leadership 
Figure 2: The field experiment’s three phases in each
corhort.
Experiment Preparation. The experiment preparation phase focused
on recruiting participants and assigning them to teams. We have
introduced the participant recruitment in Section 3.1, so we donot repeat it here. In week 2, participants were randomly assigned
to teams by the researchers and course instructors using a ran-
dom assignment application developed by the researchers. Then
we notified team assignments to participants via email. Each email
contained a unique access code that helped to track every partici-
pant and match him or her to other participants in the same team
and configuration. We did not disclose the study’s purpose to avoid
the potential biases related to social desirability. Moreover, we did
not use deception by telling a fake study purpose, either. In the
information consent, we frankly admitted that the study purpose
could not be fully disclosed, and assured them that the study had
been determined harmless by the governing authorities. Doing so
made this study free of the ethical dilemma and the second-guessing
effect [37].
Experiment Execution. The field experiment execution phase lasted
about 8 weeks from week 3 to 102. There were two key data col-
lection procedures at the beginning (week 3) and the end (week
10) of this phase. First, during week 3, we conducted the before
intergroup contacts bias assessment. Each participant finished the
first session of online assessment, which collected his or her gender
biases before intergroup contacts. Participants used their unique
access codes to access the online assessment. They were required
to finish the assessment in one sitting. A daily reminder was sent
until a participant finished the session. Then, during week 10, the
same procedure was repeated for the after intergroup contacts bias
assessment.
Both the before and after intergroup contacts bias assessments
used the same test materials and procedures. A participant was
asked to respond to one questionnaire scale (Modern Sexism Scale:
MSS) measuring explicit gender biases, and finish three implicit
association tests assessing implicit gender biases against females of
being professionals: general career (Gender-Career), general soft-
ware engineer (SE), or SE team leader (SE Leadership), respectively.
Their orders were randomized.
Experiment Warp-up. The last phase wrapped-up the experiment.
For the first cohort, there was no concrete experiment procedure
performed during that phase. We simply notified them that we
would send the debriefing note upon the finish of the second co-
hort. We did that to avoid participants in the second cohort learning
too many details about the study before their participation. During
2The week of fall/spring break did not count into regular weeks.
584ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
the last week of the second cohort, we summarized the prelimi-
nary results and sent them to both cohorts’ participants with full
disclosure of study purpose and preliminary results.
3.3 Measurements
The main constructs of the study are explicit and implicit biases.
We adapted existing psychometric models in social psychology to
measure them.
3.3.1 Explicit Gender Biases. As we mentioned in Section 3.3.3, the
explicit gender biases were measured with the modern sexism scale
(MSS). MSS asked participants to respond to 8 statements like “ it
is easy to understand why women’s groups are still concerned about
societal limitations of women’s opportunities .” Participants used a
7-point Likert scale (strongly disagree - strongly agree: [1, 7]) to
rate their responses to these statements. Then, each participant’s
responses were converted into a final score.
3.3.2 Implicit Gender Biases. Three types of gender biases were
measured using three IATs: Gender-Career, SE, SE Leadership (see
Fig. 2). Each of them has two conditions of category associations
shown in Tab. 3. We used the equation 1 (see Section 2.1.1) to
calculate each participants’ D-scores. Note that the condition 1s in
the three IAT were consistently against the common social biases.
For most of the participants, we expected that condition 1 would
result in higher latencies, i.e., LC1−LC2>0. Doing so enabled that
most of the participants’ D-scores >0. The higher a D-score is, the
more biases against females are.
Table 3: The conditions of association in the three IATs. For
the word stimuli of each IAT, please refer to the appendix in
Wang & Redmiles [81].
IAT Condition 1 (C1) Condition 2 (C2)
Gender- Female–Career vs. Female–Family vs.
Career Male–Family Male–Career
SE-general Female–SE vs. Female–Non-SE vs.
Male–Non-SE Male–SE
SE Female–SE Leadership vs. Female–SE vs.
Leadership Male–SE Male–SE Leadership
3.4 Collected Data
In both data collection sessions (Week 3 and 10), we repeatedly mea-
sured explicit and implicit gender biases with the aforementioned
measurements. For each individual, we collected 1 score for MSS, 3
D-scores for IATs in each session. Thus, combining two sessions’
data, each individual’s data could be represented by an 8-tuple as
follows:
<EW3,EW10,DG
W3,DG
W10,DSE
W3,DSE
W10,DSEL
W3,DSEL
W10>
where Erepresents the explicit gender bias measured by the MSS;
Drepresents the implicit gender biases measured by IATs’ D-score.
Since we were mostly interested in the changes of these mea-
sures’ values after 8 weeks’ interactions in teams, using each mea-
sure’s value of week 10 minus the corresponding value of week 3,we have a 4-tuple for each participant:
<∆E,∆DG,∆DSE,∆DSEL>
In total, there were 280 such 4-tuples. We were going to use them in
the data analysis described as follows. Note that most of the values
were expected to be negative because participants were assumed to
be less biased after interactions if the intergroup contact theory did
work. Therefore, the smaller a ∆value is, the more positive effect
it indicates.
4 DATA ANALYSIS
In this section, we outline the data analyses which were performed
to answer the two main research questions. All statistical analyses
were performed with the statistical software R 3.4.1 [63] and
its associated packages for macOS Catalina (version 10.15.1). We
followed the ASA’s principles to report the results and to interpret
the statistical significance [84].
4.1 Tests of Homogeneity with the Data
Collected from Cohorts 1 and 2
Because the data was collected from two cohorts, we had to de-
termine if the two cohorts’ data could combine together before
performing the following data analysis. To do so, we performed a
series of tests of homogeneity procedures. We used Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests to verify if the two cohorts’ data came from the
same distributions. For example, we tested if the first cohort’s ∆DG
and the second cohort’s ∆DGfollow the same distribution. If they
follow the same distributions, we could combine them without dis-
tinguishing which cohort they came from in the following main
effect analyses. Similar procedures were performed for the rest of
three∆measures ( ∆DG,∆DSE,∆DSEL).
4.2 Data Analysis for Answering RQ1
Since the main goal of the RQ1is evaluating the effectiveness of the
intergroup contact theory in reducing implicit gender biases, the
data analysis method is straightforward. Examining the Treatment ’s
effect on changes of gender biases values (which were repeatedly
measured before and after contacts) would serve the purpose of
evaluating the overall effectiveness of intergroup contact theory.
However, we could notsimply use the technique such as t-test
orone-way ANOVA to compare the data between the Control and
theTreatment . Because individual participants were assigned in
teams, it is likely that the data collected from participants in the
same team are not independent, i.e., there are likely to have some
correlations among data cases from the same team. Thus, our data is
nested data that does not satisfy the “independence of observations”
assumption.
To properly perform the data analysis, we resorted to the Hierar-
chical Linear Modeling (HLM ) technique [ 65]. HLM allows retaining
data’s hierarchical information in the analysis while removing the
biases caused by the dependencies among data cases. In our case,
we have three nested hierarchies: condition ,configuration , and team
(see Tab. 2).
We built four HLM models where the four ∆measurements of
explicit and implicit gender biases ( ∆E,∆DG,∆DSE, and∆DSEL)
were the dependent variables. To answering the RQ1, we needed
585Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
to focus on the condition (Control andTreatment ). Thus, condition ,
as a categorical variable, was treated as the fixed effect. Meanwhile,
theteam was treated as the random effects in the models. In this
analysis, we used both Control andTreatment ’s data cases ( N=280);
and built a model for each dependent variable, respectively.
The statistical modeling happened at an individual participant
level. We employed R’slme4 package [4] to build all HLM models.
4.3 Data Analysis for Answering RQ2
The data analysis for RQ2was similar. We also applied the HLM
technique. In this analysis, the four ∆measurements of explicit and
implicit gender biases are also dependent variables. Since we were
interested in the effects of configuration of different gender composi-
tions, we treated it as the fixed effect and team as the random effects
in the models. We used the Treatment ’s data cases only ( N=172).
As we did before, we used R’slme4 package [ 4] to build a model
for each dependent variable. However, we recoded the categorical
variable configuration . We used the numerical values of the number
of females in each team to replace the original categorical value.
That is, the F-M was recoded as “3”; the EQ-G was recoded as “2”;
and the M-M was recoded as “1. ” Doing so allowed us to use one nu-
merical variable in regressions to analyze different configurations’
effects without adding dummy variables, thus providing unified
insights of the role of team configurations in the intervention.
4.4 Data Availability
The data and its descriptions, as well as corresponding analysis
scripts, were made available at https://cutt.ly/pttgE1I. Other study
materials were also included.
5 RESULTS AND FINDINGS
In this section, we report the results and findings. We first report
the results of tests of homogeneity with the data cases collected
in the two cohorts (fall and spring semesters of the academic year
2018-19), which gave permission for the further analyses on ex-
amining intergroup contact and its configurations’ impacts. We
also provide some descriptive statistics to help readers get some
intuitive impression of the data. Then we present the details of the
Hierarchical Linear Models, which could help us answer the two
main research questions.
5.1 Results of Tests of Homogeneity
The results of tests of homogeneity support the decision to combine
the two cohort’s data together. Tab. 4 summarizes the results of the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests on ∆E,∆DG,∆DSE, and∆DSEL. None
of them has significant differences across the two cohorts. Thus,
we combined two cohorts’ data together; the total data set has 280
individual data cases from 70 teams. In Section 5.1 & 5.2, all results
are based on data from both cohorts.
5.2 RQ1: Overall Effectiveness of Intergroup
Contact Theory
5.2.1 Regression Results. Columns 2–5 in Tab. 5 present the HLM
regression models for examining the overall effectiveness of the
intergroup contact theory intervention implemented in our study.Table 4: Results of Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
Biases Measurements D Statistics Sig.
Explicit MSS ( ∆E) 0.125 Not Sig.
Gender-Career ( ∆DG) 0.055 Not Sig.
Implicit SE-general ( ∆DSE) 0.072 Not Sig.
SE Leadership ( ∆DSEL) 0.080 Not Sig.
Compared with the models which only contains the random effect
(Team ), all four models have smaller AICs, indicating that adding the
fixed effect ( Condition :Control &Treatment ) yields better models.
For all models, we can find that all coefficients of the Condition
is significant and positive, which means that the values ∆measure-
ments tend to be greater in the Treatment condition than those
values in the Control condition. Thus, we could say that using the
intergroup contact theory intervention brings greater changes to
participants’ explicit and implicit biases3. To promote an intuitive
understanding, Fig. 3 plots the pairwise comparisons of the distri-
butions of the four ∆measurements. On the top of Fig 3.(a)–(d), we
added the mean of that bias measured before the intervention. Sim-
ple calculations would determine how much biases the intervention
could be able to reduce. It is easy to conclude that the intervention
does help to reduce participants’ explicit and implicit gender biases.
ControlTreatment-0.50.00.51.0Explicit Bias (MSS) Mean (Week 3) = 4.52
Intervention ConditionsChanges on MSS
(a) Modern Sexism Scale (MSS)
ControlTreatment-0.10.00.10.20.30.4Implicit Biases (Gender-Career) Mean (Week 3) = 0.68
Intervention ConditionsChanges on Gender-Career IAT (b) Gender-Career
ControlTreatment-0.20.00.10.20.30.4Implicit Biases (SE) Mean (Week 3) = 0.58
Intervention ConditionsChanges on SE IAT
(c) SE General
ControlTreatment-0.20.00.20.40.6Implicit Biases (SE Leadership) Mean (Week 3) = 0.97
Intervention ConditionsChanges on SE Leadership IAT (d) SE Leadership
Figure 3: Changes of biases in two Control andTreatment
conditions.
3Since we calculated the ∆s by subtracting biases in week 10 from biases in week 3,
the greater they are, the more biases reduced.
586ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
Table 5: HLM models of the overall effectiveness of Intergroup Contact Theory.
Overall Effectiveness Configurations’ Impacts
Predictors ∆E ∆DG(β) ∆DSE(β) ∆DSEL(β) ∆E(β) ∆DG(β) ∆DSE(β) ∆DSEL(β)
Intercept 0.083* 0.090*** 0.070*** 0.149 0 .209***** 0.132*** 0.117*** 0.158***
(0.040) ( 0.012) ( 0.012) ( 0.020) ( 0.065) ( 0.020) ( 0.024) ( 0.039)
Fixed
Condition 0.545*** 0.138*** 0.109*** 0.136***
(0.051) ( 0.016) ( 0.015) ( 0.026)
Configuration 0.214*** 0.049*** 0.032** 0.065**
(0.031) ( 0.009) ( 0.011) ( 0.019)
Random
Team†0.036 0 .002 0 .002 0 .006 0 .018 0 .000 0 .001 0 .004
(0.189) ( 0.049) ( 0.043) ( 0.077) ( 0.133) ( 0.020) ( 0.036) ( 0.062)
AIC −25.601−525.587−524.789−232.958−30.435−306.719−286.715−120.159
(Random AIC) (35.599) (− 481.506) (− 492.437) (− 216.311) (− 4.494) (− 295.070) (− 288.192) (− 117.293)
No. of Obs. N=280 N=172
(70 teams) (43 teams)
Note.∗:p<0.10,∗∗:p<0.05,∗∗∗:p<0.01;†: for the random effects, we report the variances of group intercepts, and corresponding
standard deviations in the braces () below them.
5.2.2 Answers to RQ1.Based on the above discussions, we can
answer the RQ1as follows:
In general, bias reduction intervention based on intergroup con-
tact theory was effective in reducing explicit and implicit gender
biases. On average, it could reduce about 9% of explicit bias,
and about 20%–25% of implicit biases. It consistently performed
better than the baselines in the Control condition (single-gender
teams, no intergroup contact).
5.3 RQ2: Contact Configurations’ Impacts
5.3.1 Regression Results. Columns 6–9 in Tab. 5 present the HLM
regression models for evaluating the different team configurations’
effects. Compared with the models which only contains the random
effect ( Team ), all models have smaller AICs except for the model
of the SE-general implicit biases (Column 9 in Tab.5). Thus, we
could conclude that adding the fixed effect ( Configuration :Female-
Majority ,Equal-Gender , &Male-Majority ) yields better models for
explicit gender biases, and three types of implicit gender biases.
Since all coefficients of the Configuration is significant, we can
conclude that different configurations of gender-composition have
significant impacts on the effectiveness of the bias reduction inter-
vention. The positive coefficients indicate that having more females
in a team is likely to lead to better effectiveness in bias reductions.
As we did before, we plot distributions of bias changes in each
configuration in Fig. 4. We could find that the differences between
Female-Majority and Equal-Gender configurations are not quite
significant. Both of them achieve relatively good effectiveness in
bias reductions. But in the Male-Majority configuration, the inter-
vention’s performances are not that good.
We further examine the collected data from the Male-Majority
teams. We notice that the many females in Male-Majority teams
have smaller biases changes. Some of their biases even increased.
F-MEQ-GM-M0.00.51.0Explicit Biases (MSS)
Configurations of Gender-compositionChanges on MSS(a) Modern Sexism Scale (MSS)
F-MEQ-GM-M-0.10.00.10.20.30.4Implicit Biases (Gender-Career)
Configurations of Gender-compositionChanges on Gender-Career IAT (b) Gender-Career
F-MEQ-GM-M-0.20.00.10.20.30.4Implicit Biases (SE)
Configurations of Gender-compositionChanges on SE IAT
(c) SE General
F-MEQ-GM-M-0.20.00.20.40.6Implicit Biases (SE Leadership)
Configurations of Gender-compositionChanges on SE Leadership IAT (d) SE Leadership
Figure 4: Changes of biases in different configurations.
However, there are only 15 females in these Male-Majority teams.
Such a small number of data cases prohibit us from building HLM
models to statistically test the differences. We calculate the means of
females’ and males’ data, which were: (1) ∆E-0.15 vs. 0.47, (2) ∆DG-
0.05 vs. 0.21, (3) ∆DSE-0.07 vs. 0.18, (4) ∆DSEL-0.11 vs. 0.24. Such
differences are not trivial. What contributes to these differences
required future investigation.
587Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
5.3.2 Answers to RQ2.Based on the above discussions, we can
answer the RQ2as follows:
The configuration of gender-composition in a team significantly
influenced the effectiveness of intergroup contact theory inter-
vention. The intervention achieved better bias reductions when
the females are not the minority of a team. In a team which has
more male than female, the effectivenesses of bias reductions
might be not comparable to other cases.
6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Discussion of Findings
First, this study’s findings confirmed the effectiveness of interven-
tions based on intergroup contact theory in gender biases reduction.
It did not only reduce people’s explicit gender biases but also helped
to reduce implicit gender biases significantly. By introducing the
intergroup contact theory to software engineering contexts, we
added new tools and brought rich future opportunities for software
engineering practitioners and researchers to address implicit gen-
der biases. Note that this study only examined one intervention of
intergroup contact theory; recent progress in social psychology (see
Section 7.2) allows many different possible interventions. Design-
ing and evaluating novel interventions in SE contexts, particularly
those that can be implemented through online contacts [ 44], would
have important theoretical and practical implications.
Second, our results revealed that team configurations of gender
composition had significant impacts on the effectiveness of the
intervention. We found that the intervention’s achieved higher
effectiveness when the number of female participants in a team
was greater than or equal to the number of male participants. In
this situation, almost all members, no matter which gender they
were, had lower implicit gender biases in the after contact bias
assessment. However, when females were the minority in a team (1
female and 3 male), we observed that some female members’ gender
biases (particularly these of SE leadership configuration) increased
slightly or did not achieve comparable decreases as their male peers’
gender biases did. The reason a side effect shall be investigated in
future work. Moreover, we are not sure if such a side effect exists
in a larger team that has more than one female, but they are still
minorities.
Though our study demonstrates the effectiveness of the inter-
group contact theory, we must acknowledge that while contact
has shown to be effective, there could be potential challenges and
difficulties with getting people into contact situations. For example,
female software engineers account for a very small proportion in
the software development workforce ( <10% according to [ 19]).
Therefore, creating contact opportunities between both genders
could be difficult. On such occasions, some alternatives to “physi-
cal” intergroup contacts might provide solutions. For example, as
pointed by Crisp and other researchers [ 16,17,22], “imagined” so-
cial interactions, i.e., letting people to mentally simulate positive
intergroup contacts, might lead to reduced biases. Besides, social
robot techniques may be also helpful [ 7,35]. For instance, designing
novel interaction experiences with virtual female characters/robots
may be a good alternative way to simulate the intergroup contactsthat happen in physical environments. In fact, in our study, we
noticed that many of the interpersonal interactions in the team
indeed happened online using tools such as Hangout, Slack, etc.
To sum up, our work extends SE literature on gender biases and
sheds new light on how to reduce them through theory-driven inter-
ventions. As far as our current knowledge, empirically examining
implicit gender biases reducing interventions has not been covered
in SE literature. This study calls for more future work on leveraging
behavioral science to develop, evaluate, and implement effective
interventions to reduce gender biases in software development.
6.2 Practical Recommendations
The results and findings of this work have immediate practical
implications for software development organizations that may plan
to implement interventions based on intergroup contact theory to
address the problem of implicit gender biases. The main practical
implications and recommendations are summarized as follows:
•Software development organizations may leverage intergroup
contact theory to reduce implicit gender biases. In general, it
could be effective.
•When designing intergroup contact, it would be better to (at least
partially) satisfy Allport’s four conditions and allow an extended
period for contacts.
•Using mixed-gender project teams would be a good way to im-
plement intergroup contact theory. However, the effects may not
be that good if females are the minority group in a mixed-gender
team.
•When face-to-face intergroup interactions are not possible, it may
worth trying virtual or simulated interactions.
6.3 Threats to Validity
Similar to any empirical study, the work presented in this paper is
subject to some threats to validity. However, we have taken multiple
actions to ensure the results and findings are free from the most
significant threats, thus achieving high confidence in the validity
of the study.
First, from the perspective of “construct validity,” we argue that
there is no significant threat. The main construct of the study is the
implicit gender biases. We used the Implicit Association Tests (IATs)
to measure them from multiple perspectives. The validity of IATs
has been confirmed by thousands of studies in many disciplines,
for example, management, psychology, sociology, etc., and also
have been tested with millions of participants (see Project Implicit
https://implicit.harvard.edu). The domain-specific SE IATs were
borrowed from literature in which they were developed using strict
procedures with the involvement of a professional psychologist (see
[81]). The explicit gender bias was measured using Modern Sexism
Scales (MSS), which has been proven to be a reliable measure and
was widely adopted in thousands of studies [ 70]. Using standard
psychometric models enhances our confidence in construct valid-
ity. However, please bear in mind that all psychometric models
are nothing more than approximations of the constructs they at-
tempt to measure; thus, it is not surprising to see the arguments on
their validities. For example, Yoder & McDonald pointed out some
limitations of the MSS [86].
588ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
Second, from the perspective of “internal validity, ” we argue that
most significant threats have been removed. Multiple measures
were taken to remove most of them when performing the experi-
ment and analyzing the data. For example, the participants were
randomly assigned to the contact configurations and teams. We
also randomized the order of the three IATs. The 8-week period
between two sessions of IATs could minimize the learning effect.
Besides, two cohorts’ datasets were combined after their statistical
characteristics were examined. However, we must admit that we
could not control all the factors due to the “observational” nature of
the field experiment [ 68]. In addition, these factors might interplay
with each other, thus introducing complicated effects. For example,
factors such as participants’ ages, races, cultural backgrounds, as
well as the external relationships developed by them, may pose
significant threats to internal validity. Future studies in more con-
trolled settings with strictly implemented randomness would help
to address these threats. Moreover, whether the effects observed
in the M-M configuration were caused by the fact that the woman
being the only one rather than being in the minority needs further
clarification [18].
From the perspective of “external validity, ” the main threat might
lie on the use of students as experiment subjects. It restricts the abil-
ity to generalize our results and findings to professional software
engineering. The pros and cons of using students or practitioners as
software engineering experiment subjects have been well-discussed
[25,26]. Given that the study’s focus was individual team members’
interpersonal contact rather than the activity related to technical
skills such as programming comprehension, it avoided the most
significant threat caused by “ different skill distributions for students
and professionals ” (see the first commentary by Sjøberg and Berg-
ersen in [ 26]). However, that does not mean that the results and
findings could be directly applied in professional settings. Thus, we
urge researchers and practitioners to consider replicate the study
in professional development settings.
7 RELATED WORK
The study connects two streams of research: gender issues in soft-
ware engineering and implicit gender biases in social psychology. In
this section, we briefly review research in both streams and position
the study reported in this paper in literature.
7.1 Gender Issues in Software Engineering
Gender issues in software development have been increasingly in-
vestigated by SE researchers. The biases towards female developers
have been documented in many studies. Lee & Carver surveyed par-
ticipants from 15 open source projects [ 47]. Their results suggested
that while the participants were increasingly aware of gender bi-
ases in their project, a substantial amount of participants still took
a gender blind position. Researchers often use publicly accessible
behavioral trace data from online repositories to evaluate gender
biases and their effects. For example, Terrell et al. quantified gender
differences and biases on GitHub by comparing the acceptance rate
of pull requests from men and women [ 72]. The authors found that a
female developer is less likely to get her pull requests accepted when
her gender becomes explicit. Recently, Imtiaz et al. further exam-
ined the publicly visible developers’ behaviors on GitHub to testedthe hypotheses on the effects of these biases on female developers’
participation [ 42]. By analyzing the dynamics of female developers’
activities, Wang et al. provided an alternative explanation for fe-
males’ low participation in the lens of the competence-confidence
gap [ 83]. Stack Overflow is another well-studied platform. Several
studies, e.g., [ 28,29,49,54,75], have identified systematic biases to-
wards female members. The benefits of gender inclusiveness have
also been increasingly acknowledged in the software engineer-
ing community. Using a large sample project hosted on GitHub ,
Vasilescu et al. demonstrated that gender diversity has a positive
association with a team’s productivity [ 77]. In addition, Aue et al.
also found that social diversity contributes to project growth in the
long run [2].
Researchers also developed a framework and techniques to ad-
dress gender issues from multiple perspectives. Researchers have
explored how to improve women’s participation in SE education,
open source development, and the professional labor market. For
example, researchers at Oregon State Universities proposed the
GenderMag approach to improving the gender inclusiveness in
end-user development [ 9,52,79]. Fairness testing, though not only
focusing on gender equality, provides a unified framework to detect
and test software systems for potential discriminations, including
that against females [30].
Meanwhile, since the study using software engineering students
as the participants, it hereby relates to gender biases work in the
broader engineering education domain [ 73]. For example, McLough-
lin [51] summarized three types of spotlighting–singling out of
women by gender in ways that make them uncomfortable, and
conducted a longitudinal study to examine how to reduce the Type
III spotlighting (singling out women with the intention to help
them). Her work coincided with our work on emphasizing the
naturalness of intergroup contact. Besides, it seems that Hoeffel’s
study with engineering students showed the ineffectiveness of that
intergroup[ 38]. However, in her study, she did not implement con-
tact but simply asked individuals to self-report their experience
with female engineers. Indeed, she did find having a female en-
gineer in one’s family–the only meaningful contact in her study
resulted in fewer gender biases.
Due to the space limitation, we cannot exhaustively review all
relevant studies in all disciplines. While SE researchers have put a
substantial effort into gender biases in software developers, we are
still in lack of systematic knowledge on the design and evaluation
of interventions for reducing biases at the organizational level. Our
theory-driven, empirical evaluated work is exactly designed to fill
such a gap.
7.2 Implicit Gender Biases in Social Psychology
Though SE researchers have just started investigating implicit gen-
der biases, social psychology researchers have built solid work on
implicit biases (gender and others) and how to reduce them. Since
Section 2 has introduced the basic literature, we would focus on a
small set of recent work on interventions for reducing biases.
First, recent progress in intergroup contact theory shows that
the intergroup contacts are not necessarily restricted to face-to-
face contacts in the physical world. Computer-mediated online
interactions may also serve the purpose of intergroup contacts
589Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
[44]. When there is no chance to find people from an opposite
group, imagining positive interaction experience would still be
helpful [ 16]. Some recent work investigates the effects of intergroup
contact theory by considering many contextual factors. For example,
revealed that negative emotions caused by intergroup contacts
might increase biases and lead to discriminations [ 43]. Even positive
experiences may also fail to reduce biases [ 67] Researchers also
reported that intergroup contact theory may still work even when
Allport’s optimal conditions were not fully satisfied [ 59]. In general,
intergroup contact theory research becomes more contextual and
situational [ 14]. This recent progress will guide the practices of
applying intergroup contact theory interventions in practices.
Social psychologists also developed other methods to reduce
implicit gender biases [ 40]. One of the frequently used methods is
confronting an individual’s implicit gender biases. Such a method
follows the philosophy that “ to reduce gender biases, acknowledge
them first ” [11]. Confronting methods often have to combine with
longitudinal intensive educational interventions to ensure an in-
dividual’s reflective journey [ 15,31,53], because confronting an
individual’s implicit gender biases often causes some denial in the
beginning [ 5,66] or even some interpersonal conflicts [ 62]. Com-
pared with intergroup contact theory, such methods take a long
time and consume more resources while offering more effective in-
dividualized bias reduction [ 24]. It fits for the bias reduction needs
of a small number of people in key positions, e.g., policy-makers
in public sectors [ 24]. Thus, it may be less suitable for software
development contexts where organizations aim to reduce a large
number of individuals’ biases with limited resources. As we men-
tioned in the introduction, the scalability of intergroup contact
theory makes it quite attractive for software engineering contexts
where organizations may be willing to create mixed-gender teams
to reduce gender biases at a scale.
8 CONCLUDING REMARKS
This article reports a field experiment that investigates the effective-
ness of the intergroup contact theory in reducing implicit gender
biases with student SE teams. In the field experiment, 280 partici-
pants were assigned to 70 teams with five different configurations
of gender compositions (Control: All-Female, All-Male; Treatment:
Female-Majority, Equal-Gender, Male-Majority). All teams used 8
weeks to finish their team projects, which gives those mixed-gender
teams opportunities to implement intergroup (female vs. male) con-
tacts. We captured the changes in participants’ explicit and implicit
gender biases before and after their team projects. Using this data,
we performed a series of data analysis procedures. Our results and
findings confirmed the general effectiveness of the intergroup con-
tact theory as an intervention in reducing implicit gender biases.
We also revealed that effectiveness is subjected to different con-
figurations of gender compositions. When the number of female
members is greater than or equal to the number of male members
in a team, the intervention could achieve maximum effectiveness.
When there are more males in a team, it could reduce male mem-
bers’ implicit gender biases but often fail to result in comparable
decreases in the female member’s implicit gender biases.
Our study opens many future research opportunities. We also
plan to continue the work on developing and evaluating methodsfor reducing implicit gender biases. We have contacted several
professional software engineering organizations to negotiate the
possibility of replicating the study in their sites. Doing so helps us
to empirically examine the generalizability of our findings. Recently,
there is also a trend of synthesizing intergroup contact theory with
other biases reduction approaches. Moreover, intergroup contact
theory is not the only intervention that has the potential to reduce
implicit gender biases. There are other approaches that need to be
evaluated in software development contexts. To sum up, implicit
gender biases and corresponding biases reduction methods should
receive more attention in SE research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank all participants of the study. The
authors are in debt to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] Gordon W. Allport. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice . Basic Books.
[2]Joop Aué, Michiel Haisma, Kristín Fjóla Tómasdóttir, and Alberto Bacchelli.
2016. Social Diversity and Growth Levels of Open Source Software Projects
on GitHub. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM ’16) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Article 41, 6 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2961111.2962633
[3]Manuel Fernandez Bagues, Mauro Sylos-Labini, and Natalia Zinovyeva. 2017.
Does the Gender Composition of Scientific Committees Matter. The American
Economic Review 107, 4 (2017), 1207–1238.
[4]Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve Walker. 2015. Fitting
Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67, 1
(2015), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
[5]Rebecca S. Bigler and Erin Pahlke. 2019. ĂĲI disagree! Sexism is silly to me!
Teaching children to recognize and confront gender biases. In Confronting
Prejudice and Discrimination , Robyn K. Mallett and Margo J. Monteith (Eds.).
Academic Press, 299 – 317. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814715-3.00012-6
[6]Elina Birmingham, Damian Stanley, Remya Nair, and Ralph Adolphs. 2015. Im-
plicit Social Biases in People With Autism. Psychological Science 26, 11 (2015),
1693–1705.
[7]Cynthia Breazeal and Brian Scassellati. 2002. Robots that imitate humans. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 6, 11 (2002), 481–487.
[8]Rupert Brown and Miles Hewstone. 2005. An integrative theory of intergroup
contact. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 37 (2005), 255–343.
[9]Margaret Burnett, Simone Stumpf, Jamie Macbeth, Stephann Makri, Laura Beck-
with, Irwin Kwan, Anicia Peters, and William Jernigan. 2016. GenderMag: A
method for evaluating software’s gender inclusiveness. Interacting with Comput-
ers28, 6 (2016), 760–787.
[10] Gemma Catolino, Fabio Palomba, Damian A. Tamburri, Alexander Serebrenik,
and Filomena Ferrucci. 2019. Gender Diversity and Women in Software Teams:
How Do They Affect Community Smells?. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS
’19). IEEE Press, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIS.2019.00010
[11] Debbie Chachra. 2017. To reduce gender biases, acknowledge them. Nature 548,
7668 (2017), 373–373.
[12] Tabbye M. Chavous. 2005. An intergroup contact-theory framework for evaluat-
ing racial climate on predominantly white college campuses. American Journal
of Community Psychology 36, 3 (2005), 239–257.
[13] Sapna Cheryan, John Oliver Siy, Marissa Vichayapai, Benjamin J Drury, and
Saenam Kim. 2011. Do female and male role models who embody STEM stereo-
types hinder women’s anticipated success in STEM? Social Psychological and
Personality Science 2, 6 (2011), 656–664.
[14] Oliver Christ, Katharina Schmid, Simon Lolliot, Hermann Swart, Dietlind Stolle,
Nicole Tausch, Ananthi Al Ramiah, Ulrich Wagner, Steven Vertovec, and Miles
Hewstone. 2014. Contextual effect of positive intergroup contact on outgroup
prejudice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 111, 11 (2014), 3996–4000.
[15] William T.L. Cox and Patricia G. Devine. 2019. 12 - The prejudice habit-breaking
intervention: An empowerment-based confrontation approach. In Confronting
Prejudice and Discrimination , Robyn K. Mallett and Margo J. Monteith (Eds.).
Academic Press, 249 – 274. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814715-3.00015-1
[16] Richard J. Crisp, Sofia Stathi, Rhiannon N. Turner, and Senel Husnu. 2009. Imag-
ined intergroup contact: Theory, paradigm, and practice. Social and Personality
590ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Yi Wang and Min Zhang
Psychology Compass 3, 1 (2009), 1–18.
[17] Richard J. Crisp and Rhiannon N. Turner. 2009. Can imagined interactions
produce positive perceptions?: Reducing prejudice through simulated social
contact. American Psychologist 64, 4 (2009), 231–240.
[18] Gordon B. Dahl, Andreas Kotsadam, and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2018. Does integration
change gender attitudes? The effect of randomly assigning women to traditionally
male teams. National Bureau of Economic Research (2018).
[19] datausa.io. 2015. Demographics of Software Developers (2015). https://datausa.
io/profile/soc/15113X/. [Online; accessed 09/26/2017].
[20] Philippa Davies, A. Walker, and Jeremy Grimshaw. 2003. Theories of Behaviour
Change in Studies of Guideline Implementation. Proceedings of the British Psy-
chology Society 11, 1 (01 2003), 120.
[21] Rachel Davis, Rona Campbell, Zoe Hildon, Lorna Hobbs, and Susan Michie. 2015.
Theories of behaviour and behaviour change across the social and behavioural
sciences: a scoping review. Health Psychology Review 9, 3 (2015), 323–344. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2014.941722
[22] John F. Dovidio, Anja Eller, and Miles Hewstone. 2011. Improving intergroup
relations through direct, extended and other forms of indirect contact. Group
Processes & Intergroup Relations 14, 2 (2011), 147–160.
[23] John F. Dovidio, Kerry Kawakami, Craig Johnson, Brenda Johnson, and Adaiah
Howard. 1997. On the nature of prejudice: Automatic and controlled processes.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 33, 5 (1997), 510–540.
[24] Michael G. Eastman, Monica L. Miles, and Randy Yerrick. 2019. Exploring the
White and male culture: Investigating individual perspectives of equity and
privilege in engineering education. Journal of Engineering Education 108, 4 (2019),
459–480.
[25] Davide Falessi, Natalia Juristo, Claes Wohlin, Burak Turhan, Jürgen Münch,
Andreas Jedlitschka, and Markku Oivo. 2018. Empirical Software Engineering
Experts on the Use of Students and Professionals in Experiments. Empirical Softw.
Engg. 23, 1 (Feb. 2018), 452–489. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9523-3
[26] Robert Feldt, Thomas Zimmermann, Gunnar R. Bergersen, Davide Falessi, An-
dreas Jedlitschka, Natalia Juristo, Jürgen Münch, Markku Oivo, Per Runeson,
Martin Shepperd, and et al. 2018. Four Commentaries on the Use of Students and
Professionals in Empirical Software Engineering Experiments. Empirical Softw.
Engg. 23, 6 (Dec. 2018), 3801–3820. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-018-9655-0
[27] Janet S Fink. 2015. Female athletes, women’s sport, and the sport media com-
mercial complex: Have we really “come a long way, baby”? Sport Management
Review 18, 3 (2015), 331–342.
[28] D. Ford, A. Harkins, and C. Parnin. 2017. Someone like me: How does peer
parity influence participation of women on stack overflow?. In Proc. VL/HCC’17 .
239–243. https://doi.org/10.1109/VLHCC.2017.8103473
[29] Denae Ford, Justin Smith, Philip J. Guo, and Chris Parnin. 2016. Paradise Un-
plugged: Identifying Barriers for Female Participation on Stack Overflow. In
Proceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Founda-
tions of Software Engineering (FSE 2016) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 846?857. https://doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950331
[30] Sainyam Galhotra, Yuriy Brun, and Alexandra Meliou. 2017. Fairness Testing:
Testing Software for Discrimination. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting
on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2017) . Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 498–510. https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.
3106277
[31] Sabine Girod, Magali Fassiotto, Daisy Grewal, Manwai Candy Ku, Natarajan
Sriram, Brian A. Nosek, and Hannah Valantine. 2016. Reducing implicit gender
leadership bias in academic medicine with an educational intervention. Academic
Medicine 91, 8 (2016), 1143–1150.
[32] Anthony G Greenwald and Mahzarin R Banaji. 1995. Implicit social cognition:
attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychological Review 102, 1 (1995), 4.
[33] Anthony G Greenwald, Debbie E McGhee, and Jordan LK Schwartz. 1998. Mea-
suring individual differences in implicit cognition: the implicit association test.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74, 6 (1998), 1464–1480.
[34] Anthony G Greenwald, Brian A Nosek, and Mahzarin R Banaji. 2003. Understand-
ing and using the implicit association test: I. An improved scoring algorithm.
Journal of Personality and Social Ssychology 85, 2 (2003), 197–215.
[35] Victoria Groom and Clifford Nass. 2007. Can robots be teammates?: Benchmarks
in humanâĂŞrobot teams. Interaction Studies 8, 3 (2007), 483–500.
[36] Madeline E. Heilman. 2012. Gender stereotypes and workplace bias. Research in
Organizational Behavior 32 (2012), 113–135.
[37] Ralph Hertwig and Andreas Ortmann. 2008. Deception in experiments: Revisiting
the arguments in its defense. Ethics & Behavior 18, 1 (2008), 59–92.
[38] Elizabeth M. Hoeffel. 2007. Gender Bias in Engineering: Does More Contact with
Female Engineers Reduce Bias? Master Thesis–Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University (2007), 1–54.
[39] Crystal L Hoyt and Jeni L Burnette. 2013. Gender bias in leader evaluations:
Merging implicit theories and role congruity perspectives. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 39, 10 (2013), 1306–1319.
[40] Xiaoqing Hu, James W. Antony, Jessica D. Creery, Iliana M. Vargas, Galen V.
Bodenhausen, and Ken A. Paller. 2015. Unlearning implicit social biases during
sleep. Science 348, 6238 (2015), 1013–1015.[41] Leonie Huddy and Nayda Terkildsen. 1993. Gender stereotypes and the perception
of male and female candidates. American Journal of Political Science (1993), 119–
147.
[42] Nasif Imtiaz, Justin Middleton, Joymallya Chakraborty, Neill Robson, Gina Bai,
and Emerson Murphy-Hill. 2019. Investigating the Effects of Gender Bias on
GitHub. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’19) . IEEE Press, 700–711. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00079
[43] Mathias Kauff, Frank Asbrock, Ulrich Wagner, Thomas F. Pettigrew, Miles Hew-
stone, Sarina J. SchÃfer, and Oliver Christ. 2017. (Bad) Feelings about Meeting
Them? Episodic and Chronic Intergroup Emotions Associated with Positive and
Negative Intergroup Contact As Predictors of Intergroup Behavior. Frontiers in
Psychology 8 (2017), 1449.
[44] Nuri Kim and Magdalena Wojcieszak. 2018. Intergroup contact through on-
line comments : effects of direct and extended contact on outgroup attitudes.
Computers in Human Behavior 81 (2018), 63–72.
[45] Roger E Kirk. 2007. Experimental design. The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology
(2007).
[46] Jennifer T. Kubota, Jaelyn Peiso, Kori Marcum, and Jasmin Cloutier. 2017. Inter-
group contact throughout the lifespan modulates implicit racial biases across
perceivers’ racial group. PLOS ONE 12, 7, Article e0180440 (2017), 12 pages.
[47] Amanda Lee and Jeffrey C. Carver. 2019. FLOSS Participants? Perceptions about
Gender and Inclusiveness: A Survey. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’19) . IEEE Press, 677–687. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00077
[48] Justin D Levinson and Danielle Young. 2010. Implicit gender bias in the legal
profession: An empirical study. Duke J. Gender Law & Policy 18 (2010), 1.
[49] Bin Lin and Alexander Serebrenik. 2016. Recognizing Gender of Stack Overflow
Users. In Proc. MSR’16 . ACM, 425–429.
[50] Anna May, Johannes Wachs, and Anikó Hannák. 2019. Gender differences in
participation and reward on Stack Overflow. Empirical Software Engineering 24,
1 (2019), 1997–2019.
[51] Lisa A. McLoughlin. 2005. Spotlighting: Emergent Gender Bias in Undergraduate
Engineering Education. Journal of Engineering Education 94, 4 (2005), 373–381.
[52] Christopher Mendez, Hema Susmita Padala, Zoe Steine-Hanson, Claudia Hilder-
brand, Amber Horvath, Charles Hill, Logan Simpson, Nupoor Patil, Anita Sarma,
and Margaret Burnett. 2018. Open Source Barriers to Entry, Revisited: A So-
ciotechnical Perspective. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1004–1015. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180241
[53] Margo J. Monteith, Mason D. Burns, and Laura K. Hildebrand. 2019. Navigating
successful confrontations: What should I say and how should I say it? In Con-
fronting Prejudice and Discrimination , Robyn K. Mallett and Margo J. Monteith
(Eds.). Academic Press, 225 – 248. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814715-
3.00006-0
[54] Savannah Morgan. 2017. How Are Programming Questions from Women Re-
ceived on Stack Overflow? A Case Study of Peer Parity. In Proceedings Com-
panion of the 2017 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Systems, Program-
ming, Languages, and Applications: Software for Humanity (SPLASH Compan-
ion 2017) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 39–41.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3135932.3135952
[55] Corinne A Moss-Racusin, John F Dovidio, Victoria L Brescoll, Mark J Graham, and
Jo Handelsman. 2012. Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109, 41 (2012), 16474–16479.
[56] Per Nilsen. 2015. Making sense of implementation theories, models and frame-
works. Implementation Science 10, Article 53 (2015), 13 pages.
[57] Brian A Nosek, Anthony G Greenwald, and Mahzarin R Banaji. 2005. Understand-
ing and using the Implicit Association Test: II. Method variables and construct
validity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31, 2 (2005), 166–180.
[58] Thomas F. Pettigrew. 1998. Intergroup contact theory. Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy49, 1 (1998), 65–85. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.65
[59] Thomas F. Pettigrew. 2016. In Pursuit of Three Theories: Authoritarianism,
Relative Deprivation, and Intergroup Contact. Annual Review of Psychology 67, 1
(2016), 1–21.
[60] Thomas F. Pettigrew and Linda R. Tropp. 2006. A meta-analytic test of intergroup
contact theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90, 5 (2006), 751–783.
[61] Thomas F. Pettigrew, Linda R. Tropp, Ulrich Wagner, and Oliver Christ. 2011. Re-
cent advances in intergroup contact theory. International Journal of Intercultural
Relations 35, 3 (2011), 271–280.
[62] Emily Pronin, Thomas Gilovich, and Lee Ross. 2004. Objectivity in the eye of
the beholder: divergent perceptions of bias in self versus others. Psychological
Review 111, 3 (2004), 781–799.
[63] R Development Core Team. 2008. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http:
//www.R-project.org ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
[64] Ananthi Al Ramiah and Miles Hewstone. 2013. Intergroup contact as a tool for
reducing, resolving, and preventing intergroup conflict: Evidence, limitations,
and potential. American Psychologist 68, 7 (2013), 527–542.
591Reducing Implicit Gender Biases in Software Development: Does Intergroup Contact Theory Work? ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
[65] Stephen W Raudenbush and Anthony S Bryk. 2002. Hierarchical Linear Models:
Applications and Data Analysis Methods (2 ed.). sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
[66] Isabelle Régner, Catherine Thinus-Blanc, Agnès Netter, Toni Schmader, and
Pascal Huguet. 2019. Committees with implicit biases promote fewer women
when they do not believe gender bias exists. Nature Human Behaviour 3, 11
(2019), 1171–1179.
[67] Tamar Saguy, Nicole Tausch, John F. Dovidio, and Felicia Pratto. 2009. The
irony of harmony: Intergroup contact can produce false expectations for equality.
Psychological Science 20, 1 (2009), 114–121.
[68] Neil J. Smelser and Paul B. Baltes (Eds.). 2001. International Encyclopedia of the
Social and Behavioral Sciences . Elsevier.
[69] Cheryl Staats, Kelly Capatosto, Robin A Wright, and Danya Contractor. 2015.
State of the science: Implicit bias review 2015 . Vol. 3. Kirwan Institute for the Study
of Race and Ethnicity, The Ohio State University.
[70] Janet K Swim, Kathryn J Aikin, Wayne S Hall, and Barbara A Hunter. 1995. Sexism
and racism: Old-fashioned and modern prejudices. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 68, 2 (1995), 199–214.
[71] Bethany A Teachman and Kelly D Brownell. 2001. Implicit anti-fat bias among
health professionals: is anyone immune? International Journal of Obesity 25, 10
(2001), 1525–1531.
[72] Josh Terrell, Andrew Kofink, Justin Middleton, Clarissa Rainear, Emerson Murphy-
Hill, Chris Parnin, and Jon Stallings. 2017. Gender differences and bias in open
source: Pull request acceptance of women versus men. PeerJ Computer Science 3
(2017), e111. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.111
[73] Karen L. Tonso. 1996. Student Learning and Gender. Journal of Engineering
Education 85, 2 (1996), 143–150.
[74] Wouter Vanderplasschen and Jessica De Maeyer. 2014. Theory-Driven Interven-
tions. In Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research , Alex C. Michalos
(Ed.). Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 6629–6632. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
94-007-0753-5_3008
[75] Bogdan Vasilescu, A. Capiluppi, and A. Serebrenik. 2012. Gender, Representa-
tion and Online Participation: A Quantitative Study of StackOverflow. In Proc.
SocialInfo. ’12 . OUP, 332–338.
[76] Bogdan Vasilescu, Vladimir Filkov, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2015. Perceptions
of diversity on GitHub: A user survey. In Proc. CHASE’15 . 50–56.
[77] Bogdan Vasilescu, Daryl Posnett, Baishakhi Ray, Mark G.J. van den Brand, Alexan-
der Serebrenik, Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov. 2015. Gender and
Tenure Diversity in GitHub Teams (CHI ’15) . Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 3789?3798. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702549[78] Sira Vegas, Patricia Riofrío, and Natalia Juristo. 2017. Does Subject Type Influence
Software Engineering Experiment Results?. In Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering Companion (ICSE-C ’17) . IEEE Press, 210–212.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-C.2017.113
[79] Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Lingyi Zhang, Yun-Han Huang, Claudia Hilderbrand, Zoe
Steine-Hanson, and Margaret Burnett. 2019. From Gender Biases to Gender-
Inclusive Design: An Empirical Investigation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Paper 53, 14 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300283
[80] Susan E. Walch, Kimberly A. Sinkkanen, Elisabeth M. Swain, Jacquelyn Francisco,
Cassi A. Breaux, and Marie D. Sjoberg. 2012. Using Intergroup Contact Theory
to Reduce Stigma Against Transgender Individuals: Impact of a Transgender
Speaker Panel Presentation. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42, 10 (2012),
2583–2605.
[81] Yi Wang and David Redmiles. 2019. Implicit Gender Biases in Professional
Software Development: An Empirical Study. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS
’19). IEEE Press, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIS.2019.00009
[82] Yi Wang and David Redmiles. 2020. Implicit Gender Biases in Professional
Software Development. Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2020), under review.
[83] Zhendong Wang, Yi Wang, and David Redmiles. 2018. Competence-Confidence
Gap: A Threat to Female Developers? Contribution on Github. In Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering
in Society (ICSE-SEIS ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/3183428.3183437
[84] Ronald L. Wasserstein and Nicole A. Lazar. 2016. The ASA’s Statement on p-
Values: Context, Process, and Purpose. The American Statistician 70, 2 (2016),
129–133.
[85] Tessa V. West, Madeline E. Heilman, Lindy Gullett, Corinne A. Moss-Racusin, and
Joe C. Magee. 2012. Building blocks of bias: Gender composition predicts male
and female group members’ evaluations of each other and the group. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 48, 5 (2012), 1209–1212.
[86] Janice D. Yoder and Theodore W. McDonald. 1997. The Generalizability and
Construct Validity of the Modern Sexism Scale: Some Cautionary Notes. Sex
Roles 36, 9 (1997), 655–663.
592