Synthesis-Based Resolution of Feature Interactions in
Cyber-Physical Systems
Benjamin Gafford
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
gafford@cmu.eduTobias Dürschmid
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
duerschmid@cmu.edu
Gabriel A. Moreno
Software Engineering Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
gmoreno@sei.cmu.eduEunsuk Kang
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
eskang@cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Thefeatureinteractionproblem ariseswhentwoormoreindepen-
dent features interact with each other in an undesirable manner.
Feature interactions remain a challenging and important problem
inemergingdomainsofcyber-physicalsystems(CPS),suchasintel-
ligentvehicles,unmannedaerialvehicles(UAVs)andtheInternetof
Things (IoT), where the outcome of an unexpected interaction may
resultinasafetyfailure.Existingapproachestoresolvingfeature
interactionsrelyonprioritylistsorfixedstrategies,butmaynotbe
effective in scenarios where none of the competing feature actions
are satisfactory with respect to system requirements. This paper
proposesanovel synthesis-based approachtoresolution,wherea
conflictamongfeaturesisresolvedby synthesizing anactionthat
best satisfies the specification of desirable system behaviors in the
givenenvironmentalcontext.Unlikeexistingresolutionmethods,
ourapproachiscapableofproducingadesirablesystemoutcome
even when none of the conflicting actions are satisfactory. Theeffectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated using a
case study involving interactions among safety-critical features in
an autonomous drone.
ACM Reference Format:
BenjaminGafford,TobiasDürschmid,GabrielA.Moreno,andEunsukKang.
2020. Synthesis-Based Resolution of Feature Interactions in Cyber-Physical
Systems. In 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’20), September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416630
1 INTRODUCTION
Thefeature interaction problem occurs when two or more indepen-
dentfeaturesinteractwitheachotherinunanticipatedways,pos-
sibly leading to an undesirable systemoutcome. Although feature
interactions have been long studied by the software engineering
community[ 11,35,48],theyremainachallengingandimportant
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASE ’20, September 21–25, 2020, Virtual Event, Australia
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6768-4/20/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416630problem in emerging domains of cyber-physical systems (CPS),
suchasintelligentvehicles,unmannedaerialvehicles(UAVs)and
the Internet of Things (IoT), where the outcome of an unexpected
interactionmayresultinasafetyfailure[ 20,32,47].Forexample,
unexpected interactions between a pair of braking features has
been found to be one of the contributing factors to the incidents
involving unintended acceleration on Toyota vehicles [45].
Managing feature interactions typically involve two tasks: de-
tectionandresolution. In this paper, we specifically focus on the
problemofresolutionatthe runtime.Onceaconflictamongfea-
tures is detected during the execution of a system, the goal of arun-time resolution method is to select the most desirable out of
the actions proposed by the competing features.
A major challenge in designing effective resolution mechanisms
is defining what it means for an action to be more desirable than
others.Existingapproachestoresolutionrelyonsomenotionof pri-
orities[12,13,27,50](e.g.,emergencybrakingshouldalwaysbese-
lectedoverotherfeatures)or variable-specificstrategies [9,49](e.g.,
the feature that results in the lowest acceleration output is consid-
ered safest and thus should be selected). Both types of approaches,
however,facelimitationswhenmanagingfeatureinteractionsin
modern CPS with a highly dynamic, unpredictable environment.
First,thedesirabilityofafeatureactionmaybe context-dependent ;
i.e., whether or not one action is more desirable than the others
dependsonthecurrentconditionsoftheenvironment.Forexample,
although decreasing the speed of a vehicle is often associated with
reducingtheriskofacollision,incertaintrafficscenarios,itmay
actuallybesafertoaccelerate(e.g.,whenanothervehicleistrailing
withinanunsafedistance).Sinceitisdifficulttopredictthesetypes
ofscenariosatdesign-time,aresolutionmethodthatusesapriority
list or fixed strategy may sometimes fail to produce a desirable
system behavior.
Second, in certain situations, none of the competing feature
actions may be desirable with respectto the system requirements.
This is a fundamental challenge with resolution: When a pair of
features have conflicting objectives, being forced to select one over
theothermeanstemporarilysacrificingtheobjectiveofthelatter
feature.However,whenbothofthesefeaturesperformcriticaltasks
(e.g., safety functions), this “winner-takes-all” approach may cause
a negative impact on the system (e.g., a safety violation) regardless
of which feature is selected.
10902020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE)
To address these challenges, this paper proposes a synthesis-
basedapproach for resolving unexpected feature interactions that
arise in CPS. In this approach, the desirability of a feature action is
definedintermsofhowwellthesystemwouldsatisfyitsdesiredre-
quirementsifthatparticularactionweretobeexecutedinthegivenenvironment.Inparticular,weleverageaformalspecificationnota-
tion called signal temporal logic (STL) [31]—an extension of linear
temporal logic that is well-suited for describing behaviors of CPS—
along with the notion of robustness of property satisfaction [ 24]t o
preciselydefinethedesirabilityofanactionasaquantitativemetric.
Thisenablesaformulationofresolutionasan optimization problem:
Given a specification of desired system behaviors (specified as STL
properties) and competing actions in a given context, the goal isto select the action that achieves the highest level of satisfaction.
Furthermore, our approach explores actions beyond the given ones
and resolves a conflict by synthesizing a new action that is more
desirable than any of the given actions.
We have implemented a prototype of our resolution method
as part of the flight control software for autonomous drones (in
particular,usingPX4[ 23],apopularopensourceflightcontrolsoft-
warefordrones).Todemonstratetheeffectivenessofourmethod,
weperformedsimulationsofanautonomousdronewithfourac-
tive features that perform distinct but sometimes conflicting safety
tasks. Our evaluation shows that compared to existing methods,
ourresolutionapproachissignificantlybetteratsatisfyingmulti-
dimensional objectives, avoiding the violation of safety require-
ments, and producing smoother and more stable action sequences.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•Asynthesis-based approach to feature interaction resolution,
wheretheproblemofselectingthemostdesirableactionisformu-
lated assynthesizing the action that best satisfies the objectives
of the competing features,
•Asystemarchitectureandanalgorithmforsynthesizingactions,
and a prototype implementation on a control system for real-
world autonomous drones,
•Acasestudythatdemonstratestheeffectivenessoftheproposed
approach on an autonomous drone with four safety features.
The restof thepaper isstructured asfollows. We firstintroduce a
runningexampleinvolvinganautonomousdronethatillustrates
thechallengeswithexistingmethodsforresolutionandhowourap-
proach addresses them (Section 2). Then, we describe the concepts
ofSTLandrobustnessofpropertysatisfaction(Section3),which
servesasthetheoreticalbasisforourresolutionmethod(Section4).
We then describe an evaluation of our approach using a case study
involving simulations of an autonomous drone (Section 5). Finally,
wediscussrelatedworks(Section6)andconcludewithadiscussion
of the scope and limitations of our approach and future directions
(Section 7).
2 EXAMPLE
Consider an autonomous drone (shown in Figure 1) that is con-
trolledbyon-boardautopilotsoftware,whichperiodicallygenerates
acommandtoupdatethevelocityanddirectionofitsmovement.
The ego drone (i.e., the drone being controlled) has two safety
features installed: (1) the boundary enforcer, which monitors and
overrides the autopilot command (when necessary) to prevent the
Unsafe 
region
arun
aboundaresolve
chaserego
Figure 1: A scenario where two safety features on the egodrone are activated at the same time and generate conflict-ing commands (a
boundandarun).
drone from flying into an unsafe region, and (2) the runaway en-
forcer,whichmonitorsthemovementofatrailingdrone(e.g., chaser
in Figure 1) and attempts to maneuver the ego drone away from
theformer.Astheegodronemovesclosertotheboundarywhile
beingchasedbyanotherdrone,bothfeaturesbecometriggeredand
generate conflicting commands: The boundary enforcer generates
anaction(a boundinFigure1)tomovetheegoawayfromtheunsafe
region,whiletheactionfromtherunawayenforcer(a run)pushes
the ego towards the boundary in attempt to distance it from the
chaser. The goal of resolution is to determine the final action to be
performed by the system given such a conflict among the features.
Existingmethods. Onepossibleapproachtoresolvingthiscon-
flictistousesomenotionof priorities amongfeatures.Thedrone
operator, for example, may designate the runaway enforcer as hav-
ingahigherpriority,andthesoftwarecontrollermaybeconfiguredtodisregardtheactionsfromotherfeatures(includingtheboundary
enforcer). This decision results in system behaviors that attempt to
satisfytherequirementofthehighest-rankedfeaturewhile disre-
garding those of the lower-ranked ones.
This type of “winner-takes-all” approach, however, may not be
suitable in situations where such a strict ordering among features
doesnotexist,oralloftheconflictingfeaturesplayacriticalroleinmaintainingthesystemsafetyandperformance.Forinstance,whenthe runaway enforcer is always favored, the ego drone may end upflyingoutsidethesafeboundaryinordertoevadethechaser.Amore
desirable outcome would be one where the ego drone behaves in a
mannerthatattemptstosatisfytherequirementsofbothfeatures
by evading the chaser while staying within the boundary.Proposedmethod.
Ourresolutionapproach,incomparison,takes
intoaccounttherequirements ofallconflictingfeaturesandpro-duces an action that is satisfactory with respect to all of them.
The key idea is to (1) make explicit the desirable system behaviors
that the features are designed to produce and (2) allow the sys-
tem designer to specify the overall specification of the system as a
combination of the requirements of individual features.
For instance, suppose that the two safety enforcers on the drone
are designed to achieve the following requirements:
•Boundary enforcer: “Maintain minimum time-to-intercept Tmin
seconds away from the boundary.”
•Runaway enforcer: “Maintain minimum safe distance Dminme-
ters between the ego drone and another, trailing drone.”
Givenfeaturerequirementsinaformalspecificationnotation(in
our case, STL), our resolution method attempts to synthesize an
action that best achieves all of these requirements. In the scenario
depictedinFigure1,neitherofthetwogivenactions arunandabound
1091issatisfactory;movingawayfromtheboundarywillincreasethe
chanceofbeinginterceptedbythechaser,andvice-versa.However,
instead of taking either one of these actions, our controller synthe-
sizesanewaction, aresolve,thatmovesthedroneinawaythatis
consistent with both requirements.
Sinceourapproachdoesnotuseaprioritylistorfixedstrategies,
itcanhandleconflictscenarioswherethedesirabilityofonefeature
changes dynamically depending on its satisfaction of the system
specification in the current environmental context. In addition,by considering actions beyond those generated by the features,our approach is capable of resolving conflicts and maintaining a
desirablesystemoutcomeevenwhennoneofthecompetingactions
are satisfactory with respect to the specification.
3 PRELIMINARIES
Signals. In our approach, the behavior of a system is modeled
using the concept of a signal. A signal over domain Dis a function
s:T→D, wheretime domain Tis a possibly infinite set of real
numbers that represent points in time ( T⊆R≥0). The value of a
signalisatupleof krealnumbersthatcorrespondtodifferentstate
variables; i.e., D⊆Rkands(t)=(v1,...,vk). As a shorthand, the
subscriptnotation si(t)denotesthe i-thcomponentofthesignalat
timet(for 1≤i≤k).
Signal Temporal Logic. STL [31] is an extension of linear tem-
poral logic (LTL) [ 38] with an ability to specify system states as
real-valued signalsevolvingover time.SinceCPSrequirementstyp-
ically involve timing properties (e.g., “the drone must re-enter the
safe region within the next 3 seconds”) as well as continuous state
variables(e.g., dronespeed),STL iswell-suitedfor specifyingCPS
behaviors. An STL formula takes the following form:
φ:=u|¬φ|φ1∧φ2|φ1U[a,b]φ2
wherea<bfora,b∈Q≥0, anduis a predicate of the form
fu(s1(t),...,sk(t)) ≥0forak-tuplesignal s=(s1,...,sk)attimet.
Informally, φ1U[a,b]φ2meansthat φ1mustholduntil φ2becomes
truewithintheinterval [t+a,t+b].Theuntiloperator Ucanbeused
toexpresstwoothercommontemporaloperators—eventually( F)
and always (G): F[a,b]φ=TrueU[a,b]φandG[a,b]φ=¬F[a,b]¬φ.
Robustness. Inatypical verificationprocess,aspecificationlan-
guage such as LTL is used to define a desired property of a system,
andatoolisusedtocheckwhetherthesystemsatisfiestheproperty.Inadditiontothis binarynotionofsatisfaction,itisusefultobeable
to reason about how “close” the system is from satisfying or violat-
ingaproperty.Tosupportsucha quantitative notionofsatisfaction,
STL has been extended with the concept of robustness [22, 24].
Informally,therobustnessofsignal swithrespecttoSTLformula
φattimet,denoted ρ(φ,s,t),isavaluethatrepresentsthedifference
between the actual signal value and the threshold at which thesystem violates
φ. For example, given property φthat says “the
distance between the drone and the boundary to an unsafe region
must be at least 3.0 meters”, ρ(φ,s,t)represents how far beyond
3.0 meters the drone is able to maintain its distance.
Robustness can be used to compare different executions of a
system in terms of their desirability. Suppose that we are given
twosignals s1ands2(representingtwodistinctsystemexecutions)
such that ρ(φ,s1,t)=1.0mandρ(φ,s2,t)=2.0m. Arguably, theexecutionrepresentedby s2isasafer,moredesirablescenario,since
the system maintains a greater distance to the boundary.
Formally, robustness is defined over STL formulas as follows:
ρ(u,s,t)=fu(s1(t),...,sk(t))
ρ(¬φ,s,t)=−ρ(φ,s,t)
ρ(φ1∧φ2,s,t)=min(ρ(φ1,s,t),ρ(φ2,s,t))
ρ(G[a,b]φ,s,t)=inft/prime∈[t+a ,t+b]ρ(φ,s,t/prime)
ρ(F[a,b]φ,s,t)=supt/prime∈[t+a ,t+b]ρ(φ,s,t/prime)
where infx∈Xf(x)is the greatest lower bound of some function f
overdomain X(and suptheleastupperbound).Sinceeachpred-
icate in STL is of the form u≡fu(s1(t),...,sk(t))>0, robustness
intuitively captures how far the signal deviates above (or below) 0.
Robustnessfor G[a,b]φrepresentsthevaluewithininterval [a,b]
at which the system is the furthest away from satisfying φ(or clos-
est to violating it). Similarly, robustness for F[a,b]φrepresents the
valueatthetimebetween [a,b]atwhichthesystemachievesthe
highest satisfaction of φ.
Example. Suppose that the objective of the boundary enforcer is
tofulfillthefollowingsafetyrequirement:“Thetimebeforetheego
dronecrossestheboundaryofasaferegionmustbeatleastsome
minimumthreshold Tminsecondsforthenext3timeunits”.This
specificationcanbewrittenasSTLproperty φ≡G[0,3](tti−Tmin≥
0), wherettiis a state variable that stores the current time-to-
intercept (TTI); i.e., the time before crossing the boundary.
One possible execution of the drone is represented by the fol-
lowing signal: sA={(0,(4.0)),(1,(3.5)),(2,(4.0)),(3,(4.5))}(note
thatsAhere is a single-tuple signal with only one state variable
tti=sA
1(t); in practice, a signal would have a number of other
variables,suchasthedronecoordinates,velocity,andacceleration).
In particular, this signal depicts the behavior of the drone where
its TTI approaches 3.5s (at time step 1) before pulling away to 4.5s
(at time step 4). Suppose that Tmin=2.5s. Then, the robustness of
signalsAwith respect to the above property at the beginning of
the execution, denoted by ρ(φ,sA,0), can be computed as 1.0 (= 3.5
-Tmin).Intuitively,thisrobustnessvaluequantifieshowclosethe
system comes to violating the property.
Consider an alternative execution, represented by signal sB=
{(0,(5.2)),(1,(2.9)),(2,(3.7)),(3,(4.7))},whereρ(φ,sB,0)=0.4.Al-
though the property holds over both executions (robustness values
arepositiveforboth), sArepresentsarguablythesaferandmore
desirable behavior, since the drone does not come as close to cross-
ing the boundary as it does in sB. This example demonstrates how
the concept of robustness in STL can be used to distinguish system
behaviors that would be considered equivalent under the binary
notion of satisfaction (as in LTL, for example). As described in the
following section, this quantitative notion of satisfaction plays a
key role in our resolution mechanism.
4 RESOLUTION APPROACH
A high-level overview of the proposed framework for feature inter-
actionresolutionisshowninFigure2.Inourmodelingapproach,
a system consists of a controller that interacts with the environ-
ment. Thecontroller containsone or more features, eachof which
receives information about the environment from various sensors
1092Resolver DetectorFeature1
Feature2
FeaturenConﬂict 
Actions...Synthesized
ActionSystem 
Speci ﬁcation 
Actuators Sensors Environmenta1
a2
anController Environment 
Model
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed resolution framework.
and generates an actionto influence the latter through an actuator.
For instance, a feature in an autonomous drone may be a safety
enforcer (e.g., the boundary enforcer from Section 2) that is ac-tivated under certain environment conditions and generates an
actionneededtofulfillarequirement(e.g.,keepthedronewithin
thesaferegion).The detectorcomponentinthecontrollermonitors
the actions generated by the features and determines the subset of
theactionsthatarepotentiallyinconflictwitheachother.These
conflict actions are then passed onto the resolver.
The resolver is configured with two types of information: the
system specification that describes the requirements of the features
(expressedinSTL),andthe environmentmodel,whichisusedbythe
resolver to predict how the environment evolves over time given a
particularsystemaction.Duringresolution,theresolvergeneratesaspaceofcandidateactionsandevaluateseachofthemintermsofitsrobustness(i.e.,howwellitwouldsatisfythespecificationifitwere
tobeexecutedontheenvironment).Theactionwiththehighestrobustness value is selected and fed to the actuator, which then
performs the corresponding control action on the environment.Detection.
Detecting feature conflicts is an important part of
feature interactions management, but is not the focus of this paper
and thus omitted from discussion. Briefly, we use the variable-
specificmethod proposed in the prior works ([ 9,49]), where a pair
of features that involve inconsistent modifications to the same
actuatorvariable(e.g.,acceleration)isconsideredtobeinaconflict.
4.1 Environment Model
A key element of our approach is an executable model of the en-
vironmentthatisusedtoevaluateeachcandidateactioninterms
of how well it would satisfy the given specification if it were tobe selected as the final action. In particular, the environment is
modeled as a transition system M=(Q,A,δ,Qo), where:
•Q⊆Rkis the set of states, each representing one possible
configuration of a k-tuple signal (i.e., q=(v1,...,vk)for some
q∈Qandv1,...,vk∈R),
•Ais the set of controller actions,
•δ:Q×A→Qis the transition function that describes how
thesystemmovesfromonestatetoanotherbyperformingan
action, and
•Q0⊆Qis the set of initial states.
In our running example, the environment model describes how
the state of the ego drone (i.e., its location, direction, and velocity)
changes in response to a flight control action. More precisely, each
stateqcanberepresentedastuple (locx,locy,locz,velx,vely,velz)wherelocx,y,z∈Rencodesthex,y,zcoordinatesoftheegodrone,
andvelx,y,z∈Rencodes the current velocity of the drone.
Onetypeofactionperformedbythecontrolleris setVelocity( vx,
vy,vz),whichsetsthenewtargetvelocityofthedroneto vx,vy,
andvz(forx,y,zcomponents,respectively).Then,thetransition
function δis defined such that for any state q/prime=δ(q,a)anda=
setVelocity( vx,vy,vz):
q/prime=(q.locx+q.velx,q.locy+q.vely,q.locz+q.velz,
q.velx+ax,q.vely+ay,q.velz+az)
whereaxis the amount of acceleration that is applied to bring
q.velxtovx(and similarly for ayandaz).
Conceptually,anenvironmentmodelcanberegardedasama-
chine that generates different signals based on the actions per-
formedbythecontroller.Inparticular,anexecutiontrace q0,q1,...,ql
can be converted into signal s, where for each t≤l,s(t)=qt.
4.2 System Specification
To recall, one of the major challenges in resolution is that some
ofthefeaturesaredesignedtofulfillrequirementsthatinevitably
conflictwitheachotherincertainsituations(e.g.,thescenarioin
Figure 1). One approach is to select one of these conflicting fea-
tures as the “winner” and disable the rest; however, this effectively
amounts todisregarding therequirements ofthe “losing”features.
Instead,ourgoalistoconsiderallofthe(possiblyconflicting)re-
quirements and synthesize an action that satisfies them as much
aspossible.Tosupportthistypeofresolution,weallowtheover-
all system specification to be expressed as a combination of the
requirements of individual features.
Moreprecisely,afeature f∈Fismodeledasafunctionthattakes
a set of observable variables and produce an action. Each feature is
associated with a requirement Rfthat describes the objective that
the feature is designed to achieve. For instance, the requirement of
the boundary enforcer may be stated as “Maintain a safe minimum
distanceDminto the designated boundary”. In our approach, each
featurerequirementisspecifiedasanSTLformula(e.g., Rboundary≡
G[0,3](tti−Tmin≥0)).
Then, given nfeaturesf1,f2,...,fn, the overall system specifica-
tionis defined as a set of weighted feature requirements, as follows:
Rsys={(w1,R1),(w2,R2),...,(wn,Rn)}
wherew1,w2,...,wn∈R≥0areweighting factors that together
add up to 1 .0. The weights allow the system engineer to specify
therelativeimportanceofthefeaturerequirements.Forexample,
assigning equal weights will intuitively configure the system toresolve a conflict by selecting an action that attempts to satisfyallofthefeaturerequirements.Similarly,ifdesired,theengineer
could assign a weight of 1.0 to one of the requirements, effectively
turningourresolverintoapriority-basedone.Theweightscould
also be modified at runtime, allowing the engineer to dynamically
adjust the importance of requirements as needed over time.
4.3 Synthesis-Based Resolution
4.3.1 Resolution as Optimization. Thegoalofresolutionistore-
solve feature conflicts in a way to ensure that the resulting system
behaviorisdesirable withrespectto thefeaturerequirements.To
1093definedesirabilityasametric,weleveragethenotionofrobustness
introduced in Section 3. Formally, given a set of feature require-
ments,R1,R2,...,RnasSTLformulas,theoveralldesirabilityofa
system behavior (represented as signal s)i st h eweighted sum of
the robustness of the individual requirements:
ρsys=w1ρ(R1,s,t)+w2ρ(R2,s,t)+...+wnρ(Rn,s,t)
We callρsystheglobal robustness of the system.
Foraction a∈Aandsignal scurrthatdescribestheexecution
ofthesystemuptothepresentpointintime,let sabethesignal
that results from performing afor the next ksteps of the system
execution(i.e., saisanextensionof scurr).Then,theproblemof
synthesizing an action for resolution can be formulated as follows:
argmax
a∈A/parenleftbigw1ρ(R1,sa,t)+w2ρ(R2,sa,t)+...+wnρ(Rn,sa,t)/parenrightbig
Inotherwords,theresolutiontaskinvolvesfindingaction athat
would result in a signal that maximizes the global robustness.
4.3.2 Normalization. Computing ρsysby simply adding robust-
ness values for different requirements, as stated above, is not se-mantically valid, due to the following reasons. First, recall fromSection 3 that the robustness for STL expression
φis computed
based on the atomic functions over signal values (i.e., ρ(u,s,t)=
fu(s1(t),..,sk(t))). Since different feature requirements are gen-
erally expressed over different signal functions, their robustness
values cannot be directly compared or combined. Second, although
robustness values are real numbers, operations over them (e.g., ad-
dition and subtraction) may not be semantically meaningful. For
example, the robustness value of -1, signifying that the associated
STL formula φis violated by the margin of -1, may not be as “bad”
asρ=1i s“ g ood ” .
Before computing the global robustness as a sum of robustness
for individual feature requirements, we first perform normalization
ofthesevaluesintoacommon,semanticallymeaningfuldomain.
In particular, our normalization method is designed to achieve the
following list of desiderata:
•Thesamerobustnessvalueproducedbytwodifferentsignalfunc-tionsshouldhaveroughlythesamemagnitude:i.e.,
ρ(u1,s1,t)∼
ρ(u2,s2,t)∼...∼ρ(uk,sk,t).
•Addition and subtraction of robustness values should also be
meaningful; e.g., (−1)+1≈0, which represents the threshold at
which the system satisfies a STL formula.
Toenablenormalization,ourresolutionframeworkisconfigured
at design time with a pair of robustness bounds, ρmaxandρmin,
for each signal function; i.e.; for some ρ(u,s,t)=fu(s1(t),..,sk(t))
and any pair of signal sand time t,
ρmin≤ρ(u,s,t)≤ρmax
Intuitively, ρminrepresents the amount of violation that the sys-
tem may be willing to tolerate and recover from (i.e., below this
robustnessthreshold,thesystembehaviormaybeconsideredun-
acceptable or invalid); similarly, ρmaxrepresents the maximum
degreeofpropertysatisfactionthatismeaningful.Theselowerand
upper robustness values are highly application-specific and thus
areprovidedbythesystemengineer(anexampleofthesevalues
will be discussed in Section 4.3.4).Giventhese ρmaxandρminvalues,originalrobustness xistrans-
formed into a normalized value within [−1,1]using the following
min-max scaling function:
scale(x)=⎧⎪⎪⎪ ⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩x−ρ
min
−ρmin−1x<0
x
ρmaxx≥0
Based on our experience, however, we found this scaling alone
insufficient for encoding the desirability of system behaviors. In
mostCPSsystems,bringingthesystemfromthestateofviolatingarequirement(i.e.,negative
ρ)tosatisfyingit(i.e.,positive ρ)ismore
important than improving the degree of satisfaction (i.e., further
increaseρthatisalreadypositive).Todrivetheresolvertowards
making decisions that mitigate violations, we further improve our
normalizationsothat(1)negativerobustnessvaluesareweighted
morethan positiveones, and(2) majorrequirement violationsare
treated exponentially worse than minor violations. In particular,
wemapthescaledrobustnessvaluesfrom [−1,1]to[−2,1]using
the following function, which penalizes violations of a property
while maintaining linearity for positive robustness values:
penalize(x)=⎧⎪⎪ ⎨
⎪⎪⎩x−α−x−1
α−1x<0
xx ≥0
whereαis some constant greater than 1. Higher αvalues result
in steeper exponential curves; for our case study discussed in Sec-
tion 5, we used α=32, to create a sufficiently exponential curve
that severely penalizes increasing requirements violations with-
out overpenalizing minor requirements violations. Such a curve
improvestheresolutionsystem’sabilitytominimallyviolatecer-
tainrequirementsinordertopreventextremeviolationsofother
requirements.
Then, fully normalized robustness values for atomic STL expres-
sions are computed as follows:
ρ(u,s,t)=penalize(scale(fu(s1(t),..,sk(t))))
Robustness for other types of STL expressions (e.g., ∧,∨,G,F)a r e
computedtheusualwayasdescribedinSection3.Then,normalized
robustness values for different feature requirements can be added
to compute the global robustness ρsys.
4.3.3 Algorithm. The resolution algorithm (Algorithm 1) takes
four inputs: the set of conflicting actions, Ac, the system spec-
ification, Rsys={(w1,R1),(w2,R2),...,(wn,Rn)}, a model of the
environment, M, and a signal sthat describes the history of the
system execution up to the current time.Search space and sampling.
The first step of the algorithm is
toidentifyafiniteset ofcandidateactionstobeevaluated(line3).
This involves two tasks: (1) defining the search space given the set
ofconflictingactionsand(2)samplingtheelementsofthisspace
to be included in the candidate set Acand.
SinceAmaycontainalarge(possiblyinfinite)numberofactions,
it is infeasible to search this entire space. Instead, to bound thesearch space, we apply a heuristic based on the following idea:
Givenaction aigeneratedbysomefeature fi(for1≤i≤n),actions
thatare“closer”to aiaremorelikelytofulfilltherequirementof fi
than those that are further away from it. For example, given action
1094Input:Ac:= conflicting actions; Rsys:= system specification;
M:= environment model; s:= current signal
1funresolve(Ac,Rsys,M,s)
2ρopt:=−∞,aopt:=none
3Acand:=дenCandidateActions (Ac,G)
4fora∈Acanddo
5 sa:=execute(M,a,s,window(Rsys))
6 ρa:=computeGlobalRubustness (Rsys,sa)
7 ifaopt=none∨ρa>ρoptthen
8 aopt:=a
9 ρopt:=ρa
10 end
11end
12returnaopt
13end
Algorithm 1: Synthesis-based resolution algorithm.
afrom the boundary enforcer that moves the drone in a particular
direction,otheractionsthathavethesimilarvelocityvectoras aare
morelikelytokeepthedronewithinthesaferegion.Buildingon
thisidea,ourheuristicistonarrowthesearchspacetothoseactions
thatarelocated betweentheactionsin Ac—thus,minimizingthe
sum of distances to the actions generated by the features.
Moreformally,weassumethatthesetofactions Acanberep-
resented by a metric space (M,d)whereMis an ordered set of
elements in Aandd:M×M→Ris a metric function that
computes a non-negative distance between any pair of elements
inM.ThisassumptionisreasonableinthecontextofCPS,where
actions are typically used to manipulate continuous variables (e.g.,
velocity vector, steering angle, acceleration). Let aminandamax
be thesmallest and largestelements, respectively,in the givenset
ofconflictingactions, Ac.Then,thespaceofcandidateactionsis
defined as the set of all actions between the aminandamax:
Aspace={a∈A|amin≤a≤amax}
This set, in general, may be infinite, and thus we further per-
formasamplingofthisspacetoselectafinitenumberofcandidate
solutionstoevaluate.Thereareanumberofdifferentmethodsof
sampling,andourapproachdoesnotprescribeaparticularmethod.
However, since resolution is performed during runtime, one im-
portant consideration is the number of the sampled actions: The
overhead caused by robustness evaluation may interfere with sys-
temoperations,dependingonthetimingpropertiesofthecontroller
(e.g., how frequent the controller issues an actuator command).
In our approach, we allow the system engineer to control the
numberofthesampledactionsbyprovidinganintegervaluefor
the sampling granularity (inputGon line 3), which represents the
numberofsamplesperunitdistance.Giventhisvalue,oursampling
method partitions Aspaceinto equally sized sets and samples one
solution from each, resulting in |Acand|=G∗(amax−amin).
The more fine-grained the sampling is, the more likely that the
search will find the best solution in Aspace; the engineer may
adjustGdependingontheamountofoverheadthatisacceptable
to a particular application.Signalestimation.
Eachofthecandidateactions, a∈Acand,is
thenevaluatedforitsglobalrobustnessasdefinedby Rsys.T odo
this,theenvironmentmodelisexecutedtoextend stoanewsignal,sa, which describes the estimated evolution of the system state
assuming thataction ais executedfor somenumber of steps(line
5). The length of execution, also called the windowof execution, is
theminimumlengthofasignalneededtoevaluatetherobustnessof
a STL formula. To compute this, we adopt the method from a prior
work([39])thatanalyzesthestructureofformula φtodetermine
its window ( ω), as follows:
ω(u)=1 ω(¬φ)=ω(φ)
ω(φ1∧φ2)=max(ω(φ1),ω(φ2))
ω(φ1U[a,b]φ2)=max(ω(φ1)+b−1,ω(φ2)+b)
Inparticular, window(Rsys)online5isdeterminedasthemaximum
of the windows of the STL formulas that describe the individual
feature requirements.
Giventheestimatedsignal sa,theglobalrobustness ρaiscom-
putedandthencomparedagainstthoseoftheotheractions(lines6
to 7). After evaluating Acand, the resolution algorithm terminates
by returning an action that yields the highest global robustness
value (line 12) among the candidate actions.
4.3.4 Example. Inourrunningexample,theoverallactionspace A
isdefinedasthesetofallpossibleinstancesofaction setVelocity( vx,
vy,vz)withconcretevaluesfor vx,vy,andvz(whichcorresponds
to thex, y, z components of the velocity vector, respectively). The
distancebetweenapairofactionsisdefinedastheEuclideandis-
tancebetweenthetwove ctors.Weassumethatthemaximum speed
of a drone is 2 m/s (i.e.,/radicalBig
v2x+v2y+v2z≤2.0).
Supposethattheegodroneperiodicallykeepstrackofitsown
location and velocity as well as those of another non-friendly (“en-
emy”) drone in its vicinity, as represented by the following signal:
s(t)=(loceдo,locenemy,veleдo,velenemy)
whereloceдoitself is a 3-tuple that contains the x, y, z coordinates
of the ego drone (and similarly for other elements of the signal).
The drone is configured with two safety features: the boundary
and runaway enforcers, as introduced in Section 2. The require-
ments of the two features are specified in STL as follows:
Rb:G[0,1](timeToIntercept (s(t))−1.5≥0)
Rr:G[0,1](distanceToEnemy (s(t))−4.0≥0)
wheretimeToIntercept isafunctionthatreturnsthetime(insec-
onds) before the ego drone crosses a designated boundary into an
unsafe region, and distanceToEnemy returns the distance between
the ego and the enemy drone. We assume that the features are
assigned equal weights ( wb=wr= 0.5).
Informally, Rbstates that for the following 1 second after the
controller issues a new actuator command1, the drone must main-
tainatleastaminimumtime-to-intercept(TTI)of1.5secondstothe
boundary.Tonormalizetherobustnessvalue ρbforrequirement
Rb,w eu s eρbmax=1.5, andρbmin=−2.5. The upper bound of 1.5
signifies that being 3.0s (= 1.5 + 1.5) away from the boundary is
sufficientlyfar enoughthatincreasing theTTI evenfurtheris not
critical for the boundary enforcer. On the other hand, once TTIfalls below -1.0s (= -2.5 + 1.5), then the drone has already veered
1Since the controller is executed periodically at a much higher than 1 second, this
window is sufficient to ensure that the safety property is maintained continuously
throughout the entire drone mission.
1095deepintotheunsaferegionandshouldbeconsideredasbeingin
the least desirable state possible.
Similarly,therequirementfortherunawayenforcerstatesthat
the ego drone must maintain a distance of at least 4.0 meters away
fromtheenemydrone.Weuse ρrmax=4.0,andρrmin=−4.0asthe
upper and lower bounds on the robustness of the requirement Rr.
Suppose that the current state of the ego drone is as follows:
s(t)=/parenleftbig(8,8,10),(5.5,5.5,10),(1.2,1.2,0),(1.41,1.41,0)/parenrightbig
This signal shows that the ego drone is being chased by the enemy
drone towards thetop-right corner of the boundary. Atthis point,
bothenforcersbecomeactivatedandgenerateactionstofulfilltheir
individual requirements. In particular, the boundary enforcer gen-
eratessetVelocity(− 1.41,−1.41,0), which would instruct the ego
dronetoflytowardstheorigin(0,0,0)atthemaximumvelocityof2
meterspersecond.Ontheotherhand,therunawayenforcergen-
eratesaction setVelocity( 1.41,1.41,0),intendedtofurtherdistance
the ego from the enemy drone.
Given this pair of conflicting actions, our resolver attempts to
synthesize a new action that satisfies the requirements of both
features, as described in Algorithm 1. The set of candidate ac-tions
Acandare sampled from the space between the two con-
flicting actions: amin=setVelocity(− 1.41,−1.41,0)andamax=
setVelocity( 1.41,1.41,0).WithG=10andthez-componentfixed
to 0, this would result in around 660 sampled actions. The resolver
then evaluates each of these actions by executing it under envi-
ronment model M, which estimates how the location and velocity
oftheegodroneevolvesovertimegiventhenewvelocityvector;
the enemy drone is modeled as constantly updating its velocity in
order to minimize its distance with the ego drone.
Executing the environment model for the window of execution
(in this case, 1 second) with setVelocity(− 2,0,0)generates a new
estimated signal with the following values:
s(t+1)=/parenleftbig(6,8,10),(6.91,6.91,10),(−2,0,0),(−1.28,1.54,0)/parenrightbig
Evaluatingthenormalizedrobustnessvaluesoverthissignalresults
inρr=−0.92andρb=1, which is combined using the given
weights to yield ρsys=0.04. After evaluating all of the sampled
candidates,ourresolverdeterminesthat setVelocity(− 2,0,0)yields
thehighest ρsysandthusreturnsitasthefinalactiontobeexecuted
by the flight controller.
5 EVALUATION
In this section, we describe the evaluation of our proposed reso-lution method. In particular, our goal is to answer the followingresearch question: Does the proposed synthesis-based approach to
resolution result in more desirable system behaviors compared to ex-
isting methods? We first describe a prototype implementation of
ourmethodaspartoftheflightcontrolsoftwareforanautonomous
drone, and then discuss a set of simulation-based experiments that
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
The code for ourimplementation and evaluation is available at:
https://github.com/cps-sei/cps-synth-resolultion
5.1 Implementation
Weimplementedaprototypeofourresolutionframeworkontopof
PX4, an open source flight control software in C++ used for a widerangeofdrones[ 23].Torunourexperiments,weusedthejMAVSim
simulator (partof PX4),which simulatesthe physicaldynamics of
a drone as it reacts to commands from the flight control software.Simulatedscenarios.
OntopofPX4,weimplementedthemission-
levelcontrollogicthatinstructstheegodronetoperformthefol-
lowingmission:Flytoanumberofwaypoints,performareconnais-
sancetaskateachpoint,andreturntothestartingcoordinate.A
reconnaissance task involves dropping to some predefined altitude
andflyinginafigure-8aboutthewaypoint.Tocommandthedrone,themissioncontrolsoftwaresendsavelocityvectortothelow-level
flight control at a frequency of approximately 16.7Hz.
Theenvironmentmodelusedforsignalestimationwasimple-
mented as a C++ program that (1) takes the current signal andcontroller action as inputs and (2) produces a new set of signal
valuesthatdescribehowtheenvironmentevolvesgiventhisaction
(e.g., changes to the location and velocity of the enemy drone).
Features. Various safety features of the drone are implemented
as componentscalled enforcers,which areinterposed betweenthe
missioncontrollerandthelow-levelflightcontroller.Eachenforcermonitorstheactiongeneratedbythemissioncontrolforapotential
safetyviolation(e.g.,approachingtheboundarywithinanunsafe
distance) and if necessarily, overrides it with its own action that is
intended to maneuver the drone to safety.
We implemented four safety features to test as part of our evalu-
ation. Each feature is associated with certain operating conditions
under which it becomes active and begins to generate actions that
overridethosefromthemissioncontrol.Forinstance,theboundary
enforcer from the running example is activated when the distance
between the drone and the boundary drops below a certain thresh-
old. The following features were implemented:
•Boundary enforcer ensures that the drone stays within a pre-
defined boundary, with its robustness value calculated based on
signal function timeToIntercept.
•Runaway enforcer ensures that the drone maintains a mini-
mumdistancefromatrailingdrone,withitsrobustnesscalcu-
lated based on signal function distanceToEnemy.
•Stealthenforcer ensures that the drone stays above some min-
imum altitude ALstealthwhen flying through predefined re-
gions, with its robustness calculated based on signal function
distanceToAltitude , which measures the distance between
the ego vehicle and some target altitude along the z-axis.
•Flightenforcer ensures that the drone does not crash into the
groundbystayingaboveminimumaltitude ALдround,withits
robustness calculated based on function distanceToAltitude.
These features were chosen because they correspond to realistic
features in autonomous drones and based on their requirements,
could lead to interesting interactions.
5.2 Experimental Design
To evaluate our approach, we compared our resolution method
(whichwecall synthesis-based,or SynthRforshort)tothefollowing
two methods: (1) priority-based resolution ( PriorR), which uses
a fixed total ordering among the features to decide which one ofthe competing actions should be selected, and (2) property-based
resolution( PropR),whichevaluateseachofthegivenconflicting
1096Figure3:Histogramofrobustnessvaluesforeachresolutionstrategy.TheX-axisrepresentstheaveragerobustnessvaluesfor
eachrunwiththecorrespondingfeature.TheY-axisrepresentsthefrequenciesofthoserobustnessvalues.Largerrobustness
values mean higher satisfaction of the feature requirement.
actions for global robustness ρsysand selects the one with the
highest value, but does not involve synthesizing a new action.
To evaluate our approach, we devised the following hypotheses:
H1:SynthRleadstoahighersatisfactionofthefeature
requirements than PriorR.
H2:SynthRmethodleadstoahighersatisfactionof
the feature requirements than PropR.
To test these hypotheses, we conducted 1500controlled experi-
ments.Toavoidaselectionbias,werandomlysampled500starting
conditions(e.g.,locationsofthewaypointsandthestartingposi-
tions of the ego and enemy drones). For each of them, we executed
the drone mission under all three resolution methods.
Onerisktoconsiderwasthatenvironmentvariables,suchasthe
enemy drone speed or the size of the boundary, might implicitly
change the importance of each feature, which could introduce a
situational bias to one method over the other. For example, a faster
enemydronemightleadtopersistentviolationsoftherunawayfea-ture.Amethodthatoptimizesfortherunawayfeaturewillperform
verywellinthisspecificcase,howevermayperformpoorlyinother
featureinteractions.Ontheotherhand,decreasingtheboundary
sizemightcausetheboundaryfeaturetobecomethelimitingfactor,biasingtheresultstowardsanimplementationthatisoptimizedforthissituation.Sincethehypothesistotestinthisevaluationisabout
the general techniques instead of specific application-dependent
situations,wecreatedalargespaceofenvironmentvariablesand
controlled for them to introduce the least possible situational bias.
In addition, to avoid a predominant order between features, we
also randomly modified the weights of the features between theruns.Fortheprioritymethod,thetotalorderingbetweenthefea-
turesweredeterminedfromtheirweights.Toboundthenumber
of candidate actions evaluated by SynthR, we used a granularity
of10samplesperunit.Forexample,fortherangeof[-1,1]inthe
x-componentofthevelocityvector,thiswouldresultin20candi-
datesolutionsbeingsampleduniformlyacrossthisspace(andifthe
same range was set for all x, y, z-components, 203= 8000 samples).
Data collection. For each run, we measured the robustness of
the feature requirements every 0.06 seconds. We also collected the
number of feature interactions (i.e., the occurrence of a conflictbetween at least two features), allowing us to later compare the
effectiveness of the methods with and without conflict.
5.3 Experimental Results
Weevaluatedandcomparedtheeffectivenessoftheresolutionmeth-
odsintermsoftherobustnessthattheywereabletoachieveduring
the simulated runs. Figure 3 shows the results of our experiments.
Toevaluatethesignificanceoftheresults,weuseda t-test,which
determines whether there is a statistically significant difference be-
tween the means of two distributions (in this case, the distribution
of average robustness values collected over the simulation runs).
Once an effect is determined by the t-test to be statistically signifi-
cant,thepracticallymorerelevantmetricis effectsize,sinceitstates
howlargethedifferencebetweenapairofmethodsis.Inparticular,
weusedCohen’sD[ 16],oneofthemostcommonwaystomeasure
effect size. Cohen’s D describes the difference between two means
in terms of the standard deviation of the overall distribution.2For
2Avalueofapprox. 0.2isconsideredasmalleffectsize. 0.5isconsideredamedium
effect size and 0.8is considered a large effect size [16].
1097allmeasurements,wealsobuiltaregressionmodelthatcontrolsfor
thestartingconditions.Sincebothanalysismethodsresultedinthe
sameconclusions,wefocusontheresultsofthemoreintuitively
understandable t-test as well as Cohen’s D as effect size measure.
5.3.1 SynthR vs. PriorR. The data analysis results show that the
SynthRmethodissignificantlybetteratsatisfyingtherequirements
ofmultiplefeaturesandavoidingtheirviolationsthanthe PriorR
method. This subsection will discuss this in more detail.
When comparing the weighted sum of the robustness values
of all four features (i.e., global robustness), our results show that
SynthRis significantly better than PriorR(Cohen’s D =0.403 with
p<0.001, meaning that the global robustness achieved by SynthR
is almost 0.403 standard deviations larger).
One noteworthy observation, which can be seen in Figure 3,
is thatPriorRtends to result in negative robustness values more
frequently.Forexample,notehowtherequirementoftheboundaryfeatureisoftenviolatedunder PriorR,whereas SynthRrarelyresults
inaviolation.Thisisaconsequenceofthe“winner-takes-all”nature
ofPriorR, which simply disregards the requirements of the lower-
priority features and thus results in their violations.
Looking at the robustness of individual feature requirements,
we observe that SynthRis significantly better than PriorRfor both
the boundary with medium to large effect size (Cohen’s D =0.737
mediumtolargeeffectsize, p<0.001)andrunawayfeaturewith
a medium effect size (Cohen’s D =0.573,p<0.001). This was a
surprisingoutcome,sincewe had expectedthatforindividualfea-
tures,PriorRwouldperformjustaswell(ifnotbetter)than SynthR.
Thiscanbeattributedtothefactthat SynthR,bydesign,valuesthe
improvementofnegativerobustnessvaluesmorethantheimprove-
mentofpositiverobustnessvaluesinordertoavoidrequirement
violations.Soittradesofftheimprovementofapotentiallyviolated
requirements(inthiscase,boundaryandrunaway)withtheasmall
compromisewithanalreadyhighlysatisfiedrequirement(inthis
case, flight).
The stealth feature shows no significant effect size for a dif-
ference between between the two resolution strategies (Cohen’sD
=−0.053,p=0.425). For the flight feature, SynthRperforms
significantly worse with a small to medium negative effect size
(Cohen’sD =−0.43,p<0.001).Thiscanbeattributedtothefact
that conflicts involving these features are relatively rare, and in
suchcases,optimizingforoneparticularfeature(asdoneby PriorR)
may overall be just as effective as, if not better than, SynthR.
The larger effect size for the improvement in the boundary fea-
ture and runway outweighs the smaller effect size for a decrease intheflightfeature.Sowecanconcludethat,inourcasestudy, SynthR
shows abetter satisfaction of themulti-dimensional requirements
thanPriorR.This leads us to accepting hypothesis H1.
5.3.2 SynthR vs. PropR. Our results show that SynthRis signifi-
cantlybetterthan PropRwhilefeatureinteractionsareoccurring,
but only insignificantly better outside of these time periods.
Tobemorespecific,whencomparing PropRwithSynthRwith
respecttoglobalrobustness,thedifferenceisnotstatisticallysig-
nificant(Cohen’sD=0.12, p=0.07).Theprimaryreasonforthisis
thatduringthepartsofexecutioninwhichnofeatureconflictex-
ists, all feature requirements are satisfied regardless of the selected
resolution method. It is only during the period of interactions inwhichSynthRcan be shown toachievehigher global robustness
thanPropR. This can be seen by conducting a time series analysis
of the global robustness over each run.
Weconductedaregressiondiscontinuityanalysis[ 8,17,44]to
comparePropRwithSynthRbyevaluatinghowthelevelandslope
of the global robustness time series of the two methods change
overtime.Inthisanalysis,eachindividualmissionismodelledas
a time series with a data point for each time tick. All data points
ofthe1500timeseriesarethenanalyzedinoneregressionmodel
thatenablesustostatisticallycomparetheslopesoftherobustness
values during the presence of a feature interaction versus not. The
resulting regression equation is:
ρsys≈Intervention +Synth∗Intervention +Time+
TimeAfterIntervention +Synth∗TimeAfterIntervention +
ENEMY_DRONE_SPEED+BOUNDARY _SIZE
Intervention is a Boolean indicating whether a conflict is taking
place;Synthis a Boolean for whether the experiment was con-
ducted with SynthRor not;Timeis the number of ticks passed
sincethestartofthemission; TimeAfterIntervention isthenum-
berofticksafteraconflictstarted,and ENEMY_DRONE_SPEED
andBOUNDARY _SIZEare the control variables for environment
configurations. Intervention tells us the average change in robust-
ness values during the presence of a feature interaction versus not.
Synth∗Intervention tellsusthedifferenceinchangeinrobustness
whenusing SynthRversusnot. TimeAfterIntervention tellsusthe
average change in the slopeof robustness when a conflict is taking
place. Similarly, Synth∗TimeAfterIntervention constitutes the
average difference in robustness slope for SynthR.
Theentireregressionmodelexplains 30.1%ofthevariance.The
results are shown in Figure 4. All independent variables are statis-
tically significant ( p<0.001 for each). Overall, the improvement
achievedby SynthRis0.077robustnessunits( 95%confidenceinter-
val(CI)[0.064,0.089])whencontrollingforthementionedvariables.
So there is a small improvement overall when using SynthR,i fw e
disregard the presence or absence of feature interactions.
When a conflict occurs, the global robustness is reduced on
average by 1.469robustness units (CI [1.485,1.454]), which is a
significantdifference.Theaveragerobustnessdifferencefor SynthR
is0.29robustnessunitssmaller(CI [0.267,0.313])thanfor PropR,
whichisabout 20%oftheoveralldifference.Hence,wecanconclude
thatSynthRperformssignificantlybetterinachievinghigherglobal
robustness than PropRwhen the system is encountering a conflict.
Furthermore,asshowninFigure5, SynthRresultsinasmoother
andmorestablepathwithlessextremechanges,whichisadesirable
property in a cyber-physical system.
In conclusion, in our case study, there is a large effect size for
improvements achieved by SynthRduring the presence of feature
interactions,whilethereisrelativelyasmalleffectsizeduringtheir
absence.This leads us to accepting hypothesis H2.
5.4 Performance Overhead
Althoughourresultssuggestthat SynthRcanachievehigherglobal
robustness, it also involves more computation in comparison to
the other two methods, mainly due to the evaluation of additional
actions. Since PX4 requires the velocity vector to be updated at
1098coeff. std err. R2
Intercept 6.1152∗∗∗0.028 -
Intervention −1.4694∗∗∗0.008 25.523 %
ENEMY_DRONE_SPEED −0.6874∗∗∗0.020 0.293 %
BOUNDARY_SIZE 0.0372∗∗∗0.000 1.845 %
Synth 0.0767∗∗∗0.007 0.349 %
Synth:Intervention 0.2900∗∗∗0.012 0.133 %
TimeAfterInterv. −0.0069∗∗∗8.46e-05 1.642 %
Synth:TimeAfterInterv. −0.0096∗∗∗0.000 0.265 %
Time 0.0002∗∗∗1.84e-05 0.029 %
∗∗∗p<0.001N=409512 R2=30.1%
Figure 4: Results for the regression discontinuity analysis.
The intervention is defined as the time frame in which fea-
tureinteractionsarehappening.Thesynthesis-basedresolu-
tionleadstohighersatisfactionoftherequirements,inpar-ticular during the time while feature interactions are hap-pening.
(a) Synthesis-based resolution
 (b) Property-based resolution
Figure 5: Time-spatial visualization of a representative runforbothmethods.Orangelinesrepresenttheflightpathandthebigbluedotsrepresentthethepointsatwhichaconflicttakes place. SynthRresults in a smoother path.
least 2Hz, the operation of the drone may be affected negatively if
resolution takes longerthan the maximumallowed time between
controller updates (i.e., 0.5 seconds). To test this, we measured the
durationofeachresolutiontaskandcheckedwhetherthisexceeded
themaximumcyclelength3.Insummary,withthegranularityof
samplingusedforourcasestudy,wedidnotobserveanyoverhead
thatwassignificantenoughtoviolatethetimingrequirementon
controller updates and negatively impact the drone operation.
In practice, to deploy our resolution method, the system engi-
neer would take into account the hardware capacity and timing
properties of the controller system, and would adjust the sampling
granularity to ensure that resolution does not interfere with the
drone operation.
5.5 Threats to Validity
Construct validity. WhenmeasuringpropertiesofCPS,simula-
tions are often the only practical evaluation technique. This con-
stitutes a threat to construct validity, since every simulation omits
3The performance measurements were made on an iMac with an 3.8GHzIntel Core
i5 CPU and 16GBRAMsome properties of the real world. However, the asserted safety
properties measure execution logic instead of accuracy of physics.
Further, any imprecision applies to all experiment instances to the
same extent. So while our measurements might include a small
error, it should not bias the results towards a particular conclusion
ofH1orH2.
Internal validity. Thepracticalconstraintofpartiallysampling
a space of configurations (i.e., actions) poses a threat to internal
validity since the possibility of sampling exceptional cases can
neverbe ruledout. Thisthreatwas addressedby samplingalarge
numberofdifferentcasesandbypayingcloseattentiontostatisticalsignificance. However, the concrete numbers for effect sizes should
not be over-interpreted, but rather only used to get an overall
impression of how large the difference can be.External validity.
The performance measurements of the run
time overhead are application-specific and hardware-dependent.
On other hardware and for other applications the results may vary
greatly. So with more restricted hardware and more complex com-
putation,theimplementationwouldneedmoreperformancetuning
than our prototypical implementation. However, we believe in the
conclusionthatinmostcasestheimprovedabilitytoresolvefeature
conflicts outweighs the insignificant increase in computation.
Furthermore, the results of the case study might not necessarily
generalizetootherpotentialusecasesofthepresentedapproach.
Although webelieve that thepresented case study embodiescom-
mon characteristics of CPS, the results might differ for other kinds
of CPS, features, or use case scenarios. The main claim of thisevaluation is that the presented approach is able to significantly
outperform existing work. The empirical evaluation explicitly does
not make any claim about whether the measured effect sizes apply
to other cases, or whether H1andH2hold true for a majority of
CPS. However, since the proposed approach is also supported by a
theoretical framework that outlines its advantages, we expect it to
perform well on many other CPS that have to deal with conflicting
features that need to be resolved during run-time.
6 RELATED WORK
Feature interactions. Feature interaction problems have been
studied extensively by the software engineering community [ 3–
7,9,11,15,35,41,42,48,49]. There are two major sub-problems
in feature interactions: detection andresolution. Here, we mainly
focus on the prior approaches to resolution.
Raghavan et al. [ 39]p r o po s eda property-driven approach to res-
olution, where they also use the notion of robustness in STL to
resolveconflictsbetweenasetofcompetingfeatureactions.Our
workimprovesontheirsinthefollowingways:(1)ourapproachal-
lowsaspecificationtobeexpressedasaweightedsumofrobustness
of properties that describe the requirements of conflicting features,
whereastheirapproachislimitedtoasingleglobalproperty(thatis
not tied to a particular feature), and (2) our approach is capable of
synthesizinganewaction,whiletheirapproachislimitedtoselect-
ing one of the given feature actions. Thus, as demonstrated in our
study,ourapproachismoreeffectiveatproducingdesirablesystem
behaviors when there is no clear priority among the features, and
all of their requirements are critical to system operation.
1099Anotherrelatedapproachisthe negotiation-based approachto
run-time resolution [ 26], where a central mediator is used to re-
solve conflicts among multiple system agents. Their approach is
similarinthatthegoalofnegotiationistodeviseactionsthatare
considered acceptable to all agents involved (similar to how we
attempttosynthesizeanactionthatsatisfiestherequirementsof
theconflictingfeatures).However,ourapproachsignificantlydif-
fers in the type of specifications used to describe desired system
behaviors(constraint-based policiesthatdescribeacceptablesystem
operations in their approach versus CPS properties in ours).
Our work is also related to the variable-specific approach intro-
duced in [ 9,49], where each actuator variable (e.g., acceleration)
isassociatedwitha resolution strategythatisdesignedto resolve
conflicts over that variable (e.g., “select the action that results in
thesmallestaccelerationvalue”).However,itmaybedifficultfor
the system engineer to anticipate all possible interaction scenar-
ios(e.g.,especiallylesscommonones,likethoseinFigure1)and
devise a strategy that can produce a desirable system outcome un-
der them. In comparison, since our approach does not rely on a
fixed, design-time strategy, it is capable of handling scenarios that
are unanticipated by the engineer (as long as the the model of theenvironment is general enough to cover those scenarios).
Prior approaches to resolution that use a priority or precedence
ordering ([ 12,13,27,34,50]) are not effective for resolving interac-
tions in systems where the desirability of a feature action is highly
context-dependent(e.g.,therunawayenforcer,normallythetop-priority feature, may be of lower importance when the drone is
about to cross the boundary into an unsafe region).Runtime monitoring and verification.
STL and other similar
specification formalisms (e.g.,metric temporal logic, orMTL [ 29])
hasbeenusedforonlinemonitoringofsystemproperties[ 18,19,
21,43].Runtimetechniqueshavealsobeendevelopedfor enforcing
adesirablepropertybyobservingandpossiblymodifyingsystemactions[
1,25,37,46].However,thesepriorworksfocusonevalu-
ating asingleexecution tracefor property satisfaction,and donot
involve a comparison of multiple actions or traces.Self-adaptivesystems.
Self-adaptive systems is an active area of
researchondesigningsystemstobecapableofadjustingtochanges
in their operating environment [ 10,14,30,36,40]. Our proposed
resolutionframeworksharessomeofthecommoncharacteristicsof
a self-adaptive system, in that it relies on information collected by
monitoringthestateofthesystemanditsenvironmenttodetermineifitisnecessarytotakeanactiontomaintainsystemrequirements
andtoplanwhatactiontotake.Inaddition,itsharestheuseofa
predictive model as in model-based approaches to proactive self-
adaptation[ 2,33]toevaluatetheeffectofcandidateactionsover
the near future. Our approach supports the formal specification of
thedesiredpropertiestobemaintainedusingSTLandprovidesa
resolution approach when there are conflicts between them.
7 DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Roleofexistingfeatures. Sinceourresolverworksbyeffectively
overriding the actions of the existing features, one may wonder
whetherthereisanyneedfortheexistingfeaturesatall.Onecould,
forexample,conceiveofasystemarchitecturewhereacontroller
basedonoursynthesismethodisusedatalltimestogenerateanactionthatisoptimalwithrespecttoasetofrequirements.How-
ever, the synthesis procedure can be computationally expensive,
and thus our method is likely to be more cost-effective in systems
where conflicts are rare rather than being common events. In these
systems, the existing features implementations will still be needed
tocontrolthebehaviorofthesystemasdesired.Additionally,struc-turingthesystemassetofindependentfeatures,insteadofhavingasingle,monolithiccontrollerthatsynthesizesactions,allowsforthe
benefits of modularity as system requirements change over time.Optimality of the approach.
Since we randomly sample from
the (possibly infinite) search space, our current method does not
provide any theoretical guarantees about the optimality of the syn-
thesizedaction,butonlythatitresultsinahigherglobalrobustness
than the given conflicting actions (assuming the accuracy of theenvironmental model used for signal estimation). However, ourmethod may be augmented with search techniques such as sto-
chastic gradient descent or simulated annealing to more efficiently
explore the space and converge to an approximate global optimum.
Generality. Ourapproachmakesseveralassumptionsregarding
thesystemthatmaynotholdingeneral.Weassumetheenviron-
mentcanbeeffectivelymodeledwithinsomepredictionwindow,
and that this prediction window is sufficient for approximating an
optimal action. Additionally, designers must be able to determine afixedmaximumviolationandsatisfactionforeachproperty.Future
workcouldimprovethenormalizationmethodtoautomatefinding
theseparametersorbetteraccountforthedifferentratesofchange
of robustness values across properties. Applying an exponential
penalty to violations generalizes to any system where further vio-
lation of one property is worse than further satisfaction of another.
Whenanyviolationconstitutesamaximumviolation,thiscanbe
captured by setting the maximum violation accordingly.
Somespecificsofourcasestudydonotgeneralizetootherdo-
mains. Our method of determining a search space is specific to
ourcasestudybecauseallofouractionsaredefinedby3Dveloc-
ity vectors,and weuse this knowledgeto defineour search space.
Different CPS with different action spaces may require differentmethods to define or search for actions, but the details of these
methods are orthogonal to our high-level approach and remain as
futurework.Inaddition,thenaivesample-and-testmethodused
for action synthesis generalizes to any CPS. However, such a naive
searchmethodrequiresagreaternumberofcandidateactionsto
be tested and therefore would be infeasible in domains where eval-
uating a candidate action is computationally expensive. As future
work,leveragingoptimalcontroltheory[ 28]couldmoreefficiently
identify Pareto-optimal actions, and could potentially do so offline
without needing to discretize and search the action space.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work funded and supported by the
DepartmentofDefenseunderContractNo.FA8702-15-D-0002with
CarnegieMellonUniversityfortheoperationoftheSoftwareEn-
gineeringInstitute,afederallyfundedresearchanddevelopment
center,byToyotaMotorNorthAmerica,Inc.,andNSFAwardNo.
1852260:CMUREUSiteinSoftwareEngineering(REUSE).DM20-
0193
1100REFERENCES
[1]Björn Andersson, Sagar Chaki, and Dionisio de Niz. 2017. Combining Sym-
bolic Runtime Enforcers for Cyber-Physical Systems. In Runtime Verification -
17thInternationalConference,RV2017,Seattle,WA,USA,September13-16,2017,
Proceedings. 68–84.
[2]K. Angelopoulos, A. V. Papadopoulos, V. E. S. Souza, and J. Mylopoulos. 2016.
ModelPredictiveControl forSoftwareSystemswithCobRA.In 2016IEEE/ACM
11th International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-
Managing Systems (SEAMS). 35–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/SEAMS.2016.012
[3]Sven Apel, Wolfgang Scholz, Christian Lengauer, and Christian Kästner. 2010.Detecting Dependences and Interactions in Feature-Oriented Design. In IEEE
21st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering, ISSRE 2010, San
Jose, CA, USA, 1-4 November 2010. 161–170.
[4]Sven Apel, Hendrik Speidel, Philipp Wendler, Alexander von Rhein, and Dirk
Beyer.2011. Detectionoffeatureinteractionsusingfeature-awareverification.
In26thIEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonAutomatedSoftwareEngineering
(ASE 2011), Lawrence, KS, USA, November 6-10, 2011. 372–375.
[5]Sven Apel, Alexander von Rhein, Thomas Thüm, and Christian Kästner. 2013.
Feature-interactiondetectionbasedonfeature-basedspecifications. Computer
Networks 57, 12 (2013), 2399–2409.
[6]Sven Apel,Alexandervon Rhein,Philipp Wendler, ArminGrößlinger, andDirk
Beyer.2013. Strategiesforproduct-lineverification:casestudiesandexperiments.
In35th International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’13, San Francisco,
CA, USA, May 18-26, 2013. 482–491.
[7]Joanne M. Atlee, Uli Fahrenberg, and Axel Legay. 2015. Measuring Behaviour
Interactions between Product-Line Features. In 3rd IEEE/ACM FME Workshop on
FormalMethodsinSoftwareEngineering,FormaliSE2015,Florence,Italy,May18,
2015. 20–25.
[8]Howard S. Bloom. 2012. Modern Regression Discontinuity Analysis. Journal of
Research on Educational Effectiveness 5, 1 (2012), 43–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19345747.2011.578707
[9]Cecylia Bocovich and Joanne M. Atlee. 2014. Variable-specific resolutions for
feature interactions. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Sym-
posium onFoundations of Software Engineering,(FSE-22), Hong Kong,China, No-
vember 16 - 22, 2014. 553–563.
[10]YuriyBrun,GiovannaDiMarzoSerugendo,CristinaGacek,HolgerGiese,Holger
Kienle, Marin Litoiu, Hausi Müller, Mauro Pezzè, and Mary Shaw. 2009. Engi-
neeringself-adaptivesystemsthroughfeedbackloops. In Softwareengineering
for self-adaptive systems. Springer, 48–70.
[11]MuffyCalder,MarioKolberg,EvanH.Magill,andStephanReiff-Marganiec.2003.Featureinteraction:acriticalreviewandconsideredforecast. ComputerNetworks
41, 1 (2003), 115–141.
[12]A.Chavan,L.Yang,K.Ramachandran,andW.H.Leung.2007. ResolvingFeatureInteractionwithPrecedenceListsintheFeatureLanguageExtensions.In Feature
Interactions in Software and Communication Systems IX, International Co nference
on Feature Interactions in Software and Communication Systems, ICFI 2007, 3-5
September 2007, Grenoble, France. 114–128.
[13]Yi-Liang Chen, Stéphane Lafortune, and Feng Lin. 1997. Resolving Feature Inter-
actionsUsingModularSupervisoryControlwithPriorities.In FeatureInteractions
inTelecommunicationsNetworksIV,June17-19,1997,Montréal,Canada.108–122.
[14]Betty H. C. Cheng, Rogério de Lemos, Holger Giese, Paola Inverardi, Jeff Magee,
JesperAndersson,BasilBecker,NellyBencomo,YuriyBrun,BojanCukic,Gio-
vannaDiMarzoSerugendo,SchahramDustdar,AnthonyFinkelstein,Cristina
Gacek,KurtGeihs,VincenzoGrassi,GaborKarsai,HolgerM.Kienle,JeffKramer,
Marin Litoiu, Sam Malek, Raffaela Mirandola, Hausi A. Müller, Sooyong Park,Mary Shaw, Matthias Tichy, Massimo Tivoli, Danny Weyns, and Jon Whittle.
2009. Software Engineering for Self-Adaptive Systems: A Research Roadmap. In
Dagstuhl Seminar Report. 1–26.
[15]Andreas Classen, Patrick Heymans, Pierre-Yves Schobbens, Axel Legay, and
Jean-François Raskin. 2010. Model checking lots of systems: efficient verification
of temporal properties in software product lines. In Proceedings of the 32nd
ACM/IEEEInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering-Volume1,ICSE2010,
Cape Town, South Africa, 1-8 May 2010. 335–344.
[16]JacobCohen.1977. . AcademicPress. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-179060-
8.50011-6
[17]Thomas D Cook and Donald T Campbell. 1979. The design and conduct oftrue experiments and quasi-experiments in field settings. In Reproduced in
part in Research in Organizations: Issues and Controversies. Goodyear Publishing
Company.
[18]JyotirmoyV.Deshmukh,AlexandreDonzé,ShromonaGhosh,XiaoqingJin,Garvit
Juniwal, and Sanjit A. Seshia. 2017. Robust online monitoring of signal temporal
logic.Formal Methods in System Design 51, 1 (2017), 5–30.
[19]Adel Dokhanchi, Bardh Hoxha, and Georgios E. Fainekos. 2014. On-Line Moni-
toring for Temporal Logic Robustness. In Runtime Verification - 5th International
Conference, RV 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada, September 22-25, 2014. Proceedings.
231–246.[20]Alma L. Juarez Dominguez, Nancy A. Day, and Jeffrey J. Joyce. 2008. Modelling
feature interactions in the automotive domain. In International Workshop on
Modeling in Software Engineering (MiSE). 45–50.
[21]Alexandre Donzé, Thomas Ferrère, and Oded Maler. 2013. Efficient Robust
MonitoringforSTL.In ComputerAidedVerification-25thInternationalConference,
CAV 2013, Saint Petersburg, Russia, July 13-19, 2013. Proceedings. 264–279.
[22] Alexandre Donzé and Oded Maler. 2010. Robust Satisfaction of Temporal Logic
overReal-ValuedSignals.In FormalModelingandAnalysisofTimedSystems-8th
International Conference, FORMATS 2010, Klosterneuburg, Austria, September 8-10,
2010. Proceedings. 92–106.
[23] Dronecode Project. 2020. PX4 autopilot. https://px4.io.[24]
Georgios E. Fainekos and George J. Pappas. 2006. Robustness of Temporal Logic
Specifications. In Formal Approaches to Software Testing and Runtime Verification,
First Combined International Workshops, FATES 2006 and RV 2006, Seattle, WA,
USA, August 15-16, 2006, Revised Selected Papers. 178–192.
[25]Yliès Falcone, Laurent Mounier, Jean-Claude Fernandez, and Jean-Luc Richier.
2011. Runtime enforcement monitors: composition, synthesis, and enforcement
abilities. Formal Methods in System Design 38, 3 (2011), 223–262.
[26]Nancy D. Griffeth and Hugo Velthuijsen. 1994. The negotiating agents approach
to runtime feature interaction resolution. In Feature Interactions in Telecommuni-
cations Systems, May 8-10, 1994, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 217–235.
[27]Jonathan D. Hay and Joanne M. Atlee. 2000. Composing features and resolving
interactions.In ACMSIGSOFTSymposiumonFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering,
an Diego, California, USA, November 6-10, 2000, Proceedings. 110–119.
[28]D.E. Kirk. 2004. Optimal Control Theory: An Introduction. Dover Publications.
https://books.google.com/books?id=fCh2SAtWIdwC
[29]Ron Koymans. 1990. Specifying real-time properties with metric temporal logic.
Real-time systems 2, 4 (1990), 255–299.
[30]Christian Krupitzer, Felix Maximilian Roth, Sebastian VanSyckel, Gregor Schiele,
andChristianBecker.2015. Asurveyonengineeringapproachesforself-adaptive
systems. Pervasive and Mobile Computing 17 (2015), 184–206.
[31]Oded Maler and Dejan Nickovic. 2004. Monitoring Temporal Properties of
ContinuousSignals.In FormalTechniques,ModellingandAnalysisofTimedand
Fault-Tolerant Systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 152–166.
[32]Andreas Metzger. 2004. Feature interactions in embedded control systems. Com-
puter Networks 45, 5 (2004), 625–644.
[33]Gabriel A. Moreno, Javier Cámara, David Garlan, and Bradley Schmerl. 2015.
ProactiveSelf-AdaptationunderUncertainty:AProbabilisticModelChecking
Approach.In Proceedingsofthe201510thJointMeetingonFoundationsofSoftware
Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2786853
[34]MasahideNakamura,HiroshiIgaki,YuheiYoshimura,andKousukeIkegami.2009.
Considering Online Feature Interaction Detection and Resolution for Integrated
Services in Home Network System. In ICFI. IOS Press, 191–206.
[35]Armstrong Nhlabatsi, Robin Laney, and Bashar Nuseibeh. 2008. Feature interac-
tion: The security threat from within software systems. Progress in Informatics 5
(2008), 75–89.
[36]Peyman Oreizy, Michael M. Gorlick, Richard N. Taylor, Dennis Heimbigner,Gregory Johnson, Nenad Medvidovic, Alex Quilici, David S. Rosenblum, and
Alexander L. Wolf. 1999. An Architecture-Based Approach to Self-Adaptive
Software. IEEE Intelligent Systems 14, 3 (May 1999), 54–62.
[37]Srinivas Pinisetty, Partha S. Roop, Steven Smyth, Stavros Tripakis, and Rein-hard von Hanxleden. 2017. Runtime enforcement of reactive systems usingsynchronous enforcers. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGSOFT International
SPIN Symposium onModel Checking of Software, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,July
10-14, 2017. 80–89.
[38]Amir Pnueli. 1977. The Temporal Logic of Programs. In 18th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, Providence, Rhode Island, USA, 31 October - 1
November 1977. 46–57.
[39]Santhana Gopalan Raghavan, Kosuke Watanabe, Eunsuk Kang, Chung-Wei Lin,
Zhihao Jiang, and Shinichi Shiraishi. 2018. Property-Driven Runtime Resolution
ofFeatureInteractions.In RuntimeVerification-18thInternationalConference,
RV 2018, Limassol, Cyprus, November 10-13, 2018, Proceedings. 316–333.
[40]MazeiarSalehieandLadanTahvildari.2009. Self-adaptivesoftware:Landscape
and research challenges. TAAS4, 2 (2009), 14:1–14:42.
[41] Wolfgang Scholz, Thomas Thüm, Sven Apel, and Christian Lengauer. 2011. Au-
tomaticdetectionoffeatureinteractionsusingtheJavamodelinglanguage:an
experience report. In Software Product Lines - 15th International Conference, SPLC
2011, Munich, Germany, August 22-26, 2011. Workshop Proceedings (Volume 2).7 .
[42]Norbert Siegmund, Sergiy S. Kolesnikov, Christian Kästner, Sven Apel, Don S.Batory, Marko Rosenmüller, and Gunter Saake. 2012. Predicting performance
viaautomatedfeature-interactiondetection.In 34thInternationalConferenceon
Software Engineering, ICSE 2012, June 2-9, 2012, Zurich, Switzerland. 167–177.
[43]Prasanna Thati and Grigore Rosu. 2005. Monitoring Algorithms for Metric
Temporal Logic Specifications. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 113 (2005), 145–
162.
[44]DonaldLThistlethwaiteandDonaldTCampbell.1960. Regression-discontinuity
analysis: An alternativeto the ex post factoexperiment. Journal of Educational
psychology 51, 6 (1960), 309. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0044319
1101[45]US NHTSA. 2010. ABS ECU Programming, 2010 Toyota Prius Recalls. https:
//www.nhtsa.gov/vehicle/2010/TOYOTA/PRIUS/4%252520DR/FWD#recalls.
[46]MengWu,HaiboZeng,ChaoWang,andHuafengYu.2017.SafetyGuard:Runtime
Enforcement for Safety-Critical Cyber-Physical Systems: Invited. In Proceedings
of the 54th Annual Design Automation Conference, DAC 2017, Austin, TX, USA,
June 18-22, 2017. 84:1–84:6.
[47]Lana Yarosh and Pamela Zave. 2017. Locked or Not?: Mental Models of IoT
Feature Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, Denver, CO, USA, May 06-11, 2017. 2993–2997.[48]PamelaZave.1993. FeatureInteractionsandFormalSpecificationsinTelecom-
munications. IEEE Computer 26, 8 (1993), 20–30.
[49]MohammadHadiZibaeenejad,ChiZhang,andJoanneM.Atlee.2017.Continuous
variable-specificresolutionsoffeatureinteractions.In Proceedingsofthe201711th
Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017, Paderborn,
Germany, September 4-8, 2017. 408–418.
[50]P.AnnZimmerandJoanneM.Atlee.2012. Orderingfeaturesbycategory. Journal
of Systems and Software 85, 8 (2012), 1782–1800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.
2012.03.025
1102