Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software with
User-Driven Functional Testing and Defect Class Analysis
Junjie Zhu
Apple Inc.
Cupertino, CA, USA
jason.zhu@apple.comTeng Long
Apple Inc.
Cupertino, CA, USA
teng.long@apple.com
Wei Wang
Apple Inc.
Cupertino, CA, USA
wwang52@apple.comAtif Memon
Apple Inc.
Cupertino, CA, USA
atif.memon@apple.com
ABSTRACT
Machine Learning (ML) has become the cornerstone of information
retrieval (IR) software, as it can drive better user experience by
leveraging information-rich data and complex models. However,
evaluating the emergent behavior of ML-based IR software can be
challenging with traditional software testing approaches: when
developers modify the software, they cannot often extract useful
information from individual test instances; rather, they seek to
holistically verify whether—and where—their modifications caused
significant regressions or improvements at scale. In this paper, we
introduce not only such a holistic approach to evaluate the system-
level behavior of the software, but also the concept of a defect class ,
which represents a partition of the input space on which the ML-
based software does measurably worse for an existing feature or on
which the ML task is more challenging for a new feature. We lever-
age large volumes of functional test cases, automatically obtained,
to derive these defect classes, and propose new ways to improve
the IR software from an end-user’s perspective. Applying our ap-
proach on a real production Search-AutoComplete system that
contains a query interpretation ML component, we demonstrate
that (1) our holistic metrics successfully identified two regressions
and one improvement, where all 3 were independently verified
with retrospective A/B experiments, (2) the automatically obtained
defect classes provided actionable insights during early-stage ML
development, and (3) we also detected defect classes at the finer
sub-component level for which there were significant regressions,
which we blocked prior to different releases.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and de-
bugging ;•Information systems →Test collections ;Relevance
assessment .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558941KEYWORDS
Machine Learning Testing, Information Retrieval System Testing,
Relevance Search, AutoComplete Search, Query Interpretation
ACM Reference Format:
Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon. 2022. Improving ML-
Based Information Retrieval Software with User-Driven Functional Testing
and Defect Class Analysis. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Soft-
ware Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22), November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558941
1 INTRODUCTION
Modern industrial-scale information retrieval (IR) software, such
as search engines and recommendation systems, rely heavily on
machine learning (ML) to learn the intention and preference of
different users based on their queries [ 3]. Compared to traditional
IR methods that used few features (e.g., term frequency and inverse
document frequency [ 21]), modern IR systems have evolved thanks
to richer features (e.g., search history, geographic location, and
reviews [ 27]), increasing amount of training data, and better ML
techniques (e.g., deep learning methods [ 8]). However, this techno-
logical leap has made system testing of such ML-based IR (ML-IR)
software challenging for a number of reasons.
First, ML-IR developers are less concerned with failures on an
individual query or test input – rather they want to know if their
modification has holistically improved or regressed any aspects
of the software. In traditional IR software testing, a modification
could cause a conventional lookup function foo(𝑖)to fail its release
due to a single test input 𝑖if the scenario is a blocking issue (also
known as a ‘P 0failure’ within the software industry). On the other
hand, if foowere a ML-IR software function, then the individual
failure for the input 𝑖would be acceptable if the modification caused
footo perform better on a large number of other inputs. Take a
location-aware restaurant recommender system as an example of
a ML-IR software, and assume that over 98% of its customer base
are young vegetarians. If remote steakhouses start to rank lower
due to a code modification or ML-model retraining, we might see
recommendation improvement for many vegetarians, despite a very
localized regression where only a small fraction of the omnivore
users start seeing fewer number of steakhouses nearby.
Second, ML-IR developers wish to gather information-rich test-
ing results for specific classes of inputs that influence the decision
1291
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon
space of the ML components [ 24]. Suppose the developers of the
aforementioned recommendation software learn that the ML is
only improving recommendations for vegetarian users at the cost
of worsen recommendations for the omnivore users. Compared to
just an overall performance score, such refined information can
guide the developers to investigate biases in the training data, adapt
the ML to improve upon a specific input subspace (defined by age
and dietary preferences in this case), and eventually improve the
ML to make smarter recommendations. Making these subclasses
of inputs tractable can help advance ML development and mainte-
nance, especially as the software’s decision space is continuously
evolving with changes in the real data, e.g., shifts in user taste and
restaurant quality.
Third, to comprehensively understand the behavior of their soft-
ware, the ML-IR developers need a large number of test cases to
cover the diverse decision space of the software, e.g., tests to cover
all types of restaurants, all age groups of customers, all dietary
preferences. Not only are such large test suites difficult to create,
they are even harder to maintain. A conventional system test case
is of the form <input, expected_output >, where input may mimic
an end-user, e.g., a query input ‘indian food’ and, expected_output
determines if the software is functioning correctly, e.g., an output
list of Indian restaurants ranked by distance. Each test brings the
software into a certain internal state, applies the test input, and
checks the output. A large number of test cases may become obso-
lete as the ML software frequently improves its output over time
by learning from new training data. Consequently, hard-coded ex-
pected_output in the test cases may turn stale with respect to the
software’s new improved output.
In this paper, we develop a system testing approach that ad-
dresses these challenges. Our approach automates test authoring
with appropriate expected outputs, i.e., test oracles [ 12,35,39,40]
by leveraging the scale of production data which reflect both posi-
tive and negative user feedback. Moreover, we rely the notions of
holistic measures , which quantify overall functional behavior of a
software to help developers make pass/fail decisions on their modi-
fications, and defect classes , which capture patterns in partitioned
input spaces that can help developers reason about improvements
and regressions.
Crucially, our approach factors in three different levels of evalua-
tion that are typically treated separately: user-level ,model-level , and
engineering-level [32]. We have implemented the approach and eval-
uated it on a real Search-AutoComplete (Search-AC) ML-IR system
that supports beyond millions of queries per day. Consequently, the
results in this paper are organized to illustrate how we can cover
all three levels of testing comprehensively.
User-level testing mainly relies on online evaluation based on
live production traffic [ 17]. Such testing, including A/B testing [ 34],
has become the gold standard for industrial-scale IR systems due to
the possibility of fielding a large number of users in an end-to-end
fashion, as well as the business impact that is associated with user
engagement. Yet, online measures do not directly expose bugs at
the engineering or model levels, so fixing these bugs is expensive
not only because of wasted online traffic but also because of the
additional engineering hours needed to understand the root cause,
retrain the ML models, and deploy the system.Our contribution at this level is that we were able to completely
automatically reject a number of software modifications, of which
we present two along with another modification which was ac-
cepted — all these outcomes were confirmed via independent online
A/B testing. By relying on the holistic measure of the rate at which
the system returns no results or recalls the ones desired by the user
(i.e., test oracles automatically derived from production queries),
we were able to distinguish improvements and regressions that
were consistent with the reaction by a large number of users.
Model-level testing ensures that individual ML models achieve
performance gains with increasingly complex model architecture.
The models are typically evaluated offline (not using live production
traffic) via common ML metrics, such as the precision, recall, and
the𝐹1score [ 9]. These metrics, however, do not necessarily capture
holistic and emergent behavior of the IR systems that can consist of
multiple ML models, non-ML tables hard-coded for certain inputs,
and code logic that puts these together.
At this level we conducted deeper analysis of the system based
on the functional coverage space that captures the ML behavior of
the Search-AC system. We were able to identify many defect classes,
among which we present three examples that not only covered a
broad class of inputs but also helped define new opportunities for
ML model improvement.
Engineering-level testing emphasizes correct software imple-
mentation, and is typically performed by traditional approaches
such as unit tests and simple integration tests [ 26]. Validating these
aspects of the software correctness is undeniably necessary, but, as
we illustrated via the restaurant recommendation system example,
ML-based software needs significantly more attention at the system
level, because that is where its behavior truly emerges.
At this level, we re-purposed the test oracles derived automati-
cally from production data to directly evaluate the multi-task query
interpretation component within the Search-AC system. By such
sub-component testing, we identified implementation artifacts, of
which we present two in this paper to show how the approach can
drive the triaging of new regressions and bug fixes.
The main contribution of our work is two-fold. First, we offer a
practical methodology to perform system testing for industrial-scale
IR systems, which complements popular online testing approaches
by providing early improvement and regression signals. To our
knowledge, there is limited research on such ML-based IR system
testing despite the wide-spread usage of search engines and recom-
mendation systems in industry. Second, our methodology can be
generalized to other ML-based systems as it is designed for systems
with large input spaces that contain complex functional dimen-
sions. As such, our work contributes a solution to a class of similar
applications within the broader ML-testing literature [25, 41].
Following this section, we model our holistic measure, define
defect classes, and describe how we automatically obtain test cases.
In Section 3, we present our Search-AC application that we use in
our experiment, and in Section 4, we provide our hypothesis and
results. We outline a methodology for generic ML-based systems
in Section 5 after all the case studies, highlight related work in
Section 6, and finally conclude in Section 7 with a discussion of
future work.
1292Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
2 MODEL
In this section, we describe the common model used for defining
the metrics and designing the procedures that address different
research hypotheses in Section 4. Thus, this section focuses on
generic approaches to holistically measure ML-IR software using
functional testing, as well as strategies to identify defect classes to
both detect new regressions and drive improvements.
Without loss of generality, one simplified example we consider
in this section is a Search-AC system which completes partial user
queries, e.g., the string “hote” may auto-complete to “hotel.” This AC
also supposed to leverage ML sub-components to ‘understand’ the
query intent based on the query semantics and user context, e.g.,
geographic location, to improve the query completion task; e.g., if
a user is in the country Angola, then “hote” may auto-complete
to the city name “Hote” as opposed to “hotel.” (The specific sub-
ject application for which we present the results that address our
hypotheses will be described with full details in Section 3.)
2.1 Holistic Functional Testing
A functional test returns the pass/fail outcome of an individual
input by comparing the actual output and the expectation, known
as the test oracle [ 12,35,39,40]. Take the Search-AC system as
an example, we may expect the oracle ‘hotel’ to be ranked among
the top-3 completion suggestions with input ‘hote’ for a given
context. If this test fails on only the input ‘hote’ due to a slight
ranking change after an ML update, it does not necessarily mean
AC has regressed, especially if its ML improves the ranking on
many other query inputs. Thus, an individual test case for an ML
software cannot fully generalize a systematic behavior unless there
is sufficient evidence supported by many other similar inputs.
Here, we present a holistic measure that can easily build upon
such existing functional metrics and their aggregated pass/fail out-
comes to determine if a failure is systematic. Let 𝐴𝑋={𝑎0,𝑎1,...}
be a set of 0-1 boolean values that represent failure or passing out-
comes on the test suite indexed by 𝑋for a specific function of the
system under test (SUT), which we refer to as SUT- 𝐴. We define
a holistic measure to aggregate these individual outcomes via a
weighted average:
ℎ𝐴(𝑋)=∑︁
𝑖∈𝑋𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑖, (1)
whereÍ
𝑖∈𝑋𝑤𝑖=1and𝑤𝑖≥0for all𝑖. The weights capture the
relative importance of individual test cases. In practice, the weight
can default to 𝑤𝑖=1/|𝑋|, where|𝑋|is the size of the test set, then
Eq.(1)becomes the arithmetic mean of the pass/fail outcomes, also
known as the pass rate . The two constraints on the each weight
value𝑤𝑖ensure that the holistic measure equals its maximum value
of 1 only when all tests are passing.
Another way to construct the weights is to rely on the value space
of one or more specific test dimensions with a mapping function
𝑓, such that𝑤𝑖=𝑓(𝑣𝑖), where𝑣𝑖is the value in these dimensions.
For instance, if we consider 𝑣𝑖to be the specific query locale (e.g.,
place where the query originated) as a dimension for the Search-
AC system, one can systematically assign higher weights to the
inputs whose locales correspond to important markets already in
production and lower weights to those that correspond to emerging
markets under examination.When we compare the outcomes for SUT- 𝐴with those that
result from a modified version, which we refer to as SUT- 𝐵, with
𝐵𝑋={𝑏0,𝑏1,...}, we can directly evaluate the difference between
the two SUTs on the same input set 𝑋with the holistic measure in
Eq. (1) as follows:
𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋)=ℎ𝐵(𝑋)−ℎ𝐴(𝑋)=∑︁
𝑖∈𝑋𝑤𝑖(𝑏𝑖−𝑎𝑖). (2)
From this equation, we can deduce that the overall function for SUT-
𝐵has improved (with respect to SUT- 𝐴) if this difference is positive,
or it has regressed if the quantity is negative. The second equality
in Eq. (2)that refactors the summation implies that one can still
meaningfully evaluate individual cases that improved or regressed
based on how they contributed to the overall holistic measure of
a function. For a given test case 𝑖, the difference between the two
outcomes(𝑏𝑖−𝑎𝑖)equals 1 if the case has improved from SUT- 𝐴to
SUT-𝐵, -1 if the case has regressed, and 0 if there is no difference. We
will show in Section 4.1 three examples of software modifications,
two of which we blocked, and one passed, using this model.
Because randomness of the individual pass/fail decisions can
arise from ML fuzziness [ 14] and infrastructure flakiness [ 20,42],
the holistic measure is effectively an observed statistic based on the
specific test input set. To make it more robust to such randomness,
one also has the option to compare the difference in Eq. (2)with
thresholds to create decision rules for improvement/regression.1
2.2 Defect Class Analysis
We also partition the input set based on functional coverage dimen-
sions to enable efficient triaging [ 36]. The dimensional analyses can
help us identify specific defect classes , e.g., the class of omnivore
customers who received lower steakhouse rankings in Section 1, to
understand the root cause of a holistic regression.
Take the general case where the test suite 𝑋can be partitioned
as{𝑋0,𝑋1...,𝑋𝑚−1}, we can then compute the metric in Eq. (1)for
each partition to obtain sub-metrics
ℎ𝐴(𝑋0),...,ℎ𝐴(𝑋𝑚−1)and𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋0),...,𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋𝑚−1) (3)
given SUT-𝐴and SUT-𝐵. Suppose that one of the input classes 𝑋𝑗
has a very low value of ℎ𝐴(𝑋𝑗)or negative value of 𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋𝑗), then
we refer to𝑋𝑗as a defect class.
The analyses of defect classes are not only useful for identify-
ing relative regressions, but also helpful for understanding how
to improve the current ML-based software with prioritization. We
can sortℎ𝐴(𝑋0),...,ℎ𝐴(𝑋𝑚−1)and prioritize the defect classes that
are much worse than the overall average ℎ𝐴(𝑋). Addressing these
worst-performing defect classes would likely yield more noticeable
improvements. With any new modifications introduced (say via
SUT-𝐵), developers can then rely on the difference metric 𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋𝑗)
to track if the change presents any sign of improvement. Let us
revisit the previous AC example where we partition the space of
inputs based on the locale dimension. We can measure if the model
improvement in a new locale with inputs 𝑋𝑗comes as the cost of
worsened performance in another locale with inputs 𝑋𝑘by inspect-
ing the directionality of 𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋𝑗)and𝐷𝐴
𝐵(𝑋𝑘)and further quantify-
ing the trade-offs. In Section 4.2, we will show three examples of
1One way to determine such thresholds is to compare two identical SUTs on the same
input set and establish what differences are likely insignificant.
1293ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon
defect classes: (1) Category queries with prepositions and locations ,
(2)Queries with unique places , and (3) Users with distant viewports ,
all of which helped the developers of our software under test to
make improvements.
2.3 Automated Test Oracle
Our methodology for ML-IR software requires sufficiently large
input size|𝑋|to ensure that the statistics in Eq. (1)and Eq. (2)do
not deviate too far from the true underlying software behavior in
production (due to the ‘Law of Large Numbers’ [ 19]). When we
want to additionally cover specific functional dimensions, each
partition (e.g.,{𝑋0,𝑋1...,𝑋𝑚−1}) of the input space also requires
sufficient number of inputs so that a sub-partition can provide
abundant evidence of a specific defect class. Thus, both the holistic
measures and the defect class analyses heavily depend on practical
solutions to generate a large number of test cases automatically.
Test automation relies on resource and data availability, and more
importantly, deriving accurate expectations, which is known as the
‘test oracle problem’ [ 40]. To detect improvement or regressions
in ML-IR software, we solve the oracle problem with production
data that already captures some real user feedback based on the
existing baseline version in production. For instance, if many users
have tapped and interacted with the result ‘hotel’ returned from AC
when typing ‘hote’, outside of Angola, we can trust the suggestions
‘hotel’ as a reasonable oracle for each of the user scenarios; within
the context of Angola, the suggestion “Hote” is a better oracle if
most end users have tapped and interacted with this result. The
data captured by the test oracle is highly application-specific, so
appropriate test oracles that offer insights into the core functions
are the key to providing actionable feedback for development.
The benefit of using production data for ML-based software is
multi-fold. First, it does not require case-by-case inspection and
authoring by test authors. Instead, it only requires automated log-
ging of the relevant query input, context, and user-selected output.
Next, it is well-suited for software that can have fuzzy or complex
outputs, such as AC outputs with ranked suggestions. The expected
output from an AC can be elusive because the result is data depen-
dent and can alter with slight variation of the data dependencies.
Nevertheless, if a suggestion that a user previously liked or selected
starts disappearing or getting much lower ranks, the user is likely
to have a worse experience with the software. If many users expe-
rience the same behavior, then the holistic measure will reflect the
degree of this regression systematically. Last but not least, these
measures can offer meaningful business insights if they reflect the
user impact of the software, such as common search metrics like
user clicks. In Section 3.3, we will show how we can concretely
leverage user interactions to automatically derive test oracles for a
specific Search-AC system.
2.4 Stratified Sampling
The test inputs from production data we consider are often ob-
servational, in that we do not have control over the user traffic.
Therefore, it is often necessary to balance the size of the inputs for
different categories for critical dimensions, so that the associated
functionality can be evaluated fairly [18]. For instance, suppose
that an AC system applies three different ML models for short,medium, and long input queries, which are distinguished by 5- and
20-character cutoffs. (Here the input query length would be a cov-
erage dimension with 3 categories.) If short queries are heavily
represented (e.g., 99%) in production traffic, then this imbalance
may cause insufficient evaluation of the two models that rely on
longer inputs. In other cases where there is only a single ML, it
is still useful to partition the input space based on one or more
coverage dimensions to understand if there are any ML biases that
distinguish different outputs.
To optimize the input test size, we use the sampling strategy in
Algorithm 1 to stratify such biases in production, and construct 𝑋
with a bottom-up approach. The algorithm utilizes parallelization
and built-in functions under common map-reduce frameworks [ 7].
The function ComputeSampleRatio determines the sampling ratio
for a each category in the coverage dimension based on n, the
desired number of counts per category. If the counts of a specific
category is less than n, then the sampling fraction is set to 1, so
that all existing samples will be used. The function sampleByKey
implements a default sampler without replacement via Poisson
sampling which does not generate exact sample sizes of nbut is
highly performant. A notable property of this algorithm is that
one can iteratively stratify another dimension on a given stratified
output, so that the final output can contain fair representations of
multiple dimensions.
We will apply Algorithm 1 based on specific input dimensions
of the Search-AC system and its ML sub-component in Section 3.4
Algorithm 1: Distributed Stratified Sampling
Input: Parallelized input data: input with attribute attr
and target size n.
Output: Stratified data output with approximately n
samples for each of category.
1Function ComputeSampleRatio(countMap, n) :
2 fractionMap←emptyHashMap ;
3 foreach entry∈countMap do
4 fraction = min(1, n / entry.getValue()) ;
5 fractionMap.put(entry.getKey(), fraction) ;
6 end
7 return fractionMap ;
8End Function ;
9pairs←input.map(x => (x.get(attr),x)) ;
10countMap←pairs.countByPair() ;
11fractionMap←ComputeSampleRatio(countMap, n) ;
12sampledPairs←pairs.sampleByKey(fractionMap) ;
13output←sampledPairs.map(x => x._2) ;
3 SUBJECT APPLICATION
We now revisit Search-AC and demonstrate how the elements in
Section 2 apply to this heavily-used application. Such Search-AC
systems are commonly available and the interested reader may
1294Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
easily find details of their design and implementation.2,3,4In this
section, we first abstract a generic workflow of the Search-AC
system from the end-user’s perspective, and explain notions of
search- and AC-conversions, which are the prerequisites for solving
our test oracle problem. Next, we highlight specific functions of a
geo-aware AC application that relies on its Query Interpretation (QI)
sub-module to perform multiple ML tasks. Finally, we illustrate how
we derive test oracles for the AC and QI SUTs and the corresponding
input sets.
3.1 Search and AC Conversions
AC performs query completion in relevance search, and enhances
the user experience by displaying results given only partial inputs.
Figure 1(A) provides an overview of a typical user session. AC is
invoked while the user is typing the query, as shown on the right
branch of Figure 1(A). For each character typed, a list of suggestions
is displayed in real time. The user can directly tap on a desired
result among the AC suggestions. If the user selects any specific
AC suggestion and interacts with it, we refer to this session as
an AC-conversion session. Broadly speaking, a ‘conversion’ refers
to any desired user interaction, and is often a key metric in most
relevance search applications [30].
Instead of selecting any of the AC recommendations, the user
can, at any time, switch to the ‘click-search’ workflow, shown on
the left branch of Figure 1(A). This typically requires a user to type
a full query; and click-search may return multiple results. If the user
selects one of the results and follows up with positive interactions,
we refer to this session as a search-conversion session.5Such clicks
or conversions are a common industry standard used for evaluating
and optimizing search engines [13].
AC-conversion sessions are often desired over search-conversion
sessions because the former means the user got to their desired
result faster with fewer input characters. However, compared to
click-search, AC has to resolve the prefix to predict the full query
(and often needs to meet more stringent latency requirements).
For instance, a three character prefix: ‘hot’ can be interpreted in
numerous ways by AC and return different acceptable rankings of
multiple results.
3.2 A Geo-Aware Search-AC System
To handle the inherent ambiguity in what one should expect from
AC, many AC software have gradually specialized towards cus-
tom applications and user contexts. Here, we consider a geo-aware
Search-AC application that allows users to look up specific geo-
graphic (GEO) results or place-of-interest (POI) results. Meaningful
interactions with a specific click-search or AC result can include
continued exploration with the result, such as setting it as a desti-
nation to navigate to. Hence, the general concepts of search- and
AC-conversion sessions concretely apply to this application.
This system also relies on ML to utilize the user context to ‘un-
derstand’ the user intent. The contexts include user preference
2https://blog.google/products/search/how-google-autocomplete-works-search/
3https://www.algolia.com/blog/ux/what-are-predictive-search-and-autocomplete/
4https://baymard.com/blog/autocomplete-design
5In some cases, AC may complete the query and trigger click-search, but the user still
needs to select results presented by click-search.
query complete?NNN(search-conversion session)click search buttontrigger  click-searchcontains desired result?select search result and interactYtype query charactercontains desired result?tap AC result and interactYtrigger AC
(AC-conversion session)failed session(A) Search-AC SessionYstart
(B) Search-AC SystemQIML Models and DependenciesAdditional DependenciesClick-SearchAdditional DependenciesACFigure 1: (A) Workflow and (B) Abstraction of the Search-AC
System.
settings, the user location, and the viewport (which is the rectangu-
lar geographic region of interest to the user). Well-understood user
intents can intuitively narrow down the search space and present
more accurate and relevant results to the user. To achieve this, both
the click-search and AC can employ core ML models that interpret
the meaning of the query based on the user context as well as the
way the query is typed. We refer to the modules that host such ML
models as QI sub-modules, shown in Figure 1(B).
Let’s revisit the earlier example of ‘hot’. The geo-aware AC
application can rely on popular search queries to infer that the
user is searching for a ‘hotel’. It can also utilize the viewport to
determine if the user is looking for a hotel near their location or
remotely. Next, AC can either prompt the user to trigger a click-
search result with the query ‘hotel’ or present specific hotel POIs
in the viewport. In the latter case, the user may directly navigate to
the POI or book a room from a link (without having to view other
results shown in click-search).
Consider another user query ‘new york hot’, where the user
provides more text. QI can directly infer from the language pattern
that the user might be searching for a hotel in New York City, and
return hotels within (or near) the specific city. Alternatively, the
user might intend to search for ‘new york hotdogs’, in which case,
they would likely select POIs that serve ‘hotdogs’ (a food keyword)
in ‘new york’. Thus, AC can rely on QI to perform multiple tasks
as follows.
(1)Query Segmentation [16]: segmenting the query, as well as in-
ferring potential completions of the last entity, e.g., breaking
the example query ‘new york hot’ into two entities, including
segement ‘new york’ for the first entity, and ‘hotel’ and ‘hotdog’
as possible (completed) segments for the second entity.
(2)Query Tagging [37]: labeling the query segements, e.g., tagging
the first entity ‘new york’ as a GEO type and second as POI
category for ‘hotel’, and POI keyword for segment ‘hotdog’.
(3)Entity Recognition [28]: fully resolving what each tagged seg-
ment specifically means, e.g., returning both the entity New York
1295ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon
State or the entity New York City for possible interpretations
of ‘new york’, and the unique entity identifiers for ‘hotel’ and
‘hotdog’ respectively.
For query tagging and entity recognition, QI can utilize indices
which contain the mapping from segments to the entities (and tags),
or the reverse map of different ways users refer to the same entity,
e.g., the city of New York can be referred as ‘nyc’, ‘new york’, ‘big
apple’, etc. In this example, QI outputs four distinct interpretations
(as each entity yields two different interpretations) to AC. AC then
relies on its own dependencies to retrieve specific results (e.g., hotel
or restaurant POIs) before pruning and ranking the suggestions
presented to the user.
3.3 Test Oracles for AC and QI
Next, we provide details of how we adopt production data to derive
test oracles for both the geo-aware AC and its QI sub-component,
following the strategy in Section 2.3. Each uses a different SoT
(shown in Table 1) in this paper to focus on different aspects of the
context-aware AC functions.
Table 1: Relevant Specification for Subject Applications. 1:
Unique Places; 2: Category; 3: Brand; 4: Preposition; 5: Geo
SUT SoT Test Oracles Tested Query Classes
ACsearch-
conversion
sessionsexpected place of
interest (ePOI)1_5,2_5,3_5,1_4_5,
2_4_5,3_4_5,5_1,5_2,5_3.
QIAC-
conversion
sessionsexpected
segmentation, tags,
and entity ids1,2,3,1_5,2_5,3_5,1_4_5,
2_4_5,3_4_5,5_1,5_2,5_3.
3.3.1 AC End-to-End Tests. When considering the test oracles for
AC, we cross-reference search-conversion sessions to highlight
ways to improve AC (with click-search as a reference).6This ap-
proach builds upon the insight that a user who applied click-search
to obtain search-conversion potentially did not find satisfactory re-
sults in AC when typing the query. For such a user session, we chose
the selected POI in click-search as the expected POI (ePOI), i.e., the
test oracle, for AC. As the input to click-search is the full query, we
can truncate it to only include a prefix of the full query as the input
for the AC SUT and replay realistic user scenarios with preserved
context. The truncation mechanism is application-dependent, and
to test our geo-aware AC, we mainly considered a minimum num-
ber of input characters to trigger AC: we only allowed 3 characters7
(excluding numbers and special characters) to be included for the
last entity in the query. Such inputs enabled us to detect boundary
conditions that could highlight new improvements if the geo-aware
AC leveraged the context, despite the ambiguity in the input alone.
6We also use AC-conversion sessions to ensure queries that previously generated
AC-conversions can continue to present the desired result to the user, but we omit
the discussion and the results from this paper as this approach is used for catching
regressions similar to those found by QI testing here.
7For the specific geo-aware AC system, requiring at least 3 characters moderately
limits the number of results that match the query prefix, while we can still expect the
system to interpret the query under a reasonable level of ambiguity.3.3.2 QI Component Tests. Among the experiments in this paper,
we mainly use the ones pertaining to QI to demonstrate how we
detect regressions and triage the root causes that impact the end-
to-end AC system. Thus, we only focus on AC-conversion sessions
as the SoT for QI tests. Note that QI is responsible for query under-
standing, so its oracles include expected segmentation, tags, and
entity ids, which each correspond to its three main functions (as
opposed to the ePOI oracle used for AC). These three variables are
logged as intermediate outputs when an AC-conversion is gener-
ated. Not only do we have these multi-task test oracles, we also
have the relevant inputs to QI, such as the query and relevant con-
texts, which are part of the production data. Then, we can rely
on specific assertions to determine if the interpretation generated
for an AC-conversion query is still returned when we compare a
modified SUT vs. the one in production.
3.4 Input Space Partition for AC and QI
Here we describe the common key coverage dimension for both
the geo-aware AC and its QI sub-component8: the query class
based on user intents inferred by the ML. Each of these classes are
represented by the query tag patterns that can be generated by QI,
but each classified tag pattern triggers a different code logic in the
end-to-end AC system.
Generally, there are single-entity queries, including: 1: unique
places (e.g., ‘the Hollywood Sign’); 2: category (e.g., ‘hotels’); and
3: brand (e.g., ‘starbucks’), and others (not shown in this paper)
that cover the entire intent space for AC and QI. There are also
multi-entity queries which are ordered combinations of single enti-
ties, such as location followed by a category (e.g., ‘new york hotel’),
denoted as 5_2, where 5represents a geo/location entity, and ones
with prepositions (e.g., ‘starbucks in new york’), denoted as 3_4_5 ,
where 4represents a proposition entity, and additional combina-
tions supported by the geo-aware AC. In this paper, we limit the
scope of query classes to those shown in Table 1 for the two SUTs.
Note that all the AC query classes contain both POI (tagged by
1,2or3) and GEO (tagged by 5) entities. We refer to such inputs
as ‘mixed intent queries’ (MI queries). As opposed to single-entity
queries, these queries have specific ePOIs test oracles associated
with the POI component but are constrained by the GEO component,
and thus, often require special treatment by the ML or dedicated
ML modules. The query classes for QI are a superset of those for AC,
as we will showcase how we use QI to detect regressions outside of
mixed intent queries. For both QI and AC experiments, the inputs
for each SUT were sampled based on production data stratified by
the query classes described in Table 1 according to Algorithm 1.
4 HYPOTHESIS AND RESULTS
Following the defect class model and holistic metrics defined in
Section 2, and the subject application of the Geo-aware Search-
AC system described in Section 3, we present our hypotheses and
experiment results as follows.
8Additional dimensions specific to functionalities for AC and QI are described in
specific experiments in Section 4.
1296Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
4.1 Hypothesis 1: Our Strategy Captures
Holistic Improvements and Regressions of
ML-Driven Software with Large-Scale Inputs
Metrics: We first wanted to evaluate if our holistic measures can
determine if a new software change leads to improvement or re-
gression on specific functional metrics. To demonstrate with our
geo-aware AC (the application described in Section 3.2), we con-
sidered two different metrics: (i) the suggestion rate , which is the
fraction of tests that return at least one suggestion, and (ii) the
recall rate , which is the fraction of tests whose suggestions contain
the search-conversion ePOIs (the oracle defined in Section 3.3). We
tested the software on a targeted input set of MI queries (mixed
intent queries, one of the more complex query classes described
in Section 3.4), as they are inherently complicated to evaluate, and
hence lend themselves to automated analysis.
Procedure: We considered three real MI feature modifications
(MOD-1, MOD-2, MOD-3), and compared them to their respective
baselines using a targeted test set of over 300,000 MI queries. The
queries were obtained by our stratified approach in Section 2.4, such
that each of the 9 MI patterns contain over 30,000 test cases. For each
modification (to be compared with its baseline), we calculated the
suggestion rate difference and the recall rate difference, respectively
based on the formula in Eq. (2). Meanwhile, each modification was
independently evaluated by online user traffic in A/B experiments.
If a modification generated more AC-conversions compared to the
baseline, it would be accepted and merged into the new baseline;
otherwise, it would be rejected.
Results: Table 2 shows the differences between the modified ver-
sion (SUT-𝐵) and its baseline version (SUT- 𝐴) for each metric (sug-
gestion rate difference and recall rate difference), along with the A/B
experiment outcome. The fractions are converted to percentages for
display purpose, and the sign of the values correspond to negative
and positive outcomes. The modification that contains negative
values in our targeted test suite coincides with the outcome of the
independent A/B experiments.
Table 2: Relative Changes for Different Modifications
Sugg. Rate
DifferenceRecall Rate
DifferenceA/B Exp.
Outcome
MOD-1 -5.57% -5.1% Rejected
MOD-2 -0.78% 1.9% Rejected
MOD-3 0.09% 0.1% Accepted
Discussion: Both MOD-1 and MOD-2 were rejected modifications,
which attempted to improve the recall rate on MI queries. Both suf-
fered in the experiments as more users were seeing no results in A/B
experiments. The root causes agreed with the negative suggestion
rate difference determined from our test suite. Interestingly, when
we observed the ML improvements in MOD-2 via the increased
recall rate on some queries, we were also able to catch emergent
timeout issues that led to no results on other queries, which ended
up having a stronger impact on the user, and led to experiment
to be rejected. For MOD-3, we observed alignment in the positive
outcomes between our tests and the experiments, even though
the scale of the improvement does not directly correspond to the
increase in AC-conversion rate measured via online experiments.4.2 Hypothesis 2: Defect Class Analysis
Identifies Systematic Issues Instead of
Individual Failures for Holistic
Improvement
Metrics: We investigated the current production baseline to de-
termine if there are other areas that could be improved for AC MI
queries. Here, we consider not only the recall rate but also the rank-
ing behavior. Given a test set 𝑋𝑗on a specific class of inputs, let 𝑞𝑗
be the number of tests that recall any POIs, and 𝑟𝑘
𝑗be the number
of tests that recall the search-conversion ePOI among the top- 𝑘
suggestions. The ranking precision is defined as 𝑟𝑘
𝑗/𝑞𝑗if𝑞𝑗>0,
and if𝑞𝑗=0, the precision is set to 0. For the following analyses, we
set𝑘=6as it corresponds to the number of suggestions presented
to the user which does not require additional scrolling actions in
the AC system we studied. In addition to the coverage dimension
of intent types (described in Section 3.4), we also include a second
coverage dimension: a distance dimension measured by the average
travel time from the viewport centers to the ePOIs. We selected this
dimension because this distance strongly influences the ranking
due to a mix of rule-based and ML-based logic in the SUT. The
distance dimension is split into 7 sub-categories based on 10-min,
30-min, 2-hr, 10-hr, or 1-day driving time as thresholds to reflect
the spectrum of user scenarios.
Procedure: Taking the same target set of 300,000 MI queries, we
ran all the test cases against the production version of the software
to perform defect class analysis (described in Section 2.2): we parti-
tioned the inputs into 9 subsets based on the intent patterns (shown
in Table 1 for the AC SUT) to compute the recall rate and ranking
precision for each subset based on Eq. (1), and compared which
pass rates were systematically lower than the rest for each metric.
For each of the 9 subsets, we further partitioned the queries based
on the distance dimension and repeated the computation of the
same metrics for each sub-partition of inputs.
Results: We visualize the 9 query patterns in the full MI input
space with a 3×3grid in Figure 2, where each row corresponds
to an ePOI subtype: unique places, category, or brand, and each
column corresponds to a specific query composition: location mod-
ifiers in the suffix (location suffix), after preposition (preposition),
or in the prefix (location prefix). The values in the heatmap were
initially recall rates, but we scaled and centered the values around
0 to highlight the contrast across different query patterns, to distin-
guish the ones below average and the ones above average. After
normalization, we also use the color spectrum from red to green
to indicate the relative score from worst to best in Figure 2 and
subsequent heatmaps.
In Figure 3, each of the 9 cells were further divided into 7 sub-
categories based on the distance dimension. Each value in the
heatmap corresponds to the ranking precision, which are then
scaled and centered like Figure 2.
Discussion: Based on the results, we identified defect classes that
were relatively worse than average.
1)Category queries with prepositions and locations : This class
has the lowest score in the center cell of Figure 2. It indicated
that prepositions can often confuse AC when it is followed by
incomplete location modifiers because ones like ‘on’, ‘in’ can also
1297ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon
Figure 2: The heatmap displays relative recall rates for the 9
different query patterns among 300,000 MI queries for a pro-
duction SUT. Rows correspond to different POI subtypes, and
columns correspond to different query compositions. Values
are centered at 0 and scaled to magnitude 1. Red represents
overall worse cases and green represents overall better cases.
Figure 3: This heatmap contains the identical 9 query pat-
terns on the same MI queries in Figure 2, but further subdi-
vides each cell into 7 distance categories. The values in this
heatmap are the relative ranking precision (instead of the
recall rate), but each value is centered, scaled, and colored
according to Figure 2: the spectrum from red to green also
indicates the relative score from worst to best.
be seen as abbreviations of entities that are part of an address; and
ones like ‘at’, ‘by’ are often followed by specific types of queries.
2)Queries with unique places : These correspond to any MI queries
with unique places, shown the top row in Figure 2, such as ‘holly-
wood sign california’, ‘disney land in florida’, and ‘washington park
bellevue’. With the complete query, a user was able to directly see
and select the result from click-search, but the AC failed to recall
the result. Our metrics quantified the gap between unique places
and other query classes (category and brand), and suggested that
there is still potential for the system to leverage the uniqueness of
these entities to disambiguate the location modifiers.3)Users with distant viewports : For the cases where the distance
was more than a 10-hour drive (highlighted by the blue bounding
boxes in Figure 3), we observed that POIs in the viewport were
returned and ranked much higher frequently. This means that the
system has a higher tendency to favor the viewport over the geo-
related text hints in the MI query. Consequently, the ePOI closer to
the user location was not ranked high enough, compared to other
POIs. This is a more complex behavior where the user intent can be
ambiguous (because they can either prefer something close-by or
in a remote view port), and the ranker needs to discern the intent
based on additional query or contextual features.
In comparison, our previous test suites, which relied on ad hoc
test scenarios and individual pass/fail use cases, were unable to
identify these defect classes because (1) the tests lacked holistic
measures for proper comparisons across sub-groups, and (2) they
did not contain the scale of inputs to obtain sufficient number of
cases for each defect class.
4.3 Hypothesis 3: Our Strategy Applies to
Sub-Component Testing and Can Drive
Triaging of New Regressions
Metrics: We also considered how testing subcomponents that per-
form specialized tasks can accelerate the triage process with our
holistic approach. The QI subcomponent relies on its own ML mod-
els, and performs simultaneous query tagging, completion and
entity recognition (defined in Section 3.2). Thus, we designed the
following three recall-based metrics based on the three correspond-
ing QI-specific oracles (described in Section 3.3):
1)Tagging : whether there is an interpretation whose entity tags
(corresponding to the generic classification of the segmented query)
equal those in the oracle.
2)Completion : whether there is an interpretation whose seg-
ments (where each can contain query rewrites, and last one can
contain any necessary completion) equal those in the oracle.
3)Resolution : whether there is an interpretation whose entity ids
(corresponding to a specific entity in the database, e.g., a specific
brand or category) equal those in the oracle.
Procedure: To guarantee the functionality of QI and focus on catch-
ing regressions, we partitioned and stratified the inputs according
to the derived intent patterns from AC-conversion data (shown in
Table 1 for the QI SUT). The resulting data covered all supported
intent patterns with at least 10,000 queries and had been running
in all testing environments comparing every new SUT with the
current SUT in production. For each intent pattern, we required all
three metrics, computed based on the holistic difference in Eq. (2),
to be greater than -1% (instead of 0%) for each evaluation. We allow
for this 1% margin to account for minor variations in the produc-
tion data such as changing business names that can lead to a small
number (false positive) failures.
Results: Over the course of a few months after it was developed,
the QI test suite caught multiple regressions and blocked them
from being released to production. Here we highlight two real
scenarios that were identified (and we only show the query classes
that are relevant to the regressions we demonstrate). Each row
corresponds to a different metric, and each column corresponds
1298Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Figure 4: The heatmaps display two modifications: (A) and
(B) respectively. Each modification is compared with its base-
line counterpart in production over QI-specific functional
metrics (rows) and query classes (columns). The values of
each cell correspond to the percentage difference between
the modification and the baseline based on Eq. (2).
to a different intent pattern. The highlighted values indicate the
relative regressions (red) and improvements (green).
Discussion: First, we identified a candidate generation artifact
corresponding to Figure 4(A), which improved MI performance, but
caused regressions on simpler queries, especially category queries.
The intended improvement aimed at increasing the category and
brand recalls of specific businesses, but ended up creating an in-
creasing number of noisy entity ids for the simple queries. This
artifact overrode the ones that match the oracles especially for cat-
egory (tag: 2) queries, resulting in -9% difference in the resolution
metric. Additionally, those that yielded an extreme number of entity
ids ended up not returning any interpretations at all (captured by
>1% in both tag and completion difference metrics).
Second, corresponding to Figure 4(B), we caught a data change
that removed noisy tokens (e.g., those with misspells) such that
QI could reduce the occurrence of unintuitive query completions.
Indeed, we noticed completion improvements in two classes of
queries: category (tag: 2) and location + category (tag: 5_2). How-
ever, many of the entity ids and tags (which were originally mapped
to the removed tokens) could no longer be retrieved, resulting in a
loss in resolution and tagging in the same query class. This blocked
the particular release sign-off and led to a fix.
5 GENERAL METHODOLOGY
Even though we used the Search-AC application as our running
subject, we have identified opportunities to apply similar method-
ologies to other applications of ML-based software.
One of our recent works [ 45] offers an example of an ML-based
spelling correction software, where the test oracles can be automat-
ically derived from production data. Specific to the spell correction
functionality, the test dimensions were captured by edit-distance-
based input typo spaces, and the functional evaluation relied onrecall and ranking measures. We note that these measures are spe-
cial cases of the holistic metrics described in our current work, and
hence, the defect class analysis applied to the Search-AC application
should also be able to systematically identify defects, including the
ones reported in the original paper.
Taken together, both subject applications prescribe a general
methodology that applies to testing the emergent behavior of generic
ML software.
The methodology consists of the following steps:
(1)Define the functional behavior of the SUTs, including input-
output relations that capture ML behavior.
(2)Determine the Source of Truth (SoT) that can determine the
expected outputs (i.e., the test oracle).
(3)Specify coverage dimensions that reflect core functions and
sample test cases according to the dimensions.
(4)Evaluate the SUT based on the overall holistic metric to
determine the degree of improvement or regression.
(5)Repeat the evaluation of the metrics on sub-dimensional
inputs and determine if there are defect classes.
It is crucial in Step 1 to distinguish the black-box software be-
havior from the internal ML tasks, so that the tests reflect the
integrative influence of the ML (or multiple MLs). For instance, con-
sider a speech recognition software that performs three functions:
speaker identity recognition, language detection, and transcript
generation. The black-box input we consider could be an audio
recording along with user configurations, and the output could be
the transcribed text along with interpretations. On the contrary, an
internal ML may only rely on ‘cleaner’ pre-processed data for its
task and the output from the ML needs to be post-processed based
on other configurations.
Solving the oracle problem in Step 2 requires an SoT that con-
tains the content needed for functional assertions. For the speech
recognition software, this means knowing the expected outputs
associated with each individual function, such as how the user is
addressed, the desired displayed language, and the output text with
appropriate highlighting. The testers can take the user feedback as
the SoT to extract these outputs validated by the user either from
explicit rating by the user, or from positive subsequent interactions
captured by the software. There are generally two sources of oracles:
in-house evaluation and crowdsourcing, which mirrors the process
of data labeling for ML. This example and our proposed solution in
Section 2.3 both fall under crowdsourcing from production data, a
type of semi-automated labeling [ 10]. However, if production data
is not available, one can still derive the oracle from the existing
SoT dataset being served, e.g., all entries in a knowledge graph,
since they can be converted into some form of expectation at the
software output.
Specifying coverage dimensions in Step 3 is a common proce-
dure in traditional software testing which ensures sufficient use
cases to cover all software functions. This notion applies to our
framework as well. However, because the space of inputs (e.g., text
of audio inputs) cannot be fully enumerated, we resort to stratified
sampling on each key dimension in Section 2.4 to ensure sufficient
representation within each dimension. The reasoning follows from
label-balancing used for ML training [ 15]. For instance, to ensure
all the languages supported by the speech recognition software are
1299ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, Wei Wang, and Atif Memon
covered, the tester can define ‘language’ as an attribute of each test
case, whose value is derived from the user preference or from the
output language (with positive feedback), and then balance the test
cases along this dimension according to Algorithm 1.
Once test cases are generated, Steps 4 and 5 allow the tester to
evaluate the software systematically: they can rely on the holistic
metric in Section 2.1 to evaluate a modification compared to a
baseline to see if the change incurs an improvement or regression
not only for each of the functional metrics but also for each sub-
space within each dimension for defect class analysis as explained in
Section 2.2. With the speech recognition software for example, one
can rely on the specific metrics to answer different questions about
a modification: e.g., whether there is correlated improvements in all
three functionalities; whether there is a trade-off between language
detection and others; whether a regression in language detection is
specific to only a subset of languages. Taken together, these signals
can allow the testers and developers to understand how to improve
the software and prioritize the modifications systematically for
timely evaluation [36].
6 RELATED WORK
Our work builds upon a rich body of literature involving automating
software testing at scale and addressing challenges of ML software
testing. Here we discuss prior work on testing IR and ML systems.
Evaluation of search and similar IR systems (e.g., other variations
of Search-AC systems) has been an active research area in auto-
mated software testing. Several works have proposed user-driven
black-box testing approaches to solve the test generation and oracle
problems that we also faced for their applications: Zhou et al. [ 44]
adopted metamorphic testing to create tests for web search engines;
Olteanu et al [ 29] used crowdsourcing to identify, categorize and
understand problematic search completion suggestions. In the work
of Shokouhi et al [ 33], the researchers designed a time-sensitive
query autocomplete service, and evaluated it against query sets
with daily, weekly, monthly and annual cycles. While these works
focus on specific classes of inputs that are difficult to evaluate in
search systems, our case studies take a global view of ML-IR sys-
tems based on our holistic metrics to determine how functional
regressions need to be fixed and provide patterns of defects to prior-
itize triaging. Our results for AC and QI show that our strategy can
adapt to complex ML-IR systems by considering several regression
metrics in a multi-dimensional input space.
Assuring the functionality and quality of ML-based systems has
also been proven complex and challenging by previous research.
Zhang et al. [ 41] surveyed a comprehensive landscape of ML testing,
summarizing topics in robustness, privacy, efficiency, and fairness.
Lewis et al. [ 22] studied faults caused by mismatches among data
science, software engineering, and operations in ML-enabled sys-
tems. Santhanam et al. [ 31] and Devanbu et al. [ 11] discussed the
challenges of assessing deep learning systems. Other reviews have
emphasized specific aspects of evaluating ML systems, such as de-
fect detection in ML programs [2] or implementation quality [25].
Practitioners in industry have also echoed the level of complexity
of testing ML systems. Lwakatare et al. [ 23] reviewed challenges
and solutions of testing large-scale ML systems. Amershi et al. [ 1]
conducted a study over the development workflows of multipleML-based systems in Microsoft, and emphasized the importance
of continuously evaluating the both the ML and non-ML parts of
ML-based systems end-to-end. To detect faults in neural machine
translation systems, Zheng, et al. [ 43] derived properties between
input and output which can be checked systematically, and applied
it to test WeChat (a messenger app with over one billion monthly
active users). Chen et al. [ 4,5] focused on continuous triaging of
large-scale online service systems. Washizaki et al. [ 38] surveyed
good/bad software-engineering design patterns for ML techniques
in practice. Chen et al. [ 6] studied the challenges in the deploy-
ment process of ML systems with a focus on Deep Learning based
software. Even though these approaches do not prescribe a generic
system testing workflow like ours, they pose the multitude of ex-
isting industrial challenges, including scalability, applicability, and
acceptability, and inspired us to propose our practical strategy.
7 CONCLUSION
As ML-IR systems get increasingly complex, consisting of multiple
ML models and non-ML decision-making code, they continue to
challenge conventional software testing. We presented a new ap-
proach to test such systems, thereby addressing these challenges,
by: (1) leveraging functional test cases to inform ML-IR developers
holistically about the impact (regression/improvement) of their lat-
est code and data modifications, (2) measuring system regression at
the level of a defect class – a partition of the input space on which
the ML-IR software does measurably worse for an existing/new fea-
ture, and (3) drilling down deeper to sub-components to understand
the causes of regressions. Our deployment on a production Search-
AC system demonstrated the effectiveness of our new approach by
successfully detecting multiple regressions, and identifying defect
classes at the system as well as sub-system level to ease debugging.
Meanwhile, defining holistic metrics from individual functional
test failures, together with identification of defect classes, is a pow-
erful and general approach for continuous iterative improvement
of any ML system. In the near future, we plan to study how defect
classes evolve in AC and QI over time as new features are added,
systems are re-designed, and new usage patterns start emerging.
In the medium term, we will apply the same approach to other ML
systems, including ones for which we do not have access to produc-
tion data, and hence we will need to develop test cases using other
generative models. In the long term we plan to build frameworks to
generalize this approach, understand its strengths and weaknesses,
and implement general tools that others can leverage to test their
ML systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Alex Braunstein for constant support of
our work, Emily Kowalczyk for feedback on the manuscript, and
Archana Bhattarai for sharing insights into our subject application.
REFERENCES
[1]Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall, Ece
Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan, Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019.
Software Engineering for Machine Learning: A Case Study. In 2019 IEEE/ACM
41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in
Practice (ICSE-SEIP) . 291–300. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2019.00042
[2]Houssem Ben Braiek and Foutse Khomh. 2018. On testing machine learning
programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02257 (2018).
1300Improving ML-Based Information Retrieval Software ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
[3]Hsinchun Chen. 1995. Machine learning for information retrieval: Neural net-
works, symbolic learning, and genetic algorithms. Journal of the American society
for Information Science 46, 3 (1995), 194–216.
[4]Junjie Chen, Xiaoting He, Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Dan Hao, Feng Gao,
Zhangwei Xu, Yingnong Dang, and Dongmei Zhang. 2019. Continuous Inci-
dent Triage for Large-Scale Online Service Systems. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . 364–375.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2019.00042
[5]Yujun Chen, Xian Yang, Hang Dong, Xiaoting He, Hongyu Zhang, Qingwei
Lin, Junjie Chen, Pu Zhao, Yu Kang, Feng Gao, Zhangwei Xu, and Dongmei
Zhang. 2020. Identifying Linked Incidents in Large-Scale Online Service Systems .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 304–314. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409768
[6]Zhenpeng Chen, Yanbin Cao, Yuanqiang Liu, Haoyu Wang, Tao Xie, and Xuanzhe
Liu. 2020. A Comprehensive Study on Challenges in Deploying Deep Learning
Based Software. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(Virtual Event, USA) (ESEC/FSE 2020) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 750–762. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409759
[7]Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. 2008. MapReduce: simplified data processing
on large clusters. Commun. ACM 51, 1 (2008), 107–113. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1327452.1327492
[8]Li Deng and Dong Yu. 2014. Deep learning: methods and applications. Foundations
and trends in signal processing 7, 3–4 (2014), 197–387. https://doi.org/10.1561/
2000000039
[9]Leon Derczynski. 2016. Complementarity, F-score, and NLP Evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-
ation (LREC’16) . European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Portorož,
Slovenia, 261–266.
[10] Michael Desmond, Evelyn Duesterwald, Kristina Brimijoin, Michelle Brachman,
and Qian Pan. 2021. Semi-Automated Data Labeling. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS
2020 Competition and Demonstration Track (Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, Vol. 133) , Hugo Jair Escalante and Katja Hofmann (Eds.). PMLR, 156–
169. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v133/desmond21a.html
[11] Prem Devanbu, Matthew B. Dwyer, Sebastian G. Elbaum, Michael Lowry, Kevin
Moran, Denys Poshyvanyk, Baishakhi Ray, Rishabh Singh, and Xiangyu Zhang.
2020. Deep Learning & Software Engineering: State of Research and Future
Directions. CoRR abs/2009.08525 (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2009.
08525
[12] Daniel Di Nardo, Nadia Alshahwan, Lionel C Briand, Elizabeta Fourneret, Tomis-
lav Nakić-Alfirević, and Vincent Masquelier. 2013. Model based test valida-
tion and oracles for data acquisition systems. In 2013 28th IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 540–550.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2013.6693111
[13] Georges E. Dupret and Benjamin Piwowarski. 2008. A User Browsing Model
to Predict Search Engine Click Data from Past Observations.. In Proceedings of
SIGIR ’08 (Singapore, Singapore). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 331–338. https://doi.org/10.1145/1390334.1390392
[14] Saikat Dutta, August Shi, Rutvik Choudhary, Zhekun Zhang, Aryaman Jain,
and Sasa Misailovic. 2020. Detecting Flaky Tests in Probabilistic and Machine
Learning Applications. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Virtual Event, USA) (ISSTA 2020) .
211–224. https://doi.org/10.1145/3395363.3397366
[15] Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 2001. The elements of
statistical learning . Vol. 1. Springer series in statistics Springer, Berlin. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7
[16] Matthias Hagen, Martin Potthast, Benno Stein, and Christof Bräutigam. 2011.
Query Segmentation Revisited. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on World Wide Web . 97–106. https://doi.org/10.1145/1963405.1963423
[17] Katja Hofmann, Lihong Li, and Filip Radlinski. 2016. Online Evaluation for
Information Retrieval. Found. Trends Inf. Retr. 10, 1 (jun 2016), 1–117. https:
//doi.org/10.1561/1500000051
[18] Max Hort, Jie M. Zhang, Federica Sarro, and Mark Harman. 2021. Fairea: A Model
Behaviour Mutation Approach to Benchmarking Bias Mitigation Methods. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Athens,
Greece) (ESEC/FSE 2021) . 994–1006. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468565
[19] Pao-Lu Hsu and Herbert Robbins. 1947. Complete convergence and the law of
large numbers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 33, 2 (1947), 25.
[20] Wing Lam, Stefan Winter, Anjiang Wei, Tao Xie, Darko Marinov, and Jonathan
Bell. 2020. A Large-Scale Longitudinal Study of Flaky Tests. Proc. ACM Program.
Lang. OOPSLA, Article 202 (nov 2020), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3428270
[21] Jure Leskovec, Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey David Ullman. 2020. Mining of
massive data sets . Cambridge university press.
[22] Grace A. Lewis, Stephany Bellomo, and Ipek Ozkaya. 2021. Characterizing and
Detecting Mismatch in Machine-Learning-Enabled Systems. CoRR abs/2103.14101
(2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.14101[23] Lucy Ellen Lwakatare, Aiswarya Raj, Ivica Crnkovic, Jan Bosch, and Helena Holm-
ström Olsson. 2020. Large-scale machine learning systems in real-world industrial
settings: A review of challenges and solutions. Information and Software Technol-
ogy127 (2020), 106368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2020.106368
[24] Dusica Marijan, Arnaud Gotlieb, and Mohit Kumar Ahuja. 2019. Challenges
of testing machine learning based systems. In AITest . IEEE, 101–102. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/AITest.2019.00010
[25] S Masuda, K Ono, T Yasue, and N Hosokawa. 2018. A Survey of Software Quality
for Machine Learning Applications. In ICST . 279–284. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSTW.2018.00061
[26] Glenford J Myers, Corey Sandler, and Tom Badgett. 2011. The art of software
testing . John Wiley & Sons.
[27] Ph Mylonas, David Vallet, Pablo Castells, Miriam Fernández, and Yannis Avrithis.
2008. Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological
knowledge. The Knowledge Engineering Review 23, 1 (2008), 73–100. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0269888907001282
[28] David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of named entity recognition
and classification. Lingvisticae Investigationes 30, 1 (2007), 3–26. https://doi.org/
10.48550/ARXIV.2109.11406
[29] Alexandra Olteanu, Fernando Diaz, and Gabriella Kazai. 2020. When Are Search
Completion Suggestions Problematic?. In Computer Supported Collaborative Work
and Social Computing (CSCW) . ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3415242
[30] Khalid Saleh and Ayat Shukairy. 2010. Conversion optimization: The art and
science of converting prospects to customers . " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[31] P. Santhanam, Eitan Farchi, and Victor Pankratius. 2019. Engineering Reliable
Deep Learning Systems. CoRR abs/1910.12582 (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.1910.12582
[32] Tefko Saracevic. 1995. Evaluation of evaluation in information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the 18th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research
and development in information retrieval . 138–146. https://doi.org/10.1145/215206.
215351
[33] Milad Shokouhi and Kira Radinsky. 2012. Time-Sensitive Query Auto-Completion.
InProceedings of the 35th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (Portland, Oregon, USA) (SIGIR ’12) . As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 601–610. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2348283.2348364
[34] Dan Siroker and Pete Koomen. 2013. A/B testing: The most powerful way to turn
clicks into customers . John Wiley & Sons.
[35] Foivos Tsimpourlas, Ajitha Rajan, and Miltiadis Allamanis. 2021. Supervised
learning over test executions as a test oracle. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing . 1521–1531. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3412841.3442027
[36] Kristen R Walcott, Mary Lou Soffa, Gregory M Kapfhammer, and Robert S Roos.
2006. Timeaware test suite prioritization. In Proceedings of the 2006 interna-
tional symposium on Software testing and analysis . 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1146238.1146240
[37] Xuanhui Wang. 2020. Query Segmentation and Tagging. In Query Understanding
for Search Engines . Springer, 43–67.
[38] Hironori Washizaki, Hiromu Uchida, Foutse Khomh, and Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc.
2019. Studying Software Engineering Patterns for Designing Machine Learning
Systems. In 2019 10th International Workshop on Empirical Software Engineering
in Practice (IWESEP) . 49–495. https://doi.org/10.1109/IWESEP49350.2019.00017
[39] Elaine J Weyuker. 1982. On testing non-testable programs. Comput. J. 25, 4 (1982),
465–470.
[40] Qing Xie and Atif M. Memon. 2007. Designing and comparing automated test
oracles for GUI-based software applications. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
16, 1 (2007), 4. https://doi.org/10.1145/1189748.1189752
[41] Jie M Zhang, Mark Harman, Lei Ma, and Yang Liu. 2020. Machine learning testing:
Survey, landscapes and horizons. IEEE TSE (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.
2019.2962027
[42] Wei Zheng, Guoliang Liu, Manqing Zhang, Xiang Chen, and Wenqiao Zhao.
2021. Research Progress of Flaky Tests. In IEEE International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . IEEE, 639–646. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/SANER50967.2021.00081
[43] Wujie Zheng, Wenyu Wang, Dian Liu, Changrong Zhang, Qinsong Zeng, Yuetang
Deng, Wei Yang, Pinjia He, and Tao Xie. 2019. Testing Untestable Neural Machine
Translation: An Industrial Case. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference
on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion) . 314–315.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-Companion.2019.00131
[44] Zhi Quan Zhou, Shaowen Xiang, and Tsong Yueh Chen. 2016. Metamorphic
Testing for Software Quality Assessment: A Study of Search Engines. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering 42, 3 (2016), 264–284. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TSE.2015.2478001
[45] Junjie Zhu, Teng Long, and Atif Memon. 2021. Automatically authoring regression
tests for machine-learning based systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP) .
IEEE, 374–383. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEIP52600.2021.00049
1301