Matching Skills,PastCollaboration,and LimitedCompetition:
Modeling When Open-SourceProjects A ￿ractContributors
HongboFang
hongbofa@cs.cmu.edu
CarnegieMellonUniversity
Pittsburgh, PA, USAJamesHerbsleb
jdh@cs.cmu.edu
CarnegieMellonUniversity
Pittsburgh, PA, USABogdanVasilescu
bogdanv@cs.cmu.edu
CarnegieMellonUniversity
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
ABSTRACT
Attracting and retaining new developers is often at the heart of
open-sourceprojectsustainabilityandsuccess.Previousresearch
found many intrinsic (or endogenous) project characteristics asso-
ciated with the attractiveness of projects to new developers, but
theimpactoffactorsexternaltotheprojectitselfhavelargelybeen
overlooked. In this work, we focus on one such external factor,
a project’s labor pool , which is de ￿ned as the set of contributors
active in the overall open-source ecosystem that the project could
plausibly attempt to recruit from at a given time. How are the size
and characteristics of the labor pool associated with a project’s
attractiveness to new contributors? Through an empirical study of
over516,893Pythonprojects,wefoundthatthesizeoftheproject’s
labor pool,the technical skill match,and the socialconnectionbe-
tween the project’s labor pool and members of the focal project
allsigni￿cantlyin￿uencethenumberofnewdevelopersthatthe
focalprojectattracts,withthecompetitionbetweenprojectswith
overlapping labor pools also playing a role. Overall, the labor pool
factorsaddconsiderableexplanatorypowercomparedtomodels
with only project-levelcharacteristics.
CCSCONCEPTS
•Softwareanditsengineering →Opensourcemodel ;•Human-
centeredcomputing →Empiricalstudiesincollaborativeandsocial
computing .
KEYWORDS
open source,sustainability,laborpool
ACM ReferenceFormat:
HongboFang,JamesHerbsleb,andBogdanVasilescu.2023.MatchingSkills,
PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition:ModelingWhenOpen-Source
ProjectsAttractContributors.In Proceedingsofthe31stACMJointEuropean
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Soft-
wareEngineering(ESEC/FSE’23),December3–9,2023,SanFrancisco,CA,USA.
ACM,NewYork,NY,USA, 13pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616282
1 INTRODUCTION
Theimportanceandeconomicvalueofopen-sourcesoftwareare,
by now, undeniable [ 25]. Open source is used in all domains, by
ESEC/FSE ’23,December 3–9, 2023, SanFrancisco, CA, USA
©2023 Copyright held bytheowner/author(s).
ACM ISBN979-8-4007-0327-0/23/12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616282companies big and small, public institutions, scienti ￿c organiza-
tions,etc.Thereisawealthofopen-sourcelibraries,frameworks,
and tools that can be reused and built upon to facilitate innovation
andincrease software development productivity [ 59].
Muchlikeanysoftware[ 15],opensourcealsorequiresconsid-
erablee￿orttodevelopandmaintain,e.g.,torespondtoevolving
user needs [ 5], unexpected bugs or issues [ 67], and ever-changing
dependencies [ 11]. However, since much of open source is still
being developed and maintained by volunteers [ 7,55], for projects,
beingabletoattractandretainnewcontributorsisessential[ 53].
Attractingandonboardingnewcontributorspreservestheconti-
nuity of project development and maintenance, and can even save
the project frombeingabandoned whencore developersleave [ 4].
Thearrivalofnewcontributorsmayalsobringnewknowledgeand
perspectivestotheprojectteam,andthushelptoproducesoftware
ofhigherquality[ 54].Yet,open-sourceprojectsoftenstruggleto
￿ndtheright contributors[ 4]andthisisaggravatedbythe volun-
tary nature of many open-source contributions — turnover rates
are high [ 31], disengagement of core project developers is com-
mon[30],andthereasonspeopledropoutareoftenunavoidable,
e.g.,achange ofjob orlife status [ 48].
There has been considerable prior research to understand the
characteristicsofprojectsthatsucceedinattractingandonboarding
new contributors, as well as the barriers faced by people placing
their￿rst contributions in open-source projects [ 63]. For exam-
ple, there is empirical evidence that project popularity [ 13], age,
sizeintermsofthenumberofcontributors[ 64],license[ 57],the
presenceandqualityofdocumentation[ 51],andevenactivityon
socialmedia[ 29],areallassociatedwithaproject’slikelihoodof
attractingnewcontributors.However,muchlessisknownabout
howfactorsexternaltotheproject,relatedtoitspositionandrolein
theoverallopen-sourceecosystem,impacttheprocessofattracting
andretainingnewcontributors.
Meanwhile,thereismountingevidencethatopen-sourcecontrib-
utors,especiallyvolunteers,haveample freedomtochoosewhich
projectstocontributeto[ 34],typicallyjoinexistingcommunities
over starting new projects [ 34], and often jump around between
projects and programming language ecosystems [ 20,39,73], bring-
ing withthem knowledge andskills. Therefore,it isinsu ￿cient to
consider open-source projects as independent — their success or
failure to attract and retain new contributors is likely in ￿uenced
bythebroadercontexttheyarepartofandtheirrelationshipsto
otherprojects in the overallopen-source ecosystem.
With this holistic view, in this paper we take a step towards
better understanding an open-source project’s labor pool , de￿ned
asthesetofcontributorsactiveintheoverallopen-sourceecosystem
that a given project could plausibly attempt to recruit from at a
Thiswork islicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0Interna-
tional License.
42
ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
given time . Using longitudinaldatafroma large sampleof516,893
Python projects, and holding constant project-level characteristics
previouslyreportedintheliterature,weshowthat1)thelevelof
technical skill match between potential contributors and a focal
project,2)thestrengthoftheirconnectiontoexistingteammembers
from past collaborations,and 3) the amountof ‘competition’ from
othersimilarprojectsintheoverallecosystem,areallstatistically
associatedwithaproject’s attractiveness to newcontributors.
Ourmethodologyandresultscanhelpopensourcepractitioners,
community managers, platform designers, and funders to better
allocate typically already scarce resources, target promotional cam-
paigns, and monitor the health and sustainability of projects. By
illuminating, with quantitative empirical evidence, possible new
mechanisms through which open-source projects can attract (or
maystruggletoattract)newcontributors,ourworkalsocontributes
toourtheoreticalunderstandingoftheecosystem-leveldynamicsin
open source, an areain much need of additional research attention,
inour opinion.
2 RELATED WORK
Thesustainabilityofopen-sourceprojectsisoneofthekeyques-
tionsemergingsincetheearlydaysofopen-sourcedevelopment.
Softwaredevelopmentisacomplex,e ￿ort-intensiveprocess[ 15,49],
and the maintenance of such products can be no less costly [ 8]. Be-
cause open-source teams often consist of volunteer developers,
being able to sustain contributions becomes especially challenging.
Multiplestudieshavelookedathowdevelopersbecomeinvolvedin
open-source projects. Krogh et al.proposed a “joining script” of de-
veloper participation in the open-source mailing list and described
the practice it took for a newcomer to become established in the
community [ 74]. Crowston and Howison studied an onion-like
structuralmodelofopen-sourceteams,withthetransitionbetween
di￿erent layers being a result of team interaction and developer
contribution [ 21]. Steinmacher and others described the developer
contributiontoaprojectasamulti-stageprocessthatstartsfrom
an initial motivation and attraction phase, then moves to the re-
tention phase in the later stage [ 64]. The developers’ advancement
towards becoming long-term contributors was also studied. Re-
searchers found that the developers’ relative sociality [ 77], their
attitudes [ 78], and the project environmental factors such as the
availabilityofworkopportunitiesandprojectpopularity[ 78,79]
allplayaroletoin ￿uencethelikelihoodoflong-termcontributions.
Thoseworkshelpedtosupportmoresustainableopen-sourcede-
velopment by providingguidanceontool design[ 6,35,60,61,66]
andprojectortaskrecommendations [ 58].
Attractingnewdeveloperstocontributetoanopen-sourceproject
is an important part of the project’s sustainability and the early
stage of developer involvement in the project. Researchers have
identi￿edseveralfactorsthatshouldhelpwithattractingandon-
boarding new developers. For example, Hahn et al.reported that
developerstendtojoinprojectswheretheyhavepastcollaboration
experience with the existing developers [ 36,37], with a similar
resultfoundbyCasalnuovoetal .[18].Tanandothersfoundthat
beginner-friendly tasks and their characteristics impact developer
onboarding [ 68]. More recently, studies looked at attracting new
contributors through the lens of signaling theory, reporting thatbetterREADMEs[ 51],theadoptionofbadges[ 69],theprojectpop-
ularitymetrics(e.g.,thenumberofstars[ 13,32]),andthetimeto
reviewpullrequests[ 32]allhelptomaketheprojectmoreattractive
to newcontributors.
Our work provides an alternative perspective tounderstanding
the new contributors to a project by shifting the focus from the
project itself to the characteristics of potential contributors. Our
results also connect to the research on social media promotion [ 14,
29]foropen-sourceprojectsandopen-sourceprojectdi ￿usionin
general [42], as we show that the characteristics of the community
that the promotion reaches impact the successful attraction of new
contributors.Wefurtheridentifyseveralsuchcharacteristicsthat
open-sourcepromoters maypay attention to.
3 THEORETICALFRAMEWORKAND
RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
Ourstudyinvestigatestherelationshipbetweencharacteristicsof
a project’s labor pool and its ability to attract new contributors.
Asmentionedabove,wede ￿nelaborpool asthesetofdevelopers
active in the overall open-source ecosystem around the same time,
that a given project could plausibly attempt to recruit new contrib-
utors from. That is, in our de ￿nition labor pools are always tied
to speci￿c projects. For example, we expect that a text processing
project’slaborpoolisdi ￿erentfromabioinformaticsproject’slabor
pool, althoughthe twomay overlap if, for example,they involve
applicationsofmachinelearning.Inaddition,werequireanotion
ofplausibleawareness ofthefocalprojectfromdevelopersinthe
laborpool.Indeed,attheveryleast,onewouldneedtobeawareof
aprojectandpossibleopportunitiestocontributebeforedeciding
to do so.We discuss our operationalizationlater,inSection 4.1.
Withthisde ￿nition,wehypothesizeaboutdi ￿erencesintenden-
cies to join (i.e., start contributing changes to) a focal project for
developers in the labor pool, and the relationships (we theorize the
directionofin ￿uenceaswell)betweensuchfactorsexternaltoa
projectandtheproject’ssuccessatattractingnewcontributors.We
will operationalize and more formally test these hypotheses below,
in Section 5. Note also that we use the terms developer andcontrib-
utorinterchangeably,andinclusivelyofalltypesofcontribution,
not justcode.1
To begin with, the size of the project’s labor pool at some point
in time should be an important predictor of the number of new
contributors the project engages in the near future. A larger labor
pool size should indicate that more developers are aware of the
project,thusthepossibilitythatsomeofthosedeveloperswillbe
interestedto contributeincreases.Therefore,we hypothesize:
H1.The number of developers in a project’s labor pool is positively
associatedwiththenumberofnewcontributorstheprojectreceivesin
thenearfuture.
For potential contributors in the labor pool, a social connection
with current project developers should reduce their uncertainty
about the project, as they may trust the information about the
project provided by their ‘friends’ and may be in a betterposition
toevaluatetheoutcomeofcontributing[ 44].Inaddition,familiarity
1Althoughinouroperationalizationbelowweconsideronlycontributionsintheform
of commits (including pull request commits), to keep our analysis tractable. Commits
canstill touchnon-codepartsof a project,e.g., documentation ￿les.
43MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
with the current project members should help potential developers
to understand the working norms and the way of collaboration
better[26].Finally,thefocalproject’scurrentdevelopersaregen-
erallymorelikelytoacceptcontributionsfrompeopletheyknow
about[70]. We thus hypothesize:
H2.The strength of social connections between existing project mem-
bers and others in the labor pool is positively associated with the
number ofnew developerstheprojectreceives in thenearfuture.
The development of open-source software is skilled work. To
providevaluablecontributionstotheproject,developersneedtobe
familiarwiththeprogramminglanguages,technologies,andcoding
styleintheproject[ 17],andalignwiththeproject’sgoalsandother
suchconstraints.Therequirementfortechnicalprogrammingskills
is often a barrier for new contributors to join a project [ 65], and
the contributionsof people withless ofa trackrecordofactivity in
open source are also less likely to be accepted [ 70]. Going one step
further,wehypothesizethatit’snotenoughtohaveopensource
contributionexperience,butratherthattheexperienceshouldbe
technically relevantto the focal project:
H3.Thedegreeofsimilarity(or ￿t)betweenthetechnologiesusedina
projectandthetechnicalbackgroundofthedevelopersintheproject’s
labor pool is positively associated with the number of new developers
theprojectreceives in thenearfuture.
Finally, contributing to open-source projects takes a lot of ef-
fort[15,49].Giventhattheamountoftimeanyonecaninvestin
contributing to open source is unavoidably limited (at the very
least by the laws of physics),one can expectthat the total number
ofprojectsonecanjoinshouldbelimitedaswell.Andwhileitis
common for people to contribute to multiple open-source projects
evenduringthesameday[ 72],andone’scapacityfor‘multitasking’
across projects increases when the projects share the same pro-
gramminglanguages[ 72],therecanstillbemoreprojectsavailable
than one hascapacity for. Therefore, a developer part of thelabor
poolofmultipleprojectsmaybeforcedtochoosefromamongthem.
Stated di￿erently, a developer’s tendency to join a project may not
only be in ￿uenced by the characteristics of the focal project, but
alsobytheamountofother‘competing’projectsthedeveloperis
exposed to. As competition for new contributors can exist between
projectswithoverlappinglaborpools,we hypothesize:
H4.Aprojectwillengagefewernewcontributorsinthenearfuture
the more overlap there is between its labor pool and labor pools of
otherprojects.
H5.Theprojectwillreceivemorenewcontributorsifitisrelatively
attractive compared to other projects that developers in its labor pool
arealsopossiblyexposed to.
We describe our study design for testing these hypotheses next.
4 METHODS
This section ￿rst gives the high-level intuition behind our research
design,andthen dives intothe technical details for eachstep.
4.1 KeyStudyDesign Decisions andTradeo ￿s
Testing the hypotheses above requires a macro, ecosystem-level
analysis. Given a focal project at a given time, we need to opera-
tionalize its laborpool from among thosepeople active acrosstheentireopen-source‘universe’atthattime( H1,H2).Then,forevery
suchperson,weneedtomakeinferencesabouttheirpastexperience
withdi￿erenttechnologiesacrosstheopen-source‘universe.’We
then need to use these estimates to compute the people’s technical
￿twiththefocalproject( H3),aswellastocompute,pairwise,their
technical ￿t with all other available projects in the open-source
‘universe’, to identify the ones which might be competing for their
attention ( H4,H5).
Giventheobviouscomputationalcomplexityofsuchanalysis,
we made several tradeo ￿s between computational feasibility, on
the one hand, and realism and statistical power, on the other hand.
This resultedinthe following three key study designdecisions.
Study Context: The Python Ecosystem. To keep our analysis
tractable we choose to analyze only one open-source ecosystem —
thePythonprogramminglanguageecosystem—butconsider all
projectspartoftheecosystem.Pythonisamongthemostpopular
and widely used programming languages in open source [ 9,22],
and it is the language behind libraries and frameworks used in a
diversity of application domains.2At the same time, the Python
open-source ecosystem contains a large set of projects, enabling
ustodrawconclusionswithhighstatisticalpower.Thus,astudy
of the Python ecosystem provides important practical implications
andalsosigni ￿cantscienti ￿c value.
Labor Pool Sampling Frame: The Co-commit Network. We
operationalizethelaborpoolofafocalprojectatagiventimebased
onrelationshipsbetweennodesintheproject’s collaborationnet-
work.Nodesinthenetworkrepresentindividualdevelopers,and
edges indicatethatthosetwodevelopers made commitsto a same
project in the same time period, i.e., a co-commit relationship. For
simplicity,wecomputethecollaborationnetworkinyearlysnap-
shots,witheachsnapshotcapturingtheactivityintherespective
previousfullcalendaryear ~−1,i.e.,from1stofJanuary, ~−1to
31st of December, ~−1. We construct the network startingfrom
thesetofallcontributorstothefocalprojectinyear ~−1.Thenwe
expand outwards, to include all their ‘collaborators’ from all other
projects each contributed to in year ~−1. Then, transitively, we
collect all their‘collaborators’in the sameyear ~−1andso forth,
uptothreehopsawayfromthestartingsetofthefocalproject’s
contributors.3
The goalhereisto approximate the numberof developers who
mightbeawareofthefocalprojectatagiventime—awarenessisa
￿rst step towards deciding to contribute. Clearly, there are myriad
onlineando ￿inewaystolearnaboutnewprojects,includingsocial
media[12,28,62],recommendationsystems[ 46],directlyfollow-
ingotherdevelopersonsocialcodingplatformslikeGitHub[ 10],
meetings [ 14], andmanyotherchannels[ 50].
Identifying the exact set of developers who are aware of the
projectatagiventimeisimpossible.Instead,weuseco-committing
relationships as a proxy for awareness of the focal project. Prior
researchsuggeststhatthecollaborationbetweendeveloperscreates
opportunities for communication, and the information about a
projectislikelytodi ￿useasaresultofdeveloperinteractions[ 2].
2https://www.python.org/about/apps/
3Notethatallsubsequentoutcomemeasuresinourmodelsarecomputedinyear ~,to
avoid soundness issues caused by the possibly reversed chronology of the ‘collabora-
tion’ and focalproject joiningevents.
44ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
(A) Model developer joining tendency 
From 2014 to 2015
Technical 
similarity
Social 
strength
Competing 
effect
(B) Model new developers joining projects
from year Y- 1 to Y (Y=2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021)
Labor pool 
size
Labor pool weighted 
by joining tendency
ControlsWorld of Code 
datasetExtract Python 
activity
Construct 
collaboration networksIdentify projects that 
developers are part of 
the labor poolModel tendency of 
projects joining
Model the 
number of new 
developers
Figure 1:Summary ofour data preparation andanalysis process.
Co-committing to a common project does not guarantee direct
collaborationorinteraction[ 40],butisaprerequisiteforbothfor
contributors who make changes to a project’s codebase — at the
very least, it provides an opportunity for interaction and direct
collaboration. Moreover, not all such co-committing relationships
will result in information about the focal project being di ￿used,
especiallyasthenumberofhopsfromthefocalproject’sdevelopers
increases. However, we expect that, on average, the more such
opportunitiesforinteractionexist,themorelikelyitbecomesfor
information aboutthe focal projectto be di ￿used.
This operationalization also has the advantage of being agnostic
totheplatformwherethesourcecoderepositoryisbeinghosted,
therebyallowingustomoreeasilyscaletheanalysisbeyondany
singleplatformwhereadditional,platform-speci ￿cformsofinter-
action could alsobe considered,e.g., interactionsvia issuetracker
comments. While currently the dominant one, GitHub is not the
only platform for hosting open source.
Labor Pool Operationalization: People One-Hop Away From
Current Project Contributors in the Co-commit Network.
To further reduce the computational complexity of the analysis,
weoperationalizethelaborpoolofafocalprojectatagiventime
only as the set of developers within one hop away from current
project contributors in the collaboration network, who have never
contributedto the projectbefore.The rationaleistwofold.
First,informationdi ￿usiontheorysuggeststhattheclosernodes
are to the information source in a network, the more likely they
aretoreceivetheinformation[ 56,76].Thus,onecanexpectthat
awareness of the focal project should decrease substantially the
more hops away one is from the focal project’s current developers.
This is consistent with prior software engineering research [ 29]
reporting a relatively low tendency to join the focal project in
thefutureforpeoplewhosawitmentionedonTwitter—thereisarguablyconsiderabledistancebetweenafocalopen-sourceproject
hostedonthe GitHubplatform andan averageTwitter user.
Second,weanalyzedtheyearlysnapshotsofthecollaboration
networkbetween newcontributors and the existingproject devel-
opers across all projects in our sample, and computed the network
distances (number of hops) from the existing project developers.
Figure2visualizes the ratioÕ
?#3?~Õ
?#?~, where#3?~is the number
of new contributors to project ?in year~who are3-hops away
fromtheexistingdevelopersinthecollaborationnetworkinyear
~−1,4and#?~is the total number of new contributors to project
?in year~.5As expected, the number of new contributors iden-
ti￿able in the collaboration network decreases sharply with the
numberofhops,withtheone-hopdistancecapturingmostofthem
— around 61-65% of everyone identi ￿able within three hops. Given
theexponential increaseincomplexity withnetworkdistance, we
choose to restrict the operationalization of a project’s labor pool
todevelopersone-hopawayinthecollaborationnetwork,asthis
distance captures mostidenti ￿abledevelopers.
Note that overall, the one-hop distance captures only around
19-23%ofallnewcontributors,i.e.,themajorityofnewcontributors
areunidenti ￿ablewithinonehopofthecurrentprojectcontributors
intheyearlycollaborationgraph(similarly,alsowithinthreehops).
Therearemanypossiblereasons.Perhapstheone-yearhorizonis
insu￿cient to capture all ties, and ties surely also form through
manyothermeansthanourrelativelystrictoperationalizationofco-
committingtothesamerepositorycancapture.However,giventhe
considerablefractionofnewcontributorsthatourrelativelysimple,
butmostscalable,operationalizationcancapture,weexpectthat
our resultingsamplecontains su ￿cientsignalforour subsequent
4Recall that outcomemeasures are computed insubsequentyearsfrom collaboration
networkedges, cf.footnote 3.
5Weapply the same minimumactivity ￿lteras in Section 4.5, for consistency.
45MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
0.23 0.10 0.05 0.62
0.21 0.09 0.04 0.65
0.21 0.10 0.04 0.65
0.20 0.08 0.04 0.68
0.19 0.070.03 0.70
0.20 0.08 0.03 0.69 202020192018201720162015onehop twohops threehops fourormorehops (ornotconnected)
Figure 2: Percentage of new contributions from di ￿erent
networkdistances to theexisting developers,across years.
modelingneeds,whileatthesametimekeepingthedatavolume
andthe computationneededfor the analysistractable.
4.2 OverviewoftheAnalysis
Given these key design decisions, we structure our study in two
parts, as summarized in Figure 1. Both parts involve regression
models explaining the tendency and number of new developers
joining projects in a next time period as a function of the sets of
factors we formulate explicit hypotheses about, via their corre-
spondingvariablescomputedinacurrenttimeperiod.Inthe ￿rst
part we take a developer-centric view — from the perspective of
an individual developer, they typically have a choice of projects
theycouldcontributetoandarangeofprojectsthey’reinthelabor
poolfor,basedonpastcollaborations.Inthesecondpartwetake
aproject-centric view , aggregating individual-level e ￿ects to the
level of the whole ecosystem, to reason about project labor pool
characteristics andcompetition e ￿ects.
First, we estimate the relative importance of the three sets of
factors we formulate explicit hypotheses about6— the strength
ofsocialconnectionstoexistingprojectmembers( H2),the￿tbe-
tweenone’stechnicalbackgroundandthefocalproject( H3),and
theamountofcompetition(orchoiceonehas)betweenavailable
projects with similar technical ￿t (H4,H5) — at the individual
level.Todothis,westartbycomputingadataframeof(labor-pool-
developer, focal-project)pairs,with measurements ofthe relevant
variables (details below) for every developer in a given project’s
laborpool,acrossallprojectsinoursample;wealsorecordabinary
outcomevariableindicatingwhetherornotthatdeveloperjoined
the project in the next period. Using this data, we then construct a
logistic regression model explaining the developers’ tendency to
joinafocalprojectinthenextyearasafunctionofthevariables
of interest; the labor pool is operationalized as described above,
i.e.,peopleone-hopawayfromthefocalproject’sdevelopers.We
refer to variations of this logistic regression model (under di ￿erent
speci￿cations) as individual models .
Note that the goal here is not to make individual predictions
aboutanyonedeveloper’stendencytojoinagivenprojectinthe
next time period. Rather, the goalistoestimatethe relativeimpor-
tanceof the three sets of factors of interest, on average, across a
large sample, such that we can reuse these ‘weights,’ i.e., the es-
timatedVcoe￿cients from the logistic regression model, in the
6Excluding H1, whichrefersto the laborpoolsize, ratherthan its composition.secondpartofouranalysis.Forexample,weestimatehowmuch
the technical background ￿t explains the joining tendency of an
averagedeveloper, compared to the strength of social connections
and the amount of competition from other projects, over a large
sample. Because we estimate the logistic regression over a very
largesample,wecanassumethatthesecoe ￿cientsarestable,7so
we estimate only one set of individual models8to be used as input
for the secondpart.
Next,welift9theindividual-levelanalysistotheprojectlevelby
estimating regressions that explain the number of new developers
joining projects in a next year as a function of their labor pool
characteristics (and control variables) in the current year. We refer
tothesemodelsas projectmodels andweusethemtoformally
test allour hypotheses H1–H5.
To ensure the robustness of our conclusions, we repeat this
analysis for all the complete pairs of consecutive years in our data,
from2015–2016to2020–2021.Intheend,wequantifytheamountof
variance that the labor pool characteristics explain when modeling
thenumberofnewcontributorsaprojectwillreceive,interpretthe
results, anddiscuss the implicationsof our ￿ndings.
4.3 Data CollectionandFiltering
We mine our data from the World of Code (WoC) dataset [ 45],
which contains the git commit traces for all public projects hosted
on GitHub, Gitlab, Bitbucket, SourceForge, and many other smaller
ones. We expect that World of Code should give better coverage
ofopen-sourcedevelopmentcomparedtootherdatasetstypically
usedinprior research.
Tobeginwith,wede ￿netheopen-sourcePythonecosystemas
containing all repositories with over 50% of their ￿les written in
the Python language.We then applyseveral ￿lters tode-noise the
data,as typicalwithminingsoftware repositories research [ 41].
First, we￿lter out repositories with fewer than 10 commits that
involve changes to library import statements, i.e., adding or re-
moving dependencies. This step is needed because we later use
this dependency information to characterize the technical needs
of projects, i.e., we assume that a project using certain libraries
requires contributors with experience in those libraries. We chose
thethresholdarbitrarily,balancingadesiretoretainalargesample,
on the one hand, with an attempt to ￿lter out trivial projects (code
dumps, homework solutions, etc) and a need for ‘enough’ data for
the subsequent embeddings-based approach to work. Similarly, we
￿lteroutdevelopersfromlaborpoolsiftheyauthoredfewerthan
10 commits that involve changes to library import statements, for
analogous reasons. As a robustness validation, we run the same
analysis over datasets where projects and authors with less than
100 commits that involve change of packages are removed, and
the results are qualitatively similar (See the replication package for
validation study).
Second, we made sure to use the de-aliased activity records
fromthe WorldofCodedataset,whichprovidesbothraw dataon
commit authors as well as data on de-aliased commit authors, after
mergingdeveloperidentitieswhentheyusedi ￿erentaliases;see
7Wediscuss robustnesschecks for thisassumption below.
8Wecomputed allindependentvariables in 2014 and the outcome variablein 2015.
9The estimated Vcoe￿cientsfrom the individual models enablethisaggregation.
46ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
Table 1: The de ￿nitions of variables in the individual model
Variablesrelatedtosocial connections
Social strength Thetotalnumberofprojectsonehasworked
on with any of the current project developers.
Variablesrelatedtotechnical ￿t
Technicalsimilarity The similarity between one’s technical back-
groundandthe project’s technologies.
Variablesrelatedtocompetition e ￿ects
Numberofcompeting
projectsThetotalnumberofprojectsoneisinthelabor
poolsfor.
Relativeadvantage in
social connectionThe percentile of the Strength of social connec-
tionvariablede ￿ned above.
Relativeadvantage in
technicalsimilarityThe percentile of the Technical ￿tvariable de-
￿ned above.
Fryetal.[33]fordetailsontherandomforestmodelusedtomerge
developer aliases based on their user IDs. It is important to use the
de-aliased activity records because the volume of developer aliases
insuchdatamayskewourmeasurementsofprojectcontributors
andexperience withPythonlibraries [ 3].
Finally, we also make a best e ￿ort attempt to ￿lter out bots and
unidenti￿able accountstogetherwiththeir associatedcommit ac-
tivities,forsimilarreasons[ 75].Speci￿cally,weusethreeheuristics
toidentify bot-like accounts. First,we reusealistof 13,169botac-
countsintheWorldofCodedatasetcompiledbyDeyetal .[24]after
developing a machine learning classi ￿er for this purpose, based on
authornames,commitmessages, ￿les,andprojectsmodi ￿edbythe
suspectedbotaccount.Second,weconvertallaccountusernames
intolowercasecharactersandusestringmatchingto ￿agasbots
thosewiththelastpartoftheirusernamebeing -botor-robot.Third,
weorderalldeveloperaccountsinourdatasetbasedonthenum-
berofcommitstheymade,andwemanuallyevaluatethetop100
accounts.Thisrevealedafewadditionalbot-likeandunidenti ￿able
accountssuchas GitHubMergeButton<merge-button@github.com> .
Overall,allthesecommit authorsare excludedfrom our analysis.
4.4 PartI: Individual Models
As discussed brie ￿y above, we use logistic regression to model
thefactorsassociatedwiththeindividualtendencytojoinafocal
project,acrossall(labor-pool-developer,project)pairsinoursample.
The full modelisspeci ￿edas:
%( 8?~)=logit(V0%?~−1+V1(8?~−1+V2)8?~−1+V3⇠8?~−1),(1)
where%( 8?~)is the likelihood that developer 8joins project ?
in year~, and independent variables (8?~−1,)8?~−1, and⇠8?~−1
represent the social connection between potential contributor 8
and the existing developers of project ?, the technical background
￿t between developer 8and project ?, and the factors relating to
thecompetitiveadvantageofproject ?amongthesetofprojects
developer 8can potentially join, respectively, all computed in year
~−1. Table1gives de￿nitions of the variables in the model; we
expand onhowwe operationalizedthe variables below.
Technical fitness Social connection
Project A 0.2 6
Project B 0.3 3
Project C 0.05 2
Project D 0.8 1
Technical fitnessD B A C(0%) (25%) (50%) (75%)
Social connectionA BCD(0%) (25%) (50%) (75%)(a)
(b) (c)Figure 3:Illustrationofthe project relative advantage.
ModelingConsiderations. Forsimplicity,sincetheestimated V
coe￿cientsarestable,wecomputeonlyoneindividualmodelfor
~−1=2014andreuse the coe ￿cientsthroughout Part II.
We also restrict our sample only to the labor-pool developers
whowereactive(i.e.,madeatleastonecommit)in2014,because
developerswhoareinactiveformorethanoneyeartendtohave
alowprobabilitytomakecommitsinfutureyears[ 16].Untilthe
end of 2014, there are 104,899 Python developers in our sample
whomadeatleast10validcommitswithchangestoimportstate-
ments, and were active in 2014. For each developer, we identify the
projectswhoselaborpoolsthedeveloperwaspartof,andmodel
theirtendencytojointhoseprojectsin2015.Sincesomedevelopers
may be in the labor pools of a large number of projects, for each
developer,werandomlysample30%ofthelaborpoolstheyarepart
of.Consequently,wealsoexcludedeveloperswhoarepartofthe
labor pools of less than four projects, to ensure that at least one
projectperpersonissampled.Intotal,wehave47,788developers
and5,778,144(developer–project) observations inour sample.
Finally, given the inherently nested structure of our data (the
samedeveloperbeinginthelaborpoolformultipleprojects),we
make clustering adjustments in the standard errors at both the
project and developer levels to account for the possible within-
clustercorrelation [ 1].
Measuring the Technical Fit BetweenProjects and Develop-
ers.The￿tbetweenproject technical requirements and individual
technical background is hypothesized to be an important factor
in￿uencing the developer joining behavior. We use the packages
(orlibraries)aprojectimportstomeasurethe technicalrequirement
of a project, and the packages imported in past code commits of
adeveloper tomeasuretheir technicalskills .Whilepriorresearch
usedtheprogramminglanguageasaproxyfortechnicalskills[ 18],
this coarse-grained measure is not suitable for our study as all the
projectsinour sample are mostly written inPython.
The World of Code dataset contains dependency information
extractedfromeachcommit(i.e.,thepackagesthatacommitim-
ports).10Therefore,wecanobtainthepackagesthataprojectde-
pends on, and the packages that a developer has used in their past
commits. Following Dey et al .[23], we then train a Doc2Vec model
to obtain the technical skill embedding of developers and projects.
10https://github.com/woc-hack/tutorial
47MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 2:The de ￿nitions ofthevariablesused intheproject model.
Outcome Variable
Numberofnew
developersThenumberofnewdevelopers joining the projectin the
next year. New developers are de ￿ned as developers who
havenevercommittedto theprojectbeforethestudype-
riod, and made their ￿rst commit in the following year.
Weonlycountthe newcontributors thathaveat least 10
valid commits in the pastacross the entireWoC dataset.
Control variables
Projectage The number of days elapsed since the ￿rst commit of the
project.
Total numberof
developersThenumberofallcontributorstotheprojectinthepast.
Contributorsarede ￿nedasthedeveloperswhomadeat
least onecommitto the project.
Number of recent
developersThe number of all contributors who committed to the
project in the pastyear.
Total numberof
commitsThe number of commits developers made to the project
in the past.Number of recent
commitsThe number of commits developers made to the project
in the pastyear.
Haslicense A binary variable indicating whether the project had any
licenseby the time ofthe study.
Hasreadme A binary variable indicating whether the project had any
README ￿le by the time ofthe study.
Labor pool variables
Laborpool size Thenumberofpotentialdevelopersinthelaborpoolof
the project. See Section 4.1for the de ￿nition and opera-
tionalization.
Laborpool
e￿ectivesize,
non-competing
variablesThesizeofthelaborpoolwitheachindividualweighted
bytheirtendencytojointheproject.Theindividualmodel
does notinclude the competition-related variable.
Laborpool
e￿ectivesize, full
variablesThesizeofthelaborpoolwitheachindividualweighted
bytheirtendencytojointheproject.Theindividualmodel
includesalle ￿ectsas hypothesized in Section 3.
AnalogoustoaDoc2Vecmodelinnaturallanguageprocessing[ 43],
weconsiderthepackagenamestobethetokens,andthedevelop-
ers(projects)tobethedocuments(consistingoftokens).Wecan
thuslearnavectorembeddingofeachtoken(package),andeach
document (developer and project). The cosine distance between
vectorembeddingswillbesmallifthetwodocumentsaresimilarin
termsof thetokens theycontain, orthe packages they use. There-
fore, the cosine distance between the developer’s and the project’s
embedding isagoodproxyfor technical skill ￿t.
Measuring theProject Relative Advantage. To operationalize
possible competition between projects over potential contributors,
we rank projects, from the perspective of an individual potential
contributor, in terms of strength of social connection and technical
similarity — we expect that given multiple options, on average,
developerswilltypicallychooseprojectsforwhichtheyareabetter
socio-technical ￿t. For a potential developer, we obtain all projects
whoselaborpoolstheyarepartof.Foreachproject,wecompute
thecharacteristicsthatweconsidertobein ￿uentialonthedevel-
oper joining behavior as hypothesized in Section 3. The relative
advantage of each project is de ￿ned as the percentile of their char-
acteristics,amongthesetofprojectswherethefocaldeveloperis
part ofthe laborpool.
InFigure 3(a),forexample,assumethatthefocaldeveloperisin
thelaborpooloffourprojects(i.e.,A,B,C,andD).We ￿rstorder
projectsbasedontheirtechnical ￿twiththefocaldeveloper,and
theresultingrank(orpercentiles,aslabeledontopoftheprojectID
inFigure 3(b))istherelativeadvantageofprojectsintermsoftheir
skill￿t. Similarly, we compute the relative advantage of projects
based on their strength of social connection with the potential
developer,as showninFigure 3(c).
4.5 PartII: Project Models
Given the previous individual models estimating the probability of
alabor-pooldevelopertojoinafocalprojectfromSection 4.4,sum-
ming overalldeveloperswho are intheproject’slabor poolgivesthemathematicalexpectationofthenumberofnewcontributors
joining at the projectlevel:
%?~=’
8%( 8?~), (2)
where%?~isthetendencyofalldevelopers 8intheproject ?’slabor
pooltojointheprojectinyear ~,and%( 8?~)isthetendencyfor
any individual developer 8to join project ?, given that developer 8
ispart of ?’slaborpool.
Ourmodelingstrategyishierarchicalregression,i.e.,weestimate
separateindividualmodelsthatincorporatedi ￿erentsetsoffactors,
ranging from a baseline model with control variables only to a full
model that includes all hypothesized factors. Since the aggregation
to project level incorporates, therefore, the characteristics of devel-
opers in the labor pool, we refer to this outcome variable as the
“e￿ective (labor pool) size” in Table 2. For example, the e ￿ective
laborpoolofaprojectcouldbemuchsmallerthanthenumberof
one-hop potential contributors would suggest, if the technical ￿t is
relativelyloworthere ishigh competition from otherprojects.
Practically,weregressthenumberofnewdevelopersaproject
receives in year ~. Similarly to the individual model, we restrict
our sample to only active projects (i.e., having at least one commit)
in year~, as projects that are inactive for more than one year
should have lower probability of attracting new contributors in
the next year compared to active projects [ 52] and we do not want
our sample to be biased by the large number of inactive projects
which attract no new contributors. New developers are those who
made their ￿rst ever commit to the project in year ~. As before,
whenmeasuring the numberof newcontributors (i.e.,the outcome
variable),weonlycountthenewcontributorswhomadeatleast10
commitsinvolving importstatementsinthepast.For newproject
contributorswithoutenoughcommithistorytoinfertheirtechnical
skills, we cannot estimate their ‘future’ commit tendency, and thus
we are unable to predict whether they will join a new project or
not inthis study.
48ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
The main result of this paper is reported for y= 2021, as this
was the most recent complete snapshot in our sample and also the
largestdataset;the2021snapshotcontains516,893activePython
projects.Sincetheresultsareconsistentforothervaluesof ~,i.e.,
the regression coe ￿cients point in the same direction and have
similar scale and statistical signi ￿cance, we don’t discuss the other
models indetailbut include the results inour replication package.
5 RESULTS
5.1 Models ofIndividual JoiningTendency
We￿rstpresenttheresultformodelingthedevelopers’tendencyto
join other projects, conditioned on them being part of the project’s
laborpool,inTable 3.
In model I, we include social and technical variables that corre-
spond to H2andH3. Both the social connection between potential
new developers and the existing developers, and the technical sim-
ilarity between potential developers’ skill sets and the project’s
technical requirements are statistically signi ￿cantly and positively
associated to the likelihood of individuals joining new projects,
whichcon ￿rmsH2andH3.
In model II, we include the competition e ￿ects on the basis of
modelI,asdiscussedin H4andH5.H4iscon￿rmed,asindicated
bythenegativee ￿ectofvariable Numberofcompetingprojects(log) ,
which suggests that the more projects a developer was potentially
exposed to (the more labor pools they are part of), the lower the
likelihoodthatthe developerwill joinanyspeci ￿coneofthem. H5
wasalsocon ￿rmedbythesigni ￿cantpositivecoe ￿cientforvari-
ablesSocial strength percentile andTechnical similarity percentile ,
suggestingthattheproject’srelativeadvantageamongthesetof
projectsthatadeveloperispotentiallyexposedtoalsoin ￿uences
thedeveloper’stendencytojointheproject.Interestingly,thee ￿ect
of absolute technical similarity disappears after controlling for the
relativesimilaritye ￿ect,suggestingthattherelativetechnical ￿t
amongexposedprojectsismoreimportanttoin ￿uencethedevelop-
ers’joiningbehaviorcomparedtotheabsolute ￿tness.Compared
to model I, model II has a lower AIC (Akaike information criterion)
value overall which indicates a better match between the predicted
valueandthe ground truth.
To better analyze the impact of social-technical factors on in-
dividual joining tendencies, we examine project-developer pairs
where the developer belongs to the project’s labor pool and is a po-
tential new contributor. We categorize these pairs into four groups
based onwhetherthe developer’s technical similarity to the focal
projectandtheirsocialconnectiontoexistingdevelopersareabove
orbelowthemedianvaluesobservedinoursample.Wethencalcu-
latethejoiningprobabilityforeachproject-developerpairwithin
each group. Figure 4summarizes the results. Among (labor pool
developer, project) pairs where developers have strong social con-
nections (top 50%) and high technical similarity (top 50%) with the
project,we ￿ndanaverageof8.7newdevelopersjoiningper10,000
project-developerpairs.Incontrast,forpairswheredevelopershave
weaksocialconnectionsandlowtechnicalsimilarity,thisnumber
dropstoonly0.6newdevelopersper10,000project-developerpairs.
Figure 4: Illustration of the social-technical e ￿ects on devel-
operjoiningtendency ( ~=2021).
5.2 Models oftheNumberofNewContributors
Table4summarizes the models explaining the expected number of
newcontributorsthataprojectreceivesinthenextyear;notethe
log-scaledoutcomevariable.ModelIisourbasemodel,wherewe
explain the number of new developers a project receives only with
thecontrolvariables(project-levelcharacteristics).Asthemodel
suggests,the currentandhistorical size of theproject’s developer
team is positively associated with the number of future developers
thataprojectreceives,whichsuggeststheexistenceofapreferential
attachmente ￿ectthatdeveloperstendtoattachtopopularandwell-
known projects. This results is consistent with the one reported by
prior work [ 57,71]. In addition, the use of licenses and the project
age both have a signi ￿cant positive e ￿ect on the number of new
developers. The e ￿ect of the current project size (or the number
ofcommits)isalsosigni ￿cant,thoughitishighlycorrelatedwith
thehistoricalprojectsizeandcommits,asexpected.Overall,this
modelexplains 12.9% ofthe variance.
Next,we includethe laborpoolsizevariableinmodel IIto ex-
plainthenumberofnewdevelopersaprojectwillreceive.Ashy-
pothesizedin H1,thesizeoftheproject’slaborpoolispositively
associatedwiththenumberofnewdevelopers,andthemodelex-
plains14.8%varianceintotal,orabout2%oftheoverallvariance
more thanmodelI.
Thesimplemeasurementoftheproject’slaborpoolsizetreats
alldevelopersinthelaborpoolequally,andfailstocapturetheir
di￿erent tendencies to join. In models III and IV, each developer is
weigheddi ￿erentlybasedontheirestimatedtendencytojoin,as
computedbytheindividualmodel.Forthevariable E￿ectivesize,
no-competitionvariables ,theestimatedjoiningtendencyforeach
developeriscomputedwithnon-competingvariablesonly(modelI
49MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
Table3:Modelingtheproject-joiningtendencyofdevelopers
ModelI ModelII
Non-competitione ￿ects
Socialstrength ( log) 1.17(0.02)∗∗∗0.89(0.03)∗∗∗
Technical similarity 2.03(0.21)∗∗∗−0.14(0.25)
Competitione ￿ects
Num. competing projects ( log) −0.68(0.02)∗∗∗
Socialstrength percentile 2.03(0.07)∗∗∗
Technical similarity percentile 0.93(0.13)∗∗∗
Observations 5,778,144 5 ,778,144
AkaikeInf. Crit. 64,668.72 60 ,465.68
∗?<0.05;∗∗?<0.01;∗∗∗?<0.001
in Table3), and the variable E￿ective size, all variables is computed
based on both competition and no-competition variables (model II
inTable3).Controllingforthesimplemeasurementoftheproject’s
laborpool size, the e ￿ective laborpoolsize is still positivelyassoci-
atedwiththenumberofnewcontributorsthataprojectreceives,
anditprovidesadditionalexplanatoryandpredictivepowerforour
outcomevariable.ModelIIIwhichincludesthee ￿ectivesizecom-
puted with only non-competing variables explains 14.9% variance,
slightly more variance compared to model II, and by adding the
e￿ectivesizecomputedbybothcompetitionandno-competition
e￿ects, model IV explains 16.4% variance in total, and 1.5% more of
the overall variance than model III – a sizeable increase. Therefore,
weconcludethatallhypothesesinSection 3arecon￿rmedatthe
projectlevel.
5.3 Analysis on theGeneralizability ofLabor
PoolFactors
To better understand when labor pool factors fail to explain the
numberofnewcontributors,weplotinFigure 5thenumberofnew
developersthatprojectsinoursampleattractandthecorresponding
e￿ectivelaborpoolsize(computedwiththefull-variablesindividual
model). For better visualization, high-leverage points are removed
andwelog-scalethee ￿ectivelaborpoolsize.Thereddotrepresents
the mean of e ￿ective labor pool size with a given number of newly
attracteddevelopers.
Wefocusontwoareasofthegraph.First,projectsinareaAof
Figure5have a large e ￿ective labor pool size, but they attract very
fewnewcontributors,ifatall,whichdi ￿ers fromwhat wewould
predict with the e ￿ective labor pool. In contrast, projects in area B
attractalargenumberofnewdevelopersinthenextyearbutseem
tohaveaverysmalle ￿ectivelaborpoolsize.Itisalsointeresting
to understandhow they attract alarge number ofnewdevelopers
given a relatively small e ￿ective labor pool size. Therefore, we
manuallyexploretheprojectsinareaAandBinFigure 5andlist
possible factors that mayleadto modelmisclassi ￿cation.
First, we ￿nd that many projects in area A (large e ￿ective la-
borpoolandalownumberofnewcontributors)seemtobeused
for storage purposes, such as workshops or student competition
projects(e.g., ai2cm/dsl_workshop ,PlatziMaster/challenge-prework-
ds),ratherthan moretraditional open-source development.Those●●●●●●● ●
0.00010.00390.1250
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Number of attracted new contributorsEffective labor pool size, full variables (log)(A)
(B)
Figure5:Therelationshipbetweenthee ￿ectivelaborpool
sizeandtheattractednewcontributors(Y=2021,excluding
outlierprojectsattracting more than eightdevelopers).
projectstendtostopreceivingnewcontributorsaftertheworkshop
orcompetitionends,thustheircontributionisrelativelyindepen-
dent ofthe e ￿ective labor pool size. Second,projects in area A are
likelytoreceivenocommitsatallinthenextyear,beingthatnot
only do they attract no new developers, but also they receive little
tonocommitsfromtheexistingdevelopersinthenextyear.This
suggests that the existing developers, which is the basis for identi-
fyingaproject’slaborpoolinourstudy,maynotbesendingsignals
totheircollaboratorsandattractingnewdevelopersastheyhave
abandoned the project themselves. In addition to some existing de-
velopersbeing“forced“toleavetheprojectbecauseofunavailability,
asalsoreportedbypriorresearch[ 48],anotherpossiblereasonis
the completeness of project features or a decision to stop the devel-
opment,whichleadstoanaturalendoftheprojectdevelopment.
We￿nd evidence for such projects as they have been archived [ 47]
(e.g.,ansible-community/molecule-azure ), or they receive no new
issuesandupdatesinthe future (e.g., FergusYip/DrinkMoreApp ).
ForprojectsinareaB(lowe ￿ectivelaborpoolandalargenumber
ofnewcontributors),we ￿ndthemostcommonreasonisthatthose
projects are owned by organizational accounts (e.g., skit-ai/dialogy ,
panther-labs/panther-analysis ,ZJU-OpenKS/OpenKS ), and the labor
poolmeasuredbasedondevelopernetworksmaynotbeanaccurate
re￿ection ofdevelopers whoare aware of the project.
Overall, we found that factors such as project completion and
the disengagement of existingdevelopers maycomplicate theesti-
mationofaproject’slaborpool,whichcouldbiaspredictionsand
explanationsofthenumberoffuturecontributors.Wefurtherac-
knowledgethatitishardertoestimatethelaborpoolsizebasedon
ourcurrentoperationalizationforprojectsownedbyorganizational
accounts, as we do not incorporate the organization in ￿uence into
our labor pool operationalization. However, we recommend that
future researchers and developers also consider these factors when
estimating a project’s e ￿ective labor pool or the number of future
contributors that may be expected. In addition, despite having con-
siderableexplanatorypoweronthenumberoffuturedevelopers,
the regression model with the labor pool and other controls in
our study has not yet produced practically usable predictions on
individualfuturecontributors.Weestimatethatwiththeindividual
50ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
Table 4:Modelingthenumberofnew developers aprojectwill receive inthe nextyear ( ~=2021)
ModelI ModelII ModelIII ModelIV
Control variables
Projectage ( log) 0.01(0.0004)∗∗∗0.005(0.0004)∗∗∗0.005(0.0004)∗∗∗0.005(0.0004)∗∗∗
Projecttotaldeveloper size ( log) 0.07(0.001)∗∗∗0.06(0.001)∗∗∗0.06(0.001)∗∗∗0.06(0.001)∗∗∗
Projectrecent developer size ( log) 0.05(0.001)∗∗∗0.04(0.001)∗∗∗0.04(0.001)∗∗∗0.02(0.001)∗∗∗
Projecttotalcommits ( log) 0.001(0.0004)∗0.0003(0.0004)0.001(0.0004)0.001(0.0004)∗
Projectrecent commits ( log) 0.01(0.0004)∗∗∗0.01(0.0004)∗∗∗0.01(0.0004)∗∗∗0.01(0.0004)∗∗∗
Has readme −0.01(0.001)∗∗∗−0.01(0.001)∗∗∗−0.01(0.001)∗∗∗−0.01(0.001)∗∗∗
Has license 0.03(0.001)∗∗∗0.02(0.001)∗∗∗0.02(0.001)∗∗∗0.03(0.001)∗∗∗
Labor pool variables
Laborpoolsize ( log) 0.02(0.0002)∗∗∗0.01(0.0002)∗∗∗0.01(0.0002)∗∗∗
E￿ective size, no-competing variables ( log) 0.10(0.004)∗∗∗
E￿ective size,full variables ( log) 0.42(0.004)∗∗∗
Observations 516,893 516 ,893 516 ,893 516 ,893
AdjustedR20.129 0 .148 0 .149 0 .164
Note:∗?<0.05;∗∗?<0.01;∗∗∗?<0.001
model(i.e.,predictingwhetheragivendeveloperwilljoinaproject
in the next year or not), making a prediction has 7% precision and
14%recallonaverage, andwiththeprojectmodel(i.e.,predicting
the number of new contributors to a project in the next year) mak-
ing a prediction has 0.19 average di ￿erence, or the prediction on
the number of new contributors for each project will be o ￿by 0.19
compared to the ground truth on average. This accuracy may be
insu￿cient for prediction tasks in practice, which go beyond the
scopeofthisworkinwhichwefocuson explanation instead,and
betterunderstanding the underlying mechanisms.
6 DISCUSSION
In this paper,we explored thein ￿uence ofthe projects’labor pool
on attracting new developers. We summarize the main results and
discusslimitations,thescienti ￿cvalue,andthepracticalimplica-
tionsofour results below.
6.1 Labor Poolas anImportant Factorfor
Project Sustainability
The prevailing empirical studies on open-source sustainability, and
attractingnewcontributorsinparticular,havefocusedonthein ￿u-
ence of project-level characteristics. In our paper, we provide an
alternative,ecosystem-levelperspectivebysuggestingtheproject’s
laborpoolas an importantfactor.
Thelaborpoolofaprojectcorrespondstothecommunitiesof
developersthatmaybeofhelptothedevelopmentandmaintenance
of the project. They consist of developers who learn about the
project through many possible channels, like recommendations
fromtheirfriendsorcollaborators,exposureonsocialmediaspaces,
recommendation systems, web search engines, and many others.
They are the contribution resources potentially ‘accessible’ by the
projectat agiven time.
Considering labor pool factors following a methodology similar
to ours can help open-source stakeholders to better understand
andpredicttheamountofcontributionsprojectsmayhaveinthefuture,which helpswiththe projectmanagementand resourceal-
location. Moreover, users who are seeking sustainable open-source
projectstoadoptcanuselaborpoolfactorstobetterevaluatethe
sustainabilityofcandidate projects.
6.2TheSizeoftheLabor Pool Is Important, but
ItIsNot All That Matters
It is not surprising that expanding the size of the project’s labor
pool helps to attract new developers, which is why so much e ￿ort
has been devoted to promoting open-source projects to a larger
audience [ 14,29,62]. However, ourresults indicatethat the charac-
teristics of the developers in the project’s labor pool, in addition
totherawnumberofdevelopers,alsohaveasigni ￿cante￿ectto
explainthe number ofnewdevelopers that aprojectwillreceive.
Withmanypreviousstudiesaboutattractingandretainingopen-
sourcecontributorsfocusingonexpandingthein ￿uenceofprojects
andreachingouttoalargecommunity,ourworkaddstothecon-
ventionalwisdom by suggesting thatexpandingproject in ￿uence
to aproperaudience also matters. In addition, our work is the ￿rst,
to the best of our knowledge, to provide empirical evidence of the
competition e ￿ectsbetweenprojects, and suggeststhepracticeof
recruitingnewdevelopersismorecomplexbeyondsimplyreaching
outto alarge community.
6.3 Towards TargetedProject Promotion
Foropen-sourceprojectpromotersseekingtoattractmoreattention
ande￿orttotheirprojects,ourresultssuggestthatitisnotonlythe
number of developers that the promotion reaches that matters, but
alsothecharacteristicsofthosedevelopers.Therefore,atargeted
promotion that di ￿uses the project information to a developer
communitythatpossessestherelatedtechnicalskillsandissocially
closetotheproject’sexistingdevelopersmaybemoree ￿cientand
e￿ective to attract new developers compared to promotions to a
wideaudience,astheyreachacommunitythatismorelikelytojoin
theprojectascontributors.Inaddition,asthepromotionofprojects
51MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
becomesmoretargeted,developersmaybelessoverwhelmedby
the wide range of projects hosted online as the information and
promotion they are exposed to will be more relevant to their skills,
socialconnections,andneeds.Itcanreducethecognitiveworkload
forindividualdevelopersandshouldhelptobetterallocateattention
ande￿ort at the open-sourceecosystem level [ 19].
Someprojectpromotionchannelsortoolsarepotentiallysuitable
for targeted promotions. For example, project promotion on social
mediasuchasTwittermayeasilyreachsociallyconnectedgroupsas
thedi￿usionofinformationdependsonthesocialconnections;and
theprojectrecommendationtoolscanincorporatetechnicalrelated-
nessandsocialconnectionsasfactorsforprojectrecommendations.
Withmostopen-sourcepromotionresearchsofarconcentratingon
thesizeofdevelopersthatapromotionreaches[ 14,29],weargue
for the importance of studying the characteristics of developers
thatthosepromotionsreach,andreconsiderthevalueofpromotion
campaignsbasedontheire ￿ectivenesstoreachatargetedaudience
instead ofreachingalarge developer community.
6.4 The Relationship BetweenProjects andthe
Success ofOpen-SourceEcosystems
The signi ￿cant competition e ￿ects between projects revealed by
our models suggest that the attraction of developers to projects
isnotalocalquestion.Giventwoprojectswithoverlappinglabor
pools, any e ￿ort to make one project more attractive is likely to
have a negative e ￿ect on the sustainability of the other, when they
are competing for the same e ￿ort pool.
This￿ndingraisestheimportantquestionabouttheallocation
of e￿ort among open-source projects, and the role of individual
projects in the success of the open-source ecosystem. While open-
source developers and researchers have devoted much e ￿ort to
makingindividualprojectsmoresuccessfulandsustainable,little
wasdiscussedaboutthein ￿uenceofthosee ￿ortsonotherprojects
inthe ecosystem.Ourresult is one of the ￿rst works to understand
therelationshipandcompetitionbetweenprojects,andwecallupon
futureresearchinthisdirectiontofurtherstudythesustainabilityof
individual projects jointly withthatof theopen-sourceecosystem.
6.5 ValidationsandRobustnessChecks
Validate the Robustness of Our Results Over Years. We evalu-
ate the e￿ectiveness of labor pool factors over years and run the
same project model for data in three other years (i.e., selecting
~=2016,2017,2018,2019,2020and2021). The result suggests that
thelaborpoolfactorsareimportantpredictorsofthenewdeveloper
attractionforfourconsecutiveyears,seeourreplicationpackage
for full results.
ValidatetheResultsWithaNegativeBinomialRegressionModel.
Negativebinomialregressionisapowerfultooltomodeldiscrete
outcomevariablessuch asthenumberofnew developers [ 38]. To
validate the in ￿uence of labor pool factors, we use a negative bino-
mialregressionmodeltoestimatethenumberofnewdevelopers
that a project receives, with all the independent variables the same
as the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression used to report the
main result; see replication package.
Alllaborpoolfactorsarestillsigni ￿cantlyassociatedwiththe
outcome variable, with the direction of e ￿ects qualitatively similarexcept for the e ￿ect fromE￿ective size, no-competition variables in
modelIII,whichchangesfrompositiveintheOLSregressionmodel
tothecurrentnegativee ￿ect.Furtheranalysisshowsthatthee ￿ect
isonlynegativewhencontrollingforthe Laborpoolsize variable,
but signi￿cantly positive otherwise. Despite this inconsistency, the
e￿ective labor pool size with the individual model of full variables
still shows a signi ￿cant positive e ￿ect, and the Akaike information
criterion(AIC)valuedecreaseswhenaddinglaborpoolvariables,
whichindicatesbettermodel ￿t.Therefore,weconcludetheresults
withnegativebinomialregressionaregenerallyconsistentwiththe
OLS regression.
7 CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we show that an open-source project’s labor pool,
de￿ned as the set of developers who are possibly aware of the
projectandmayserveaspotentialfutureprojectcontributors,isan
importantfactorthatcanimpactprojectsustainability.Wefound
that adding the labor pool factors, being both the amount and
characteristics of developers in a project’s labor pool, explains
27% more variance compared to baselinemodels that only include
project characteristics. We also show that the technical ￿t, the
social connection, and the project competition e ￿ects are three
factors that can a ￿ect how developers move between projects. Our
workcontributestothescienti ￿cunderstandingofwhatleadsto
the attraction of new open-source developers beyond individual
project-level factors, and provides important implications to open-
sourcestakeholdersforbetterprojectpromotionandcommunity
management.
8 DATA AVAILABILITY
The data and scripts to reproduce our results are available inthe
replication package [ 27].
DOIDOI10.5281/zenodo.825256010.5281/zenodo.8252560
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors kindly acknowledge partial support from the NSF
awards 1901311, 2107298, and 2120323, the Google Open Source
ProgramsO ￿ce,GoogleFacultyResearchAwards,andaGoogle
AwardforInclusionResearch.WeareadditionallygratefultoCourt-
neyMiller,AudrisMockusandMahmoudJahanshahi,fortheirhelp
withdatacollectionanddiscussionsaroundourexperimentalde-
sign.
REFERENCES
[1]Alberto Abadie, Susan Athey, Guido W Imbens, and Je ￿rey Wooldridge. 2017.
Whenshouldyouadjuststandarderrorsforclustering? TechnicalReport.National
Bureauof EconomicResearch. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjac038
[2]DivyakantAgrawal,CerenBudak,andAmrElAbbadi.2011.Informationdi ￿usion
insocialnetworks:Observingandin ￿uencingsocietalinterests. Proceedingsof
theVLDB Endowment 4, 12 (2011), 1512–1513. https://doi.org/10.14778/3402755.
3402811
[3]Sadika Amreen, Audris Mockus, Russell Zaretzki, Christopher Bogart, and Yuxia
Zhang.2020. ALFAA:ActiveLearningFingerprintbasedAnti-Aliasingforcor-
recting developeridentity errors in versioncontrol systems. Empirical Software
Engineering 25(2020), 1136–1167. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-019-09786-7
[4]Guilherme Avelino, Eleni Constantinou, Marco Tulio Valente, and Alexander
Serebrenik. 2019. On the abandonment and survival of open source projects: An
empiricalinvestigation. In 2019InternationalSymposium onEmpiricalSoftware
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM) . 1–12.https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2019.
8870181
52ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA Hongbo Fang,James Herbsleb,andBogdan Vasilescu
[5]AidaAzadegan,KNadiaPapamichail,andPedroSampaio.2013. Applyingcollab-
orative process design to user requirements elicitation: A case study. Computers
in Industry 64,7 (2013),798–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2013.05.001
[6]Sogol Balali, Umayal Annamalai, Hema Susmita Padala, Bianca Trinkenreich,
MarcoAGerosa,IgorSteinmacher,andAnitaSarma.2020. Recommendingtasks
tonewcomersinossprojects:Howdomentorshandleit?.In Proceedingsofthe
16thInternationalSymposiumonOpenCollaboration .1–14.https://doi.org/10.
1145/3412569.3412571
[7]AnnBarcomb,AndreasKaufmann,DirkRiehle,Klaas-JanStol,andBrianFitzger-
ald.2018.Uncoveringtheperiphery:Aqualitativesurveyofepisodicvolunteering
infree/libreandopensourcesoftwarecommunities. IEEETransactionsonSoftware
Engineering 46,9 (2018), 962–980. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2018.2872713
[8]Pankaj Bhatt, Gautam Shro ￿, and Arun K Misra. 2004. Dynamics of software
maintenance. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes 29, 5 (2004), 1–5. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1022494.1022513
[9]Tegawendé F Bissyandé, FerdianThung, DavidLo, Lingxiao Jiang, and Laurent
Réveillere. 2013. Popularity, interoperability, and impact of programming lan-
guagesin100,000opensourceprojects.In 2013IEEE37thannualcomputersoftware
and applications conference . 303–312. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2013.55
[10]Kelly Blincoe, Jyoti Sheoran, Sean Goggins, Eva Petakovic, and Daniela Damian.
2016. Understanding the popular users: Following, a ￿liation in ￿uence and
leadership on GitHub. Information and Software Technology 70 (2016), 30–39.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.10.002
[11]ChristopherBogart,ChristianKästner,JamesHerbsleb,andFerdianThung.2016.
How to break an API: cost negotiation and community values in threesoftware
ecosystems.In Proceedingsofthe24thACMSIGSOFTInternationalSymposium
onFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering(FSE) .109–120. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2950290.2950325
[12]Hudson Borges, Andre Hora, and Marco Tulio Valente. 2016. Understanding
the factors that impact the popularity of GitHub repositories. In International
Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . 334–344. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICSME.2016.31
[13]HudsonBorgesandMarcoTulioValente.2018. What’sinagithubstar?under-
standing repository starring practices in a social coding platform. Journal of
SystemsandSoftware 146(2018),112–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2018.09.016
[14]HudsonSilvaBorgesandMarcoTulioValente.2019. Howdodeveloperspromote
open source projects? Computer 52, 8 (2019), 27–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.
2018.2888770
[15]FrederickPBrooksJr.1995. Themythicalman-month:essaysonsoftwareengi-
neering. Pearson Education.
[16]FabioCalefato,MarcoAurelioGerosa,GiuseppeIa ￿aldano,FilippoLanubile,and
Igor Steinmacher. 2022. Will you come back to contribute? Investigating the
inactivityofOSScoredevelopersin GitHub. EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering 27,
3 (2022), 76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-021-10012-6
[17]Gerardo Canfora, Massimiliano Di Penta, Rocco Oliveto, and Sebastiano
Panichella.2012. Whoisgoingtomentornewcomersinopensourceprojects?.
InProceedings of the 20th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations
ofSoftwareEngineering (FSE) . 1–11.https://doi.org/10.1145/2393596.2393647
[18]Casey Casalnuovo, Bogdan Vasilescu, Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov.
2015. DeveloperonboardinginGitHub:theroleofpriorsociallinksandlanguage
experience. In Proceedings of the 23th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
onFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering(FSE) .817–828. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2786805.2786854
[19]Johan SG Chu and James A Evans. 2021. Slowed canonical progress in large
￿eldsofscience. ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences 118,41(2021),
e2021636118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2021636118
[20]Eleni Constantinou and Tom Mens. 2017. Socio-technical evolution of the Ruby
ecosystem in GitHub. In 2017 IEEE 24th international conference on software
analysis,evolutionand reengineering (SANER) .34–44. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SANER.2017.7884607
[21]Kevin Crowston and James Howison. 2005. The social structure of free and open
source softwaredevelopment. First Monday (2005).
[22]Daniel P Delorey, Charles D Knutson, and Christophe Giraud-Carrier. 2007.
Programminglanguage trends in open source development: An evaluation using
data from all production phase sourceforge projects. In Second International
Workshop onPublic Data about SoftwareDevelopment (WoPDaSD’07) .
[23]Tapajit Dey, Andrey Karnauch, and Audris Mockus. 2021. Representation of de-
veloperexpertiseinopensourcesoftware.In Proceedingsofthe43rdInternational
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 995–1007. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE43902.2021.00094
[24]Tapajit Dey, Sara Mousavi, Eduardo Ponce, Tanner Fry, Bogdan Vasilescu, Anna
Filippova,andAudrisMockus. 2020. Detecting andcharacterizingbots that com-
mitcode.In Proceedingsofthe17thInternationalConferenceonMiningSoftware
Repositories(MSR) . 209–219. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379597.3387478
[25]Nadia Eghbal. 2016. Roads and bridges: The unseen labor behind our digital
infrastructure . Ford Foundation.
[26]Alberto Espinosa, Robert Kraut, Javier Lerch, Sandra Slaughter, James Herbsleb,
and Audris Mockus. 2001. Shared mental models and coordination in large-scale,distributed softwaredevelopment. (2001).
[27]Hongbo Fang, James Herbsleb, and Bogdan Vasilescu. 2023. Replication package.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8252560
[28]Hongbo Fang, Bogdan Vasilescu, and James Herbsleb. 2023. Understanding
information di ￿usion about open-source projects on Twitter, HackerNews, and
Reddit. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Cooperative and
Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE) . 56–67.https://doi.org/10.1109/
CHASE58964.2023.00015
[29]HongboFang,BogdanVasilescu,HemankLamba,andJamesHerbsleb.2022.“This
IsDamnSlick!”EstimatingtheImpactofTweetsonOpenSourceProjectPopu-
larityandNewContributors. In Proceedingsofthe44thInternationalConference
onSoftwareEngineering (ICSE) .https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510121
[30]FabioFerreira,Luciana Lourdes Silva,andMarco TulioValente.2020. Turnover
inOpen-Source Projects:TheCase of Core Developers. In Proceedings ofthe34th
Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering . 447–456. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3422392.3422433
[31]MatthieuFoucault,MarcPalyart,XavierBlanc,GailCMurphy,andJean-Rémy
Falleri.2015. Impactofdeveloperturnoveronqualityinopen-sourcesoftware.
InProceedings of the 23th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations
of Software Engineering (FSE) . 829–841. https://doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2786870
[32]Felipe Fronchetti, Igor Wiese, Gustavo Pinto, and Igor Steinmacher. 2019. What
attracts newcomers to onboard on oss projects? tl; dr: Popularity. In IFIP Interna-
tionalConferenceonOpenSourceSystems .Springer,91–103. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-20883-7_9
[33]Tanner Fry, Tapajit Dey, Andrey Karnauch, and Audris Mockus. 2020. A dataset
andanapproachforidentityresolutionof38millionauthoridsextractedfrom
2b git commits. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Mining
SoftwareRepositories(MSR) . 518–522. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379597.3387500
[34]MarcoGerosa,Igor Wiese, BiancaTrinkenreich,GeorgLink, Gregorio Robles,
Christoph Treude,Igor Steinmacher,and Anita Sarma. 2021. The shifting sands
of motivation: Revisiting what drives contributors in open source. In Proceedings
ofthe43rdInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering(ICSE) .1046–1058.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00098
[35]Mariam Guizani, Thomas Zimmermann, Anita Sarma, and Denae Ford. 2022.
Attractingandretainingosscontributorswithamaintainerdashboard.In Proceed-
ings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE): Software
Engineering inSociety . 36–40.https://doi.org/10.1145/3510458.3513020
[36]JungpilHahn,JaeYoonMoon,andChenZhang.2006. Impactofsocialtieson
open source project team formation. In IFIP International Conference on Open
SourceSystems . Springer, 307–317. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-34226-5_31
[37]Jungpil Hahn, Jae Yun Moon, and Chen Zhang. 2008. Emergence of new project
teams from open source software developer networks: Impact of prior col-
laboration ties. Information Systems Research 19, 3 (2008), 369–391. https:
//doi.org/10.1287/isre.1080.0192
[38]JosephMHilbe.2011. Negativebinomialregression . CambridgeUniversityPress.
[39]CoreyJergensen,AnitaSarma,andPatrickWagstrom.2011. Theonionpatch:
migrationinopensourceecosystems.In Proceedingsofthe19thACMSIGSOFT
International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE) . 70–80.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2025113.2025127
[40]Mitchell Joblin, Wolfgang Mauerer, Sven Apel, Janet Siegmund, and Dirk Riehle.
2015. Fromdevelopernetworkstoveri ￿edcommunities:A ￿ne-grainedapproach.
InProceedingsofthe37thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering(ICSE) .
563–573. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2015.73
[41]Eirini Kalliamvakou, Georgios Gousios, Kelly Blincoe, Leif Singer, Daniel M
German,andDanielaDamian.2014. Thepromisesandperilsofmininggithub.
InProceedingsofthe11stInternationalConferenceonMiningSoftwareRepositories
(MSR). 92–101. https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.2597074
[42]Hemank Lamba, Asher Trockman, Daniel Armanios, Christian Kästner, Heather
Miller,andBogdanVasilescu.2020. HearditthroughtheGitvine:anempirical
study of tool di ￿usion across the npm ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGSOFTInternational Symposiumon Foundations ofSoftware Engineering (FSE) .
505–517. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409705
[43]Jey Han Lau and Timothy Baldwin. 2016. An empirical evaluation of doc2vec
with practical insights into document embedding generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.05368 (2016).https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1607.05368
[44]Daniel Z Levin and Rob Cross. 2004. The strength of weak ties you can trust:
The mediating role of trust in e ￿ective knowledge transfer. Management science
50,11(2004), 1477–1490. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1030.0136
[45]Yuxing Ma, ChrisBogart, Sadika Amreen, Russell Zaretzki, and Audris Mockus.
2019. World of Code:An infrastructure for mining theuniverse of opensource
VCS data. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories(MSR) . 143–154. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2019.00031
[46]Tadej Matek and Svit Timej Zebec. 2016. Github open source project recommen-
dation system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02594 (2016).https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1602.02594
[47]CourtneyMiller,ChristianKästner,andBogdanVasilescu.2023. “WeFeelLike
We’re WingingIt:” AStudyonNavigating Open-SourceDependencyAbandon-
menment.In ProceedingsoftheACMSIGSOFTJointMeetingontheFoundations
53MatchingSkills, PastCollaboration,andLimitedCompetition: Modeling When Open-Source Projects ... ESEC/FSE ’23, December3–9, 2023,San Francisco, CA, USA
ofSoftwareEngineering (ESEC/FSE) .
[48]CourtneyMiller,DavidGrayWidder,ChristianKästner,andBogdanVasilescu.
2019. Why do people give up FLOSSing? A study of contributor disengagement
in open source. In IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems . 116–129.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20883-7_11
[49]Audris Mockus, David M Weiss, and Ping Zhang. 2003. Understanding and
predicting e ￿ort in software projects. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 274–284. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE.2003.1201207
[50]Gang Peng. 2019. Co-membership, networks ties, and knowledge ￿ow: An
empirical investigation controlling for alternative mechanisms. Decision Support
Systems118(2019), 83–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2019.01.005
[51]Huilian Sophie Qiu, Yucen Lily Li, Susmita Padala, Anita Sarma, and Bogdan
Vasilescu. 2019. The signals that potential contributors look for when choosing
open-source projects. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3,
CSCW (2019), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359224
[52]HuilianSophieQiu,AlexanderNolte,AnitaBrown,AlexanderSerebrenik,and
Bogdan Vasilescu.2019. Goingfarther together:The impactofsocial capitalon
sustained participation in open source. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 688–699. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE.2019.00078
[53]IsrarQureshiandYulinFang.2011. Socializationinopensourcesoftwareprojects:
A growth mixture modeling approach. Organizational Research Methods 14, 1
(2011), 208–238. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428110375002
[54]SamRansbothamandGeraldCKane.2011. Membershipturnoverandcollabo-
ration success in online communities: Explaining rises and falls from grace in
Wikipedia. MisQuarterly (2011), 613–627. https://doi.org/10.2307/23042799
[55]DirkRiehle,PhilippRiemer,CarstenKolassa,andMichaelSchmidt.2014. Paid
vs. volunteer work in open source. In 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference
onSystemSciences . 3286–3295. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2014.407
[56]KazumiSaito,Ryohei Nakano,andMasahiro Kimura.2008. Prediction ofinfor-
mationdi ￿usionprobabilitiesforindependentcascademodel.In International
conferenceonknowledge-basedandintelligentinformationandengineeringsystems .
Springer, 67–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85567-5_9
[57]CarlosSantos,GeorgeKuk,FabioKon,andJohnPearson.2013. Theattractionof
contributors in freeand open source softwareprojects. TheJournal ofStrategic
Information Systems 22, 1 (2013), 26–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2012.07.004
[58]Fabio Santos, Bianca Trinkenreich, João Felipe Pimentel, Igor Wiese, Igor Stein-
macher, Anita Sarma, and Marco A Gerosa. 2022. How to choose a task? Mis-
matchesinperspectivesof newcomersandexistingcontributors. In 2022 Interna-
tionalSymposiumonEmpiricalSoftwareEngineeringandMeasurement(ESEM) .
114–124. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544902.3546236
[59]Jan-Felix Schrape. 2019. Open-source projects as incubators of innovation: From
niche phenomenon to integral part of the industry. Convergence 25, 3 (2019),
409–427. https://doi.org/10.1177/1354856517735795
[60]André Luis Schwerz, Rafael Liberato, Igor Scaliante Wiese, Igor Steinmacher,
Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and João Eduardo Ferreira. 2012. Prediction of developer
participationinissuesofopensourceprojects.In 2012BrazilianSymposiumon
CollaborativeSystems . 109–114. https://doi.org/10.1109/SBSC.2012.27
[61]Luiz Philipe Serrano Alves, Igor Scaliante Wiese, Ana Paula Chaves, and Igor
Steinmacher. 2021. How to Find My Task? Chatbot to Assist Newcomers in
Choosing Tasks in OSS Projects. In International Workshopon ChatbotResearch
and Design . Springer, 90–107. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-94890-0_6
[62]Leif Singer, Fernando Figueira Filho, and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2014. Software
engineeringatthespeedoflight:howdevelopersstaycurrentusingtwitter.In
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering . 211–221.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568305
[63]Igor Steinmacher, Tayana Conte, Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and David Redmiles.
2015. Social barriers faced by newcomers placing their ￿rst contribution in
open source software projects. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on
Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . 1379–1392. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675215[64]Igor Steinmacher, MarcoAurélio Gerosa, and David Redmiles.2014. Attracting,
onboarding,andretainingnewcomerdevelopersinopensourcesoftwareprojects.
InWorkshop onGlobal SoftwareDevelopment ina CSCW Perspective .
[65]Igor Steinmacher, Marco Aurelio Graciotto Silva, Marco Aurelio Gerosa, and
David F Redmiles. 2015. A systematic literature review on the barriers faced by
newcomerstoopensourcesoftwareprojects. InformationandSoftwareTechnology
59(2015), 67–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2014.11.001
[66]XiaobingSun,WenyuanXu,XinXia,XiangChen,andBinLi.2018. Personalized
projectrecommendationonGitHub. ScienceChinaInformationSciences 61(2018),
1–14.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11432-017-9419-x
[67]LinTan,ChenLiu,ZhenminLi,XuanhuiWang,YuanyuanZhou,andChengxiang
Zhai. 2014. Bug characteristics in open source software. Empirical software
engineering 19,6 (2014), 1665–1705.
[68]Xin Tan, Minghui Zhou, and Zeyu Sun. 2020. A ￿rst look at good ￿rst issues
on GitHub. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
onFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering(FSE) .398–409. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3368089.3409746
[69]AsherTrockman,ShuruiZhou,ChristianKästner,andBogdanVasilescu.2018.
Addingsparkletosocialcoding:anempiricalstudyofrepositorybadgesinthe
npmecosystem.In Proceedingsofthe40thInternationalConferenceonSoftware
Engineering (ICSE) . 511–522. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180209
[70]Jason Tsay, Laura Dabbish, and James Herbsleb. 2014. In ￿uence of social and
technical factors for evaluating contribution in GitHub. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 356–366. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568315
[71]Marat Valiev, Bogdan Vasilescu, and James Herbsleb. 2018. Ecosystem-level
determinantsofsustainedactivityinopen-sourceprojects:Acasestudyofthe
PyPIecosystem.In Proceedingsofthe26thACMSIGSOFTInternationalSymposium
onFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering(FSE) .644–655. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3236024.3236062
[72]BogdanVasilescu,KellyBlincoe,QiXuan,CaseyCasalnuovo,DanielaDamian,
Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov. 2016. The sky is not the limit: Multi-
taskingacrossGitHubprojects.In Proceedingsofthe38thInternationalConference
onSoftwareEngineering(ICSE) .ACM,994–1005. https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.
2884875
[73]Bogdan Vasilescu, Alexander Serebrenik, Mathieu Goeminne, and Tom Mens.
2014. Onthevariationandspecialisationofworkload—acasestudyoftheGnome
ecosystemcommunity. EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering 19,4 (2014), 955–1008.
[74]Georg Von Krogh, Sebastian Spaeth, and Karim R Lakhani. 2003. Community,
joining, and specialization in open source software innovation: a case study.
Researchpolicy 32,7(2003),1217–1241. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(03)
00050-7
[75]Mairieli Wessel, Bruno Mendes De Souza, Igor Steinmacher, Igor S Wiese,
Ivanilton Polato, Ana Paula Chaves, and Marco A Gerosa. 2018. The power
of bots: Characterizing and understanding bots in OSS projects. Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–19. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3274451
[76]ChengxiZang, Peng Cui,Chaoming Song,ChristosFaloutsos,and Wenwu Zhu.
2017. Quantifying structural patterns of information cascades. In Proceedings
of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion . 867–868.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3041021.3054214
[77]MinghuiZhouandAudrisMockus.2011. Doestheinitialenvironmentimpact
thefuture ofdevelopers?.In Proceedingsof the33rdInternationalConferenceon
SoftwareEngineering (ICSE) . 271–280. https://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985831
[78]Minghui Zhou and Audris Mockus. 2012. What make long term contribu-
tors: Willingness and opportunity in OSS community. In Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 518–528. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227164
[79]Minghui Zhou and Audris Mockus. 2014. Who will stay in the ￿oss community?
modelingparticipant’sinitialbehavior. IEEETransactionsonSoftwareEngineering
41,1 (2014), 82–99. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2014.2349496
Received 2023-02-02; accepted 2023-07-27
54