CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers
James Kukucka1, Luís Pina2, Paul Ammann1, and Jonathan Bell3
1George Mason University, Fairfax, VA USA
2University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, Illinois USA
3Northeastern University, Boston, MA USA
jkukucka@gmu.edu,luispina@uic.edu,pammann@gmu.edu,j.bell@northeastern.edu
Abstract
Fuzztesting(fuzzing)allows developerstodetectbugsandvul-
nerabilitiesincodebyautomaticallygeneratingdefect-revealing
inputs. Most fuzzers operate by generating inputs for applications
and mutating the bytes of those inputs, guiding the fuzzing pro-
cesswithbranchcoveragefeedbackviainstrumentation.Whitebox
guidance(e.g.,tainttrackingorconcolicexecution)issometimesin-tegratedwithcoverage-guidedfuzzingtohelpcovertricky-to-reachbranches that are guarded by complex conditions (so-called “magic
values”). This integration typically takes the form of a targeted in-
put mutation, e.g.,placing particular byte values at a specific offset
of some input in order to cover a branch. However, these dynamic
analysis techniques are not perfect in practice, which can result in
thelossofimportantrelationshipsbetweeninputbytesandbranch
predicates, thus reducing the effective power of the technique. We
introduceanew,surprisinglysimple,buteffectivetechnique, global
hinting, which allows the fuzzer to insert these interesting bytesnot only at a targeted position, but in any position of any input.
We implemented this idea in Java, creating Confetti, which uses
both targeted and global hints for fuzzing. In an empirical com-
parisonwithtwobaselineapproaches,astate-of-the-artgreybox
Java fuzzer and a version of Confetti without global hinting, we
foundthatConfetticoversmorebranchesandfinds15previously
unreportedbugs,including 9thatneitherbaseline couldfind.By
conductingapost-mortemanalysisof Confetti’sexecution,we
determined that global hinting was at least as effective at revealing
new coverage as traditional, targeted hinting.
ACM Reference Format: JamesKukucka,LuísPina,PaulAmmann,and
JonathanBell.2022.CONFETTI:AmplifyingConcolicGuidanceforFuzzers.
In44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), May
21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510628
1 Introduction
Software is at the core of critical electronic systems. To avoid
introducingfaults,whichcanleadtosignificanterrorsandsecurity
vulnerabilities, developers test their applications before deploy-
ment by generating diverse inputs that exercise as many behaviors
as possible, attempting to catch bugs and vulnerabilities before
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
onthe firstpage.Copyrights forcomponentsof thisworkowned byothersthan the
author(s)mustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,or
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510628theyescapetothewild.Unfortunately,manualtestingonlygoes
sofartowardsgeneratingdiverse(andunexpected)inputs.Many
recent advances in greybox fuzzing, such as the popular American
FuzzyLop(AFL)[ 81],AFL++[ 38],libFuzzer[ 55],andhongfuzz[ 44],
are based on coverage-guided fuzzing. Coverage-guided fuzzers use
branch coverage as feedback to guide mutation of a set of manu-
allyprovided“seed”inputstowardsnewinputsthatexplorenew
programpaths.Thesefuzzersmightexecutethousandsofinputs
persecond,butareunlikelytogenerateinputsthatsatisfyhighly
constrained branches which require some so called “magic bytes”.
Acomplementaryapproach, concolicexecution,discoversthose
magic values by recording exactly which input bytes are used in
which branches in the program’s execution). Then, with the aid of
an SMT solver, the concolic execution engine generates inputs that
forceadifferentbranchchoice[ 45,72,82].Priorworkhasobserved
that full-blown concolic execution is often unnecessary to handle
typicalmagicbytecomparisons,turninginsteadtodynamictaint
tracking [ 33,40,69]. Dynamic taint tracking is an analysis that
associates taint tags with values, and then propagates those tags
duringprogramexecutionsuchthatwhenanewvalueisderived
(through data flow) from a tainted value, that same taint tag is
associated with the new value.
Whiletainttracking-guidedfuzzerslikeVUzzer[ 69],Angora[ 33]
and BuzzFuzz [ 40] have been shown to be more effective than a
typical greybox fuzzer, we believe that they have only begun to
leverage the power of taint tracking in fuzzing. In particular, taint
trackingcanonlyguidethefuzzertoexplorebranchesforwhich
thereisa dataflowrelationship betweenthebranchpredicateand
the input bytes. Consider the code snippet in Listing 1, in which
theinputstrings s1ands2arecomparedagainstsomeparticular
string, with that comparison stored into a boolean variable.
1public void magic(String s1, String s2){
2boolean v1 = s1.equals( "abc");
3boolean v2 = s2.equals(s1.c oncat("def"));
4if( v 1& &v 2 )
5throw new IllegalStateException(); //Bug
6}
Listing 1: Example code in which taint tags from inputs s1
and s2do not flow to a branch that they indirectly control.
Ideally, the taint tracking tool could report to the fuzzer that to
cover the true side of the branch on line 4, the fuzzer must mutate
s1ands2(and even better, to generate the concrete values abc
andabcdef,respectively).However,thetainttrackingtoolwillnot
report any relationship between the input and the branch on line 4
because v1iscontrol-dependenton s1,butnotdata-dependent(and
similarly,between s2andv2).Evenworse:whileinthisexample,
thereisadataflowrelationshipbetweentheinputstrings s1and
s2and the magic strings abcandabcdef, in real code, the taint
4382022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
tags on s1ors2might also be lost through implicit flows. For
example, one common pattern is to build a map from input strings
to a tokenized representation of each string — if the same input
string is encountered more than once, the parser returns the same
tokenized version ofthe string, effectively losing trackof the input.
Whilesomedynamictainttrackingtoolsdosupport“controlflow
propagation,” which would detect this relationship, these analyses
have too many false positives to be useful in practice [ 34,47]. How
else can we help the fuzzer to explore this branch? One typical
approach is to simply scrape the application binary for all strings,
creating a dictionary of interesting strings to use when fuzzing
(inthiscase, abcanddef).Unfortunately,thistrickonlyworksif
the magic values are statically defined in the codebase — values
generated dynamically will not be included in the dictionary. In
this case, because s2must be the value abcdef, the dictionary will
not help the fuzzer explore this branch.
This paper presents Confetti, (CONcolic Fuzzer Employing
Taint Tracking Information), a system that combines fuzzing with
taint-trackingandconcolicexecution.Confettiamplifiesthereach
of concolic guidance, allowing the fuzzer to effectively generate in-
putsthatexplorebranchesliketheoneinListing1, andlonger,more
complex examples where taint tags quickly become lost through
implicit flows.Our keyinsight isthat theprecise targetingof past
tainttracking-guidedgreyboxfuzzersunnecessarilyrestrictsthe
fuzzer’s ability to reveal tricky-to-reach branches. As with state-
of-the-art fuzzers, Confetti executes each input in its population
with taint tracking, collecting constraints on the input bytes. Con-
fetticangeneratenewcoverage-revealinginputsthroughconcolicexecution by negating and solving those constraints, in the style of
existing work [33, 35, 63, 72, 79, 80].
Confetti’snovelapproachtoguidethefuzzer, globalhinting,
is based on the insight that although taint tags might be lost for
parts of an input, magic values derived for otherparts of the input
canbere-targeted andappliedelsewhere.When Confettifinds
thatapartoftheinputflowsintoacomparisonwithadynamically
computed value, Confetti records that value as a global hint. We
createandevaluateanewfuzzingmutation,whichinsertsglobal
hintsanywhere inanyinput — not only at the targeted location of
the specific input from which the hint was derived.
Weevaluatetheefficacyofthisnewmutationstrategy,consid-
ering both system-level metrics (i.e., branches covered and bugs
found)andunit-levelmetrics(i.e., mutationsuccessrate).Ourre-
sults clearly demonstrate that global hinting is roughly as effective
inrevealingnewcoverageastraditional,targetedhinting,andmost
importantly, that this strategy reveals differentcoverage and bugs
thatcould not be reported by using targeted hinting alone.I no u r
evaluation, the baseline JQF-Zest fuzzer detected 11 bugs, whereas
Confetti with only targeted hints detected 16, and Confetti
with both global and targeted hints detected 25 bugs. Our open-
source implementation of Confetti represents a significant im-
provementinfuzzertechnologyforJVM-basedsoftware,providingbenefitstosoftwareengineeringresearchersinventingnewfuzzing
approaches and to professional software engineers searching forbugs in their software. While our implementation is limited to asingle language (Java) and a single greybox fuzzer (Zest), we be-
lievethatourresultsarecompellingenoughtohaveasignificantimpactonthefieldofsoftwareengineering,warrantingfuturework
exploring global hinting in other fuzzing domains.
The key contributions of this paper include:
•Anewapproachtocombineconcolicexecutionandtainttracking
with fuzzing: global hinting.
•An open source implementation of Confetti for Java, whichcombines traditional, targeted hinting with our novel global
hinting strategy [51, 52].
•An evaluation of Confetti, demonstrating the efficacy of its
novelglobal-hinting-basedguidanceoverabaselinestate-of-the-
art greybox Java fuzzer (Zest), and against a baseline version of
Confetti without global hinting.
2 Background
Before describing how Confetti effectively guides a greybox
fuzzerusingwhiteboxinformation,wefirstbrieflysummarizegrey-boxfuzzing,andinparticular,parametricgreyboxfuzzing.ConsiderfuzzinganapplicationthattakesXMLfilesasinput.Figure1shows
two fuzzing loops: one that represents the behavior of a traditional
coverage-guidedfuzzerlikeAFL[ 81]orlibFuzzer[ 55](blueline),
and one that represents the behavior of a parametric fuzzer like
Crowbar[ 37],FuzzChick[ 53]orJQF-Zest[ 66](orangeline).The
traditional fuzzer (blue) executes a loop, where it starts with some
(well-formed) seed input, selected from a pool of seeds. The fuzzer
thenusesa mutatortotransformthatinput(typicallyusinganevo-
lutionary algorithm). Then, the fuzzer executes the new input and
capturesbranchcoveragethatmaybiastheevolutionaryalgorithm
(mutator)onfutureexecutionsofthefuzzingloop.Ifthenewinput
isdeemed interesting —typicallydefinedasrevealingcoverageofa
newbranch,orgreatlyincreasingthehitcountsofthosealready
covered—thentheinputissavedintothefuzzer’spopulation,to
be selected again later for further fuzzing.
However,inthecaseofthetraditionalcoverage-guidedfuzzer
(blue line), the mutator is unaware of the input syntax expected by
the system under test, so most of the generated inputs are likely to
haveashallowreachinthecode.Thatis,mostoftheseinputseither
fail some early stage syntactic parsing (e.g., the XML fragment <
xml><^xml> ),oratbest,findabuginthatsyntacticparser(perhaps
<xml><^xml> causes a crash).
System Under Test
Semantic Logic
Syntactic ParserMutator
Parametric 
GeneratorGuidance
XCoverage
Biases
<xml>
  <name>value</name></xml>name=value<xml></xml>0001Seeds
Concrete 
input:Parametric
input:Concrete input:
<xml><^xml>
0011
Figure 1: Comparing a fuzzing loop for a traditional
coverage-guided fuzzer (blue) and parametric fuzzer (or-ange).
The traditional fuzzer uses an evolutionary algorithm to
mutate concrete program inputs directly. The parametric fuzzer
mutates the parametric input — the sequence of decisions made by
a generator function that ultimately creates concrete inputs.
439CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
In contrast, the parametric fuzzer (orange and green lines in Fig-
ure 1) has a seed pool that consists of parametric inputs, which are
thesequencesofdecisions madebytheparametricgeneratorthat
result in some input. Whereas property-based testing tools employ
randomgeneration,parametricfuzzersguidethegenerationofnew
inputs by controlling each “random” decision made by the genera-
tor. The parametric input 0001, in this example, represents the set
of decisions made by the generator function to create the concrete
input <xml></xml> .Theparametricfuzzeralsousesamutatorto
transformaseedinput,butoperatesonthisparametricinput(or-
angeline).Bymutatingparametricinputs,correspondingmutations
occuratthe objectlevelandnotattheinputbytelevel.Aone-bit
mutationto 0011mightresultinamoresemanticallyinteresting
change tothe concrete input, creating <xml><name>value</name
></xml> in the example. Hence, the key insight behind parametric
fuzzing is that the structure of inputs is often more constraining
thanthesetofvaluesinsertedintothatstructure.Priorexperiments
show that parametricfuzzing is more effective whencompared to
traditionalpropertytesting[ 53]andtotraditionalcoverage-guided
fuzzing of Java programs [ 66]. Since we target Java applications,
we chose to integrate Confetti with a parametric fuzzer.
3 Confetti
Confettigeneratescomplexinputsthatcanexposehiddenbugs
in a program’s logic by using concolic execution and taint track-
ing as forms of guidance for parametric fuzzing. The traditional
approachtointegratewhiteboxguidancewithfuzzingistoprovidetargetedguidance,instructingthefuzzertoplaceparticularbytesat
aparticularlocationinaparticularinput.Werefertoeachsuchsug-
gestion as a “targeted hint.” Confetti employs targeted hints, but
alsointroducesthenotionof globalhints,whichallowConfettito
overcometheinadequaciesofdynamictainttracking.Althoughour
approach is language-agnostic, we implement Confetti in Javaand target applications written in languages that target the JVM
such as Java, Scala, Kotlin, Groovy, and Clojure.
3.1 Example
BeforeexaminingConfetti’sarchitectureindetail,shownin
Figure 3, we provide a brief example to demonstrate how Con-
fetti works in tandem with the fuzzer to generate concrete inputs
that explore otherwise hard-to-reach code. Figure 2 shows Con-fetti’s hinting process to bias an example XML generator — in
this example, it is the generateXML() function called in line 1. As
statedpreviously,aparametricinputcanbethoughtofasaseriesofchoicesthataremade—wehavecolor-codeddistinctchoicepoints
with the XML generator, along with their associated parametric
inputandresulting,concretevalues.Function generateString isa
black box that consumes a parametric input and generates a string.
We present the minimalset of program executions that reaches
line 6 — but in practice, Confetti applies a variety of mutators to
support both targeted and non-targeted hints (described further in
Section3.5).Initially,thegeneratorcreatesarandomseedinput( 1/circlecopyrt
inFigure3)—Input#1,whichrandomlyselectsthestring“groupID”
(perhaps from a dictionary), and the random boolean false. Being
the first input of the fuzzing run, this is guaranteed to obtain new
coverage—namelylines2and3.Thisinputisdeemed“interesting”
by thefuzzer, asit leadsto increasedbranch coverage,and issent
totheConfettiCoordinatorforwhiteboxanalysis( 2/circlecopyrtinFigure3).1 XMLDocument doc = parse(generateXML());
2 if(!"expected" .equals(doc. element(0).name()))
3    throw new Error();
4 if(!"version" .equals(doc. element(0).attr( 0).name()))
5    throw new Error();
6 // interesting logic we want to fuzz follows bellow
(b) Simple parametric XML tag generator that uses 4 random choicesString generateXML(){
  String tagName = generateString();  if(generateBoolean())    return "<"+tagName+ " "+
      generateString() + "='"+
      generateString() + "'></"+tagName+ ">";
  return "<"+tagName+ "></"+tagName+ ">";
}(a) Example code to fuzz; the immediate goal is to pass both branches 
(c) Visualization of Fuzzer Execution with hints. The first input is generated 
randomly, later inputs are mutated by the fuzzer, or hinted by CONFETTI ( hint 
underlined). CONFETTI generates hints from coverage-revealing inputs only.5
“expected” true “version” “A”“groupID” false
“package” false
“expected” false
“expected” true “groupID” “A”seed
mutationhintmutationhint# Source Generator Choices
New
Coverage
6
7, 8
912345Parametric Input
0101101 0
0101111 0
1001011 0
1001011 1011010 01101
1001011 1011111 01101-
Figure 2: Example Fuzzer Execution. A parametric fuzzer can
easily create an input that is parsable by the black-box function on
line 1, but may struggle to reach line 6 due to lines 2 and 4. As the
parametric fuzzer records the sequence of random choices made
in the generator (a), and mutates those choices to generate new
inputs, Confetti proposes values for some of those choices, thus
guiding fuzzer through these branches with ease.
The Confetti Coordinator dispatches the input to a whitebox
analysisprocess 3/circlecopyrttoperformtaint-trackingandcollectconstraints,
which are 4/circlecopyrtreturned to the Confetti Coordinator, which 5/circlecopyrt
negatesandsolvesthem, 6/circlecopyrtpossiblyresultinginnewparametric
inputs. Meanwhile, 1/circlecopyrtthe fuzzer mutates inputs independently,
changing “groupID” to “package” in Input #2.
Oncethefuzzerdecidestomutateanewinput,itcontactsthe
ConfettiCoordinatorforhints,whichthe 7/circlecopyrtConfettiCoordi-
nator returns in the form of the modified parametric input derived
from Input #1, hinting the first generated string should be “ex-
pected”(derivedfromtainttrackingbetweentheinputstringand
theString.equals call). With the hint, Input #3 results in new
coverageonline4(anexceptionisthrownimmediatelyuponhit-
ting line 4 due to the absence of attributes) — Input #3 is then sent
to the Confetti Coordinator for whitebox analysis. Meanwhile,
thefuzzermutatesInput#3into#4bychangingthebooleanchoice
totrue, followed by a random string for an attribute name and
value.Input#4resultsinnewcoverageonline5,andisalsosent
to the Confetti Coordinator. Input #5 is generated in a similar
manner to Input #3,using Confetti’s hint mechanism forstrings
by instrumenting as the call to attrto obtain the hint “version.”
While the parametric fuzzer couldcreate these inputs by chance, it
becomes a certainty with Confetti.
3.2 Architecture
Figure3showsahigh-leveloverviewof Confetti’sarchitecture.
Confetti consists of three key processes that run in coordination:
(1)thefuzzer —responsibleforinputgenerationandexecutionof
440ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
CONFETTI 
CoordinatorWhitebox Analysis
(Knarr)Greybox Fuzzer
SMT Solver2 Interesting input 3 Analyze new input
4 Constraints + taint flows
5 Solve negated 
constraints6New
inputs7 New input(s) & hints for
original input
1Generate and 
Execute Inputs
Figure3:Overviewof Confetti’sapproachtoprovidewhiteboxhintingtoagreyboxfuzzer. Thefuzzerrepeatedlygeneratesand
executes inputs, considering any hints that hit has received so far to guide its generation 1/circlecopyrt. For each input that the fuzzer creates that
is deemed interesting for generating new coverage, it 2/circlecopyrtsends that newly generated input to the Confetti coordinator, which in turn
3/circlecopyrtsends the newly generated input to the Knarr client in order to 4/circlecopyrtperform a whitebox analysis and collect constraints. If there are
constraints,theConfetticoordinator 5/circlecopyrtnegatesconstraintsandsendsthemtotheSMTsolverto 6/circlecopyrtgeneratenewinputs.Regardlessofthe
SMT result, the Confetti coordinator also extracts taint tracking-derived hints from string comparisons in the constraints. The coordinator
7/circlecopyrtreturns the hints, and any new SMT-derived input(s) to the fuzzer, and the cycle continues.
thetargetprogram, (2)theKnarrProcess —responsiblefordynamic
taint trackingand constraintcollection on interestinginputs, and
(3) the Confetti Coordinator — responsible for transmitting inputs
between the two aforementioned processes and for using an SMT
solver tofeedconcolic execution.This designhastwomainbene-
fits.First,itusesseparateprocessesforcomponentsthatexecute
the program under test with different (incompatible) instrumen-
tations: collect taint and constraints (Knarr), or simple branch
coverage(fuzzer).Second,itallowsthewhiteboxanalysistotake
placewithoutdelayingthefuzzer,whichcontinuestomutateinputs
unimpeded by constraint collection and analysis. The Confetti
Coordinator thus acts as a broker for inputs being passed between
Knarr and the fuzzer, receiving interesting inputs from the fuzzer
andforwarding themto Knarrforfurther analysis.Similarly,the
Confetti Coordinator manages constraints that are computed by
Knarr, negating and solving them in the SMT solver.
Similar to prior work such as Angora [33], the Confetti Coor-
dinatorisnotnotifiedofeachmutation/executionthatthefuzzer
performs, but instead only of each input that the fuzzer finds in-
teresting (e.g., each input that reaches new coverage). Focusing on
interestinginputshastwoimportantconsequences.First,Knarr
executes a small number of inputs and does not lag behind thefuzzer. Second, this mitigates the path explosion problem since
Knarr executes (concretely) paths known to reach new coverage,
andthefuzzerultimatelyselectswhichhintstotake.Inthisway,
Confetti leverages the speed of the fuzzer at generating inputs
and the power of the whitebox analysis.
Our implementation of Confetti extends the JQF+Zest para-
metric fuzzer [ 64–66] and extends our Phosphor dynamic taint
tracking engine [ 27,28] for constraint collection. Our prototype
interfaces uses the Green library [ 75] as a bridge to constraint
solvers,allowingittobeagnosticofthesolverused.Inpractice,we
use the mature Z3 theorem prover [ 36], which worked well in our
experiments. Future workmight consider other constraint solvers,
perhaps using newer Java APIs like JavaSMT3 [23].
3.3 Knarr: Collecting Whitebox Guidance
Knarruses dynamictainttracking totracehoweachbyteofthe
parametricinputflowsthroughthegeneratorintoageneratedcon-
crete input, and then through the application under test. Dynamictaint tracking is an automated analysis that allows tools to taint
somevariable(s),andthen,at anypointintheprogramexecution,
identifyifavariableisderivedthroughdataflowfromthatoriginal,
tainted input. Knarr instruments the system under test (including
the generator that drives the application) to perform this analysis.
RecallfromSection2thataparametricfuzzerrepresentseachin-
putasaseriesofrandomchoicesconsumedbyageneratorprogram.
Totaintthegeneratedinput,wemodifythefuzzertotainteachbyte
oftheparametricinputthatisconsumedbythegenerator.Bydoing
this, we are able to propagate taint tags through the parametric
inputtotheconcretegeneratedinputandbeyond.Mostgenerators
require no changes, the only modifications that Confetti may
requiretothegeneratorareforstringgeneratorsthatselectinga
randomitemfromapre-defineddictionary.Forexample,suchagen-
erator might have logic along the lines of result = dict[choice
% dict.length] , where choiceis a random integer and dictis
a pre-defined list of strings. Confetti requires these generators to
berewrittentocallahelperfunction,alongthelinesof result =
ConfettiHelper.stringFromList(choice, dict) . This helper
function will propagate the taint tag from choicetoresult(since
array-indexing is an implicit flow), and will allow Confetti to
decidetouseahint(whichmaynotbedefinedinthedictionary)
or to choose an item from the dictionary.
Knarr tracks taint tags for each variable, and for strings, tracks
taint tags at a per-character level. Knarr tracks common stringoperations like
equalsandstartsWith so that it can represent
theseoperationstothesolver.Whenexecutingthegeneratorand
theconcreteinput,Knarrrecordsthetainttagofvaluesusedin
branch predicates. Knarr sends this data to the Confetti Coordi-
nator, that can then connect individual bytes in a given parametric
input to conditions guarding branch edges not yet covered.
Instead of using a simple, traditional taint tag (of ‘tainted’ or
‘nottainted’),Knarrenhancesthetainttrackingenginetobuildan
abstract expression for each variable to use as the taint tag (again,
a technique inspired by Angora [ 33]). For instance, given the code
int x=y+z and assuming that yandzwere tainted inputs, an
off-the-shelf taint tracking tool would typically set x’s taint tag to
betheunionof yandz’stags.Instead,Knarrtrackstheabstract
expression that generated the value (in this case, that 𝑥=𝑦+𝑧).
In this way, x’s taint tag becomes the symbolic expression 𝑦+𝑧.
441CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
When a tainted input reaches a branch, the taint tag of the branch
condition is then the complete symbolic expression that relates the
parametric input byte to the branch condition.
WhenKnarrdetectstainteddatabeingusedinabranch,itadds
theconstraintsinthetainteddatatothecurrent pathcondition.The
pathconditionisthustheconjunctionofalltheconstraintsobserved
tocontrolbrancheswhileexecutingoneinput.Afterexecutingeach
input,Knarrcollectsallconstraints inthecurrentpathcondition
and sends them to the Confetti Coordinator, which uses those
constraints to generate new inputs and hints for the fuzzer.
3.4 Confetti Coordinator and Hints
Using the constraints collected by Knarr, Confetti Coordi-
nator derives three kinds of targeted hints: SMT solver-derived
hints,stringcomparison-derivedhintsandcharactercomparison-
derivedhints.ConfettiCoordinatorprovidesthesetothefuzzer
as targeted hints, and as explained in the following section, thefuzzer will derive a set of global hints from these targeted hints.
Confetti Coordinator leverages an SMT solver in the style of con-
colic execution [42,71] in order to generate new inputs that are
likelytorevealnewbranchcoverage.Whileinprinciple,Confetti
Coordinatorcouldattempttonegateandsolvealluniquebranch
conditionsinordertoattempttoexploreallpaths,inpracticewe
foundthatconcolicexecutionwasmostusefultotargetbranches
that could not be covered by the fuzzer. As Knarr executes inputs
andcollectspathconstraints,ConfettiCoordinatorkeepstrack
of which branches have not been fully explored.
Confetti’s concolic execution thread works by first selecting a
branchtotarget—onethatisnotfullycoveredandwhosepredicate
includes at least one value from the input. Then, Confetti selects
oneoftheinputsthatreachesthebranchandnegatestheconstraints
applied by that branch’s predicate. Confetti drops constraintsfromthe inputthatoccurredafterthisbranchexecution, sinceit
mightbeunsatisfiabletoretainthemwhilealsonegatingthetargetbranch’sconstraints.Then,ConfettiusesanSMTsolver(Z3[
36])
to generate a new parametric input that takes the other side of
the branch. If satisfiable, the solution is then translated into a new,
hinted input that can be immediately executed by the fuzzer. If
thesolverdeemstheconstraintstobeunsatisfiable,ortimes-out,
Confetti marks that combination of input and branch as “already
tried” and moves on to the next target branch.
After attempting to generate inputs for all uncovered branches
once, Confetti loops around to try each uncovered branch again,
this time picking a new input. Confetti records solver-related
statistics:howoftenabranchwastargetedforsolvinghowoften
each input was tried to solve for that branch, and the result of that
solvercall.Somebranchesmayneverbesatisfiable,duetolimita-
tions in constraint tracking or solving (e.g., usage of floating point
operations), and perhaps become a waste of solver time. We found
thatmostbranchesthatcouldbesolvedforwereoftensolvedon
oneofthefirstfewinputsattempted,andaddedauser-configurable
threshold to blacklist particular branches that repeatedly were not
satisfiable, defaulting to 50 attempts.
SinceConfetti’sgoalistoprovide guidance toafuzzer(andnot
necessarily perform complete concolic execution), it also provides
very lightweight, taint tracking derived hints to the fuzzer. Con-
fettiextractscomparisonsbetweeninputvaluesandvariousstringvalues,regardlessofwhetherthosecomparisonscontrolbranches
arecovered.Foreachofthesestringcomparisons,Confettipro-
videsthefuzzerwithatargetedhinttosettherelevantbytesofthe
input to the value that was compared to.
SinceKnarrtrackstainttagsoneach character ofeachstring,
itisalsopossibleforConfettitoderivehintsfromcomparisons
between individual characters of strings. To mitigate the explosion
ofhintsresultingfromsuggesting everypossiblecharacterthata
given input is compared against, Confetti limits the total number
of character hints suggested for each targeted branch to 10.
3.5 Parametric Fuzzer Guidance
Confetti’s core novelty over prior work is in how it inte-
gratesthose results with the fuzzer. State-of-the-art fuzzers that
integrateguidancefromdynamictainttrackingand/orpathcon-straint solving — like Angora [
33], Driller [ 72], VUzzer [ 69] and
others[35,63,79,80]—provide targetedguidancetothefuzzer.For
instance, taint tracking might be used to determine which bytes of
theinputcontrolbranchesthatarenotyetcovered,andthenthe
fuzzer might be guided to generate a particular input to cover that
branch.Confettiusesseveraltargetedhintingstrategiesbasedon
prior work in addition to its novel, globalhinting strategy.
When mutating an input, Confetti extends the fuzzer with
the following new mutations: 1) Apply a single targeted hint, 2)
Applymultipletargetedhints,simultaneously,or3)Performnormal
mutation, which might apply global hints
Targeted hints represent the state-of-the-art approach to inte-
grate taint tracking and constraint solving with fuzzing: if Knarr
determinesthatthereisaparticularvaluethatshouldbetriedat
a particular positionin an input, then thatvalue is applied to that
offset. Targeted hints are always applied withoutfurther mutation
of the input, since the hints were collected on the original input
beingmutated,anarbitrarychangetotheinputmightinvalidate
the usefulness of those hints. When the fuzzer selects an inputformutation,andtherearetargetedhintsthathavenotyetbeen
applied,withacoinflip,oneofthosetargetedhintsisapplied.Afteran input is selected for mutation repeatedly, eventually all targeted
hintswillbetried,andthenthismutationwillnolongerbeavail-
able for this input. If a single hint isn’t applied, then the fuzzer
might apply multiple targeted hints simultaneously. In either case,
Confetti inserts instructions in the input to use the hinted value,rather than whatever value would have otherwise been chosen by
the generator at that targeted position.
Each time that a targeted hint is applied to an input, that hint
valueissavedinaglobalhintset,enablingConfetti’spowerful
globalhintingmechanism.Thisglobalhintsettracksallstringsthat
any input string was compared to during the fuzzing campaign. At
anycallinthegeneratorthat couldconsumeatargetedhint,weadd
a coin flip to determine whether the global hint set should be used,
orthegenerator’snormallogicshouldbeused.Bymutatingthebits
that control this decision, the fuzzer can control the application of
global hints at each position. In our evaluation, we found that this
seemingly simple strategy was very effective at generating new,
coverage-revealing inputs and in revealing new bugs.
A key aspect of Confetti’s hinting implementation is that it
ensuresthathintsare inheritable :ifaninputwithtargetedorglobal
hintsisdeemeduseful,saved,andfuzzedlater,assumingthatthe
442ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
choices to generate those hinted values aren’t mutated, then the
same hints will be applied in the same position. This allows thefuzzer to make progress towards generating increasingly morecomplex inputs by stacking multiple hints together. We did not
perform any hyper-parameter tuning to optimize the probabilities
ofapplyinghintsbasedontheiroverallperformance,althoughin
Section 4.3 we report on the success rate of each mutation strategy.
4 Evaluation
In order to empirically evaluate Confetti and, in particular, its
novel global hinting strategy, we measured its effectiveness across
asuiteofbenchmarkprograms.Ourevaluationisprimarilyfocused
on answering the following research questions:
RQ1:How does Confetti compare to the baseline fuzzers in
terms of branches explored?
RQ2:Does Confetti find bugs that the baseline fuzzers cannot?
RQ3:Howusefuliseachof Confetti’shintstrategiesfordiscov-
ering new coverage-revealing inputs?
RQ4:CaninputswithConfetti’sglobalhintsbereplacedwith
statically derived values, and still yield the same coverage?
WeevaluateConfettiincomparisontothestate-of-the-artpara-
metricfuzzerJQF-Zest[ 66]andusethesamesuiteofbenchmark
programs,giventhatwebuiltConfettiontopofJQF-Zest.Where
possible, we used the latest version of the target software that still
contained the bugs detected by JQF-Zest in the original work. Fol-
lowing best practices, we study both Confetti’s ability to explore
programbranches(e.g., coverage)incomparisontoJQF-Zest,and
its ability to find new and previously-known bugs [50].
In order to precisely evaluate the efficacy of Confetti’s global
hintingstrategy,wealsoevaluateConfetti’scoverageandfault
finding ability in comparison to a baseline Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡, which
is exactly the same version of Confetti, but with global hints
disabled.However,there maybea varietyof confoundingfactors
thatalsoimpactConfetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡’soverallperformanceinthishead-
to-head evaluation. For instance, the fuzzer’s scheduling algorithm
(thatallocatesmutationtimetoandchoosesthemutationstoapply
on inputs) likely interacts with factors that influence the coverage
of each input — like hints. To isolate the impact of global hints, we
also analyzed each of the coverage-revealing inputs that Confetti
generated, looking to determine whether or not those inputs could
have been generated without global hints.
WeconductedallofourexperimentsonAmazon’sEC2infras-
tructure, using “r5.xlarge” instances with 4 3.1Ghz Intel Xeon Plat-
inum8000CPUsand32GBofRAM,runningUbuntu16.04“xenial”
and JDK 1.8.0_241. Following best practices, we conducted each
experimentfor24hoursandrepeatedthis20timesaveragingthe
results [50]. The input generators used in our evaluation are exten-
sionsoftheopensourceinputgeneratorsthatwerepublishedby
theJQF-ZestauthorswithinJQFitself[ 64].Themodificationsmade
to the generators for constrainttracking and hinting are minimal,
amounting to approximately two lines of code in the XML docu-
ment generator, approximately four lines of code in the JavaScript
code generator, and approximately ten lines of code in the Java
classfile generator.Wealsomodified theMavenpom.xml genera-
tor—thecodeprovidedbytheJQF-Zestauthorswasmisconfigured,
and hence unable to generate high-coverage pom.xml files. Ourmodification to the Maven pom.xml generator was merged intothe upstream codebase [ 26]. Otherwise, we used the generators as
provided by the JQF-Zest authors without modification.
4.1 RQ1: Evaluating Fuzzer Coverage
Most fuzzers (including JQF-Zest and AFL) consider coverage of
allcode,inboththeapplication’scodeanditslibraries,todetermine
whichinputstosave,sinceaninputthatcoversnewlibrarycode
might be “closer” to covering new application code. Following the
methodology of Padhye et al.’s JQF-Zest [ 66], we analyze and
report coverage overall, and also for application code specifically.
Figure 4 visualizes the branch coverage of allcode (not only
thesystemundertest)ofeachofthe20executionsofeachofthe
benchmarkprogramsforeachfuzzerduringthedurationofeach
24-hour campaign.The solidline representsthe averagecoverage
across each of the 20 executions, and the shaded area represents
thecompleterangeofcoverage.Wealsocalculatedthe totalbranch
coverage for each fuzzer over all of its 20 runs, this time usingthestandardcodecoveragetoolJaCoCo[
59],andreportingonly
branches in the program under test covered by any input from any
1500200025003000
0 500 1000 1500
(a) Apache Ant15002000
0 500 1000 1500
(b) Apache Maven
500010000
0 500 1000 1500
(c) Google Closure20002500300035004000
0 500 1000 1500
(d) Mozilla Rhino
1000125015001750
0 500 1000 1500
Campaign Time (minutes)Branch Probes Covered
(e) Apache BCEL
Figure 4: Rate of new branch discovery for each fuzzer,
JQF-Zest shown in red, Confetti in blueand Confetti-
NoGlobalHintsin black. The solid line shows the average cov-
erageacrossall20runs,andtheshadedareashowstheentirerange.
All charts have the same axis labels as BCEL.
443CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 1: Summary of results for RQ1 and RQ2: branch coverage and bugs found. Coverage in this table includes onlycoverage of
applicationcode(nolibrarycoverage).Totalbranchesshowsthenumberofbranchesconsidered;branchcoverageisshownaggregated
acrossall20runsforConfetti,thebaselineJavafuzzerJQF-Zest,andConfetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡(Confettiwithtargetedhintsbutwithoutglobalhints).
Total Branch Coverage Bugs Found
Benchmark Program (Version) Total Branches Confetti JQF-Zest Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡Confetti JQF-Zest Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡
Apache Ant [6] (1.10.2) 23,361 872 859 871 11 1
Apache Maven [11] (3.5.2) 5,858 857 821 853 00 0
Apache BCEL [10] (6.2) 6,220 1,421 1,361 1,423 52 3
Google Closure [12] (20190415) 49,602 11,458 10,545 10,640 15 4 8
Mozilla Rhino [19] (1.7.8) 25,035 3,744 3,757 3,534 44 4
of the 20 runs. Table 1 shows the total branch coverage of each
fuzzer, along with the number of branches considered for coverage.
For all fuzzing targets, Confetti’s average branch coverage
surpassedthatof Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡,whichsurpassedthatofJQF-Zest.
Rhino’scomparisongraphismuchtighterthantheothergraphs,
withagreatdealofvarianceforboth ConfettiandConfetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡
whencomparedwiththatofJQF-Zest—andthemaximumcoverage
ofJQF-ZestwasgreaterthanConfetti.DiggingdeeperintoRhino,
wecanseefromTable1that,intotal,JQF-Zestexplored13more
application branches than Confetti. This variance is likely due to
theadditionalchoicesthatConfettiintroducesinthegenerators—
namelybyincreasingthesizeoftheglobaldictionary,orbyhavingseveralhintstochoosefromattargetedbytepositions.Withfurther
(andlonger)trials,wesuspectthatthisvariation(anddiversity)may
helpConfettitoultimatelyachievehighercoveragethanJQF-Zest.
We also believe that future work could improve the efficacy of the
generator for Rhino. For Maven, BCEL and Closure, Confetti’s
improvement in branch coverage over JQF-Zest was quite notable.
It is interesting to note that in the case of coverage BCEL, our
baseline without global hints (Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡) slightly outperformed
Confetti. Howev er,ConfettioutperformedConfetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡both
in terms of total coverage (Figure 4) and bugs found — supporting
ourhypothesisthatglobalhintsareausefulstrategyforcombiningconcolicguidancewithgreyboxfuzzing.Webelievethelimitedvari-
ability in BCEL is due to JQF-Zest’s Java class file generator, which
wedeliberatelydidnotmodify.Inparticular,itgeneratesmethod
bodieswithveryfewinstructions,greatlylimitingthechancesof
exercising complex behavior in the target. Nonetheless, Confetti
still outperforms JQF-Zest on this target, which shows that even
with restrictive generators, Confetti still improves performance.
4.2 RQ2: Bugs Found
We analyzed each failure detected in all twenty, 24-hour runs,
and reported each unique program crash as a bug in Table 2. In
order tode-duplicate bugs, weutilize aheuristic ofexamining the
first 5 lines in a stack trace to identify a unique bug, as well asmanual analysis after applying this heuristic. This methodology
clusters more bugs together than prior work of stack hashing [ 50],
as the higher levels of the stack tend to isolate the locality of aparticular bug. Using this methodology, we replicated the same
10bugsthatPadhye etal.reportedinJQF-Zest(withevengreater
frequencyinsomecases),plusoneadditionalbuginClosure,likelyfoundduetoperformanceimprovementsthatwemadetoJQF-Zest
(described in Section 5).
Ofthose11bugsthatJQF-Zestfound,Confettifoundallbutone
initstwenty24-hourruns(IssueB1inthetable).Again,weattributethistoadditionalchoicesthatConfettiintroducesinthegenerator,
which clearly can result in a diversity of paths explored. This is
evident in BCEL particularly, as Confetti finds four additional
bugsthatJQF-Zestdoes not.Theadditionofthesechoicesmakes
bugsthatarerepeatablewithlowfrequencyevenlesslikelytobe
triggered within a single run. We suspect that tuning the rate at
whichhintsareselectedcouldincreasethelikelihoodthatConfetti
detects bugs like this, but leave such investigation for future work.
Ofthose25bugsthatConfettifound,16(64%)werepreviously
unknown,theresthadbeenfoundpreviouslybyJQF-Zestorothers.
Table 2 shows that, of the bugs that Confetti detects, there is
a clear range of detectability, with some bugs detected on mostfuzzing runs, and four detected at the 5% (i.e., 1/20) level. This
distribution supports our hypothesis that supplying global hints
Table 2: Bug detectability rate, from 20 executions of each
fuzzer.If multiple unique bugs had the same repeatability rates,
they are included in the same row (C14, C15, and R1, R2, R3, R4).
Unreferenced issues were not reproducible in latest version of soft-
ware.IssuesreferencingJQF-Zest[ 66]werepreviouslyfoundand
reported by the authors of JQF-Zest.
Program Issue # JQF-Zest Confetti Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡
ant A1 [66] 100 % 100% 100%
bcel B1 [66] 100 % 0% 0%
bcel B2 [66] 100 % 100% 100%bcel B3 [8] 0 % 40% 0%
bcel B4 0 % 80% 0%
bcel B5 [7] 0 % 100% 5%
bcel B6 [9] 0 % 100% 20%
closure C1 [66] 100% 100% 100%closure C2 [66] 90% 5% 85%closure C3 [66] 80% 45% 70%closure C4 [1, 2] 0% 95% 45%closure C5 [3] 0% 90% 15%closure C6 0% 5% 0%
closure C7 [4] 0% 100% 20%closure C8 [17] 0% 100% 0%
closure C9 [5] 15% 20% 15%closure C10 0% 100% 5%
closure C11 [14–16] 0% 100% 0%
closure C12 [13] 0% 35% 0%
closure C13 0% 20% 0%
closure C14,C15 0% 5% 0%
rhino R(1-4) [66] 100% 100% 100%
444ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
to the fuzzer can pay off: even though many of the hints tried at
eachpositionofeachinputmaybeirrelevantfordetectingabug,
someofthemdo.Giventhatthedesignofthefuzzeristoexecute
as many inputs as quickly as possible, a diversity of hints can lead
to a greater diversity in coverage, and a diversity in bugs found.
Wefoundthat6ofthe16newlydiscoveredbugshadalreadybeen
foundandpatchedinthemostrecentdevelopmentversionofthe
respectivefuzzingtargets—anencouragingsignthatdevelopers
care about the kinds of bugs that Confetti can find. We reported
theremaining10bugstothedevelopers,andattimeofwriting4
bugs in Closure have been fixed by developers and 3 have been
acknowledged, 3 bugs in BCEL are awaiting acknowledgment. The
ClosuredevelopersfoundthebugsdiscoveredbyConfettitobe
quiteinteresting,andintheirinvestigationofIssueC11,founda
separate(butrelated)bugthattheyhavealreadyfixed[ 18].Thisisa
testamenttoConfetti’sabilitytofindtrulyunexpectedbehaviors,
thereby revealing latent software errors, and contributing to the
betterment of software quality. We describe several of the newly
foundbugsheretoprovidesomemoreintuitionintoConfetti’s
performance.
Inmanycases,Confettifoundthesebugsthankstotainttrack-
ing, finding special strings like arguments ,jscomp.reflectProp-
ertyandgoog.reflect.objectProperty . It is likely that these
strings would trigger these bugs in both the Confetti and Con-
fetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡runs.ThisisshownintheresultsinTable2,inwhichthere
are a subset of bugs that Confetti and Confetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡do find with
similar frequency that JQF-Zest was not able to find (Issues C4, C5,
C8).
Bugs C4 and C5 are interesting, but technically could have also
been detected at the same frequency if the strings arguments and
goog.reflect.objectProperty were in the fuzzer’s dictionary.
Issue C7 presents an example that could not be detected with a
dictionary. $jscomp$ isusedasaninternalconstantthatClosure
Compiler uses to construct internal aliases for arguments to func-
tions.Bysupplyingboth inner$jscomp$1 andinnerasarguments
to a function, the compiler throws an exception because it tries to
constructamapofargumentnamesandif inner$jscomp$1 issup-
pliedasthefirstargument,itwillfailtoinsertthesecondargument
name,leadingtoa RuntimeException .Notethat,inthiscase,no
dictionary-based approach could detect this bug, as the bug is only
triggerediftwoargumentsarespecified,withthefirstargument
matching the second argument, plus the suffix $jscomp$.
Several bugs were detected only by Confetti’s global hint-
ing strategy (C6, C8, C11-C15). For example, consider Issue C11,
which Confetti was able to find in 100% of runs, while Con-
fetti 𝑡𝑔𝑡and JQF-Zest were unable to find it. A simplified input ex-
ercising this bug is (((goog$dom$TagName$$_88a).length) +=
(this)))) . The string goog$dom$TagName$$_88a was extracted
via taint tracking and added to the global dictionary. Later in
the fuzzing run, the generator decided to use it as the left-handexpression of an addition assignment operator. During an opti-mization pass, the compiler is unable to satisfy the preconditionthat
(((goog$dom$TagName$$_88a) .length) matches the type
ofthisandthrowsanexception.Exercisingthisbugwouldnotbe
possible without the decoupling of string hints to their respective
parametric byte input positions. In Closure, this proves to be very
successful in finding new bugs.In BCEL, global hints led to the discovery of two bugs that only
Confettiwasabletofind(IssuesB3andB4).OfthebugsthatonlyConfetti and Confetti
𝑡𝑔𝑡found (B5 and B6), Confetti was able
to find them with 100% repeatability across the 20 experimental
runs. This suggests that global hinting is a powerful technique for
revealing bugs with a high rate of repeatability within BCEL.
4.3 RQ3: Efficacy of Hint Strategies
WhileConfettiruns,italsocollectsbasicstatisticsontheinputs
generated:whichstrategieswereusedwhengeneratingeachinput,
and which inputs were saved to the fuzzing population. Recall
thatJQF-Zest,likemanyothergreyboxfuzzers,savesaninputto
its population for later fuzzing if the input reveals new branchcoverage, or if it increases the hit count of a previously coveredbranch by an order of magnitude. Since inputs are derived from
existing inputs, it’s possible that a single input has benefited from
multiple hints, and multiple kinds of hints.
The left side of Table 3 shows the total number of inputs gener-
ated(acrossall20runs),alongwiththesuccessrateforthetargeted
hint strategies (SMT, Char, String), for the global hint strategy, andoverall, for random mutation. Some observations from this portion
ofthetablearethatSMTandCharmutationsarerelativelyeffective,thatis,theyareseveralordersofmagnitudegreaterintheirsuccess.
However, despite this, these strategies are rarely employed com-pared to the other mutation strategies due to SMT solving beingexpensive and/or finding certain paths to be unsatisfiable, or in
thecaseofCharhints,simplybeingencounteredinfewerplaces
thanstringcomparisons.Theothermutationstrategies—String,
Global and Random, generate several orders of magnitude more
inputs, as they leverage the throughput of the underlying greybox
fuzzing framework upon which Confetti is built. String mutation
strategiesareparticularlyeffectiveinGoogleClosure,andGlobal
mutationstrategiesareanorderofmagnitudemoresuccessfulin
Closure than in any other target application.
However, simply considering the success rate of each hint strat-
egy does not adequately capture its overall efficacy. For example, if
coverageisquicklysaturatedduring thefuzzingrun(aswefound
inthecaseofMaven), nomutationstrategywillbesuccessful,since
there is no new coverage to find. Success rates can also be mislead-
ing because they do not capture how frequently a kind of hint isavailable to be tried (again, particularly notable for SMT inputs),
nor how often a hint is inherited by multiple derived inputs.
TherightsideofTable3presentsananalysisofeachoftheinputs
thatweresavedbyConfetti.Thismetriccapturesbothhowoften
a hint is available, and also how often a hint is inherited by a child
input.Notethatsinceasingleinputmighthavemultiplehints(andmultiplekindsofhints),thesumofthenumberofsavedinputswith
each form of hint may be greater than the total number of savedinputs (or fewer, in the case of Rhino, where some saved inputs
hadnohints).Ofthetargetedhintstrategies,wecanseethatwhile
SMT and Char targeted hints had the highest success rates, they
are represented by only a relatively small proportion of the saved
inputs. Since the fuzzer can generate and test inputs extremelyquickly, running up to several thousand inputs per second, it’spossible that inputs that couldhave been generated by the SMT
solver were instead, first generated by chance, perhaps thanks to a
differenthint.Thereisaninterestingexceptiontothisinthecase
445CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 3: Hint information for each new saved (coverage-revealing or hit-count increasing) input, aggregated across 20 runs.
Theleftsideshowsthesuccessrateofeachmutationstrategyincreatinginputsthatrevealnewcoverage.Eachsavedinputmighthave
multiple hints; the right side reports on the number of saved inputs with each kind of hint (including inherited hints).
Total # Inputs
GeneratedSuccess Rate of Mutation Strategy Total # Inputs
SavedWith Targeted Hints With Global
Hints Program SMT Char String Global Random SMT Char String
ant 948,781,594 0.56% 5.32% 0.0099% 0.0011% 0.0013% 12,808 36 354 6,713 8,703
bcel 9,756,905,877 4.92% 7.47% 0.0107% 0.0003% 0.0003% 32,807 796 139 825 31,885
closure 249,762,647 5.61% 4.99% 0.1482% 0.0565% 0.0492% 144,857 828 2,506 43,167 117,601
maven 6,572,328,873 0.85% 3.22% 0.0015% 0.0004% 0.0004% 26,397 155 722 10,689 18,358
rhino 1,838,661,632 1.03% 10.07% 0.0093% 0.0017% 0.0019% 38,119 480 2,112 5,072 24,375
of BCEL, as the number of saved inputs for SMT targeted hints
and String targeted hints are the same magnitude. BCEL is unique
among the applications that we studied in that its input (Java class
files)isaformatthatcontainsbothstrings andbinarydata.SMT-
targetedhintsparticularlyexcelatcoveringnewbranchesthatrely
on specific “magic” bytes, as opposed to strings.
Perhapsthemostinterestingtakeawayfromthesestatisticsisthe
enormousproportionofsavedinputsthatcontainglobalhints.This
isencouragingevidencethatsupportsourhypothesisthatglobal
hints are a useful form of guidance for fuzzers. However, simply
becauseaninputwassavedwithaglobalhintdoesn’tmeanthat
this input needed that hint in order to produce the same coverage
(and be saved) — it is possible that the hint is coincidental to the
coverage, and that another string could have also resulted in the
same coverage. We investigate this idea in greater depth in RQ4.
4.4 RQ4: Analysis of Inputs with Global Hints
RQ1andRQ2showthatusingglobalhintscoversmorebranches
andfindsmorebugs.RQ3showsthekindsofhintsininputsthat
are saved (i.e., are coverage-revealing), showing that most of those
savedinputsincludeglobalhints.However,itishardtoconclude
thattheglobalhintsarenecessary:maybea randomly generated
input could have revealed that same coverage — how do we know
thattheglobalhintwasrelevanttorevealingthiscoverage?With
RQ4,weRQ4examinethisconcerndirectly,studyingthelikelihood
that a random fuzzer (that also benefits from targeted hints) could
generate an input that reveals the same coverage as the input that
CONFETTI generated using global hints.
Foreachinput 𝐼acrossallofCONFETTI’srunsthatrevealednew
coverage andhadglobalhints,wetooktheparentinput 𝑃(thatwas
mutated by CONFETTI into 𝐼) and fuzzed it 1,000 times using both
randomgenerationandtargetedhints,observingthecoverageof
thoseinputs.1,000iterationsisanorderofmagnitudemorefuzzing
iterationsthanZestwouldapplyinasinglecycle,whichwebelieve
providesareasonableupper-boundofthelikelihoodofthefuzzer
withoutglobalhintsgeneratinganinputthatrevealedthatsame
coverage. If the fuzzed input never produces the same coverage,
then we may have some confidence in the hypothesis that, for that
input, global hints were necessary to achieve the same coverage.
Thisallowsustodistinguishbetweenglobalhintsthatareclearly
unnecessaryandthosethatmighthavebeenusefulforrevealing
new behaviors during the fuzzing campaign.
Table4showsthenumberandpercentageofsavedinputsthat
haveglobalhintsthatcouldbereplicatedwithoutthoseglobalhintstrivially(onthefirsttry),eventuallywithinthe1,000runs,andneverwithin the 1,000 runs. On Ant, BCEL, Maven and Rhino, the major-
ity of saved inputs can be replicated without global hints, trivially.
Thisindicatesthat,intheseapplications,formostoftheglobal-hint-
containing inputs that revealed new coverage, the global hint(s)
were definitely not necessary to produce that same coverage. How-
ever,wenotethatthesurvivinginputsinthe“Never"columnare
still roughly comparable to the number of targeted hints shown in
Table 3. This is perhaps evidence that global hints are at leastas
effective ofa strategyas targetedhints inrevealing newcoverage.
Closure is the one exception to this trend, in which over 98%
ofsavedinputscannotbereplicatedwithoutglobalhints.Thisis
likely due to the high rate of implicit flows within Closure itself. A
commonpatternthatwefoundinClosureisthatalloccurrencesofthesameidentifiernameinaninputaremappedtothesameobject
inside of the compiler — losing the precise mappings from eachoccurrence of that identifier in the input. Many of the bugs that
only Confetti was able to find in Closure have similar properties.
Our overall conclusion from this analysis is that Confetti’s novel
combinationofbothglobalandtargetedhintsismoreeffectivethan
using only targeted or only global hints.
4.5 Data Availability
OurartifactcontainsthesourcecodeanddependenciesforCon-
fetti, our scripts to run experiments, our modifications to JQFand JaCoCo, and all data produced by our experiments [
52]. To
encourage re-use, Confetti is released under the BSD 2-clauselicense and our GitHub repository has a continuous integration
workflow to run performance evaluations of pull requests [51].
Table4:Post-mortemanalysisofallsavedinputswithglobal
hints.For each input, we remove all global hints and attempt to
replicate the same coverage by replacing the global hints with
random strings from the fuzzer’s dictionary. We show the number
ofthoseinputswithcoveragereplicabletrivially(onthefirsttry),
eventually (within 1,000 tries), and never within those 1,000 tries.
Saved Inputs Replicated Without Global Hints
Program Trivially Eventually Never
ant 6,664(76.57%) 125(1.44%) 1,914 (21.99%)bcel 16,714(52.42%) 1,440(4.52%) 13,731 (43.06%)closure 839 (0.71%) 668(0.57%) 116,094 (98.72%)maven 14,229(77.51%) 173(0.94%) 3,956 (21.55%)rhino 19,980(81.97%) 454(1.86%) 3,941 (16.17%)
446ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
5 Discussion and Threats to Validity
Reliablyevaluatingfuzzersisdifficult,sincetheprocessisnon-
deterministic. We mitigated this risk by following best practices:
we ran our experiment 20 times, and reported in Table 1 only bugs
found at least once in those 20 runs [ 50]. Confetti might have
different performance on other programs: we used a benchmark
offuzzingtargetsusedbypriorwork[ 66].Ourtoolsanddataare
available for others to replicate and expand on.
While our approach should be language-agnostic, we have only
implementedittargetingprogramsthatrunintheJVM.Webelieve
that the Confetti’s approach could even be used for programs
writteninC,asshownbyrecentsourcecodeinstrumentation-based
approachestoconcolicexecution[ 68].Whilewearehopefulthat
global hinting will be as significant of a hint strategy for other
fuzzers (like AFL or libFuzzer), it is possible that there is hidden
couplingbetweenthesuccessofglobalhintingandthedesignof
the particular fuzzer that we extended (JQF-Zest). Like most other
fuzzers,itwillbedifficulttoapplyConfettitostatefulapplications
in which separate inputs are related. Pairing Confetti with a
checkpoint-rollback system [ 29] could ensure high-fidelity fuzzing.
Itisinterestingtoconsiderwhypriorgreyboxfuzzersthatlever-
aged taint tracking or concolic execution used it only for targeted
guidance. Onehypothesis is that, inother languages, itis difficult
toidentifybytesthatareusedtorepresentstrings,versusbinary
data. However, popular fuzzers AFL and libFuzzer both already
leveragestatically-deriveddictionaries[ 20,54].Hence,perhapsitis
more likely that our approach of global hinting simply hasn’t been
tried yet, due to the concern that the global hint set would growto such a large size to become unmanageable. Our experimental
results seem to support the idea that including more strings in the
global hint set (including those that may not be useful) is more
beneficial than only considering targeted hints. Even if our results
do not generalize to other languages, we note that Confetti is theonlyconcolic-guidedJVM-basedfuzzer,andhenceourfindingsstillhaveasignificantimpactforanysoftwareengineersorresearchers
interested in fuzzing JVM-based code.
We did not carefully explore the configuration space for Con-
fetti, and it is possible that its performance could increase or
decreaseonsomeorallfuzzingtargetsbasedontunableparame-
ters,suchasthefrequencyatwhichhintsareapplied.Webelieve
that this could be interesting future work, but feel that such an
evaluation is outside of the scope of this paper.
Like JQF-Zest, Confetti assumes the availability of generators
to exercise the programs under test. We do not see this as a signifi-
cant limitation, however, due to the popularity of generator-based
testingtoolslikeJQF[ 65],ScalaCheck[ 60]andJUnit-Quickcheck[ 46].
Furthermore, our evaluation used only the pre-existing generators
that were used in the original evaluation of JQF-Zest [ 66]. One
hypothesis for the success of global hinting in our experimentsis that the pre-existing generators were overly restrictive in the
values that they could generate, and global hints provided a means
togeneratemorediverseinputs.Inthislight,Confettimightbe
seen more as an approach to automatically improve the quality of
existing generators, bypassing these restrictions. While we havenot yet been able to design an experiment to confirm this result,we now believe quite strongly that future research in fuzzing JVM-
basedapplicationsshouldfocusoneitherapproachestoevaluate
and improve developers’ existing generators and property tests, or
to design new approaches that do not rely on those generators.
While we have very carefully tested our prototype implemen-
tation of Confetti, it is possible that our evaluation is affected
by bugs that remain in Confetti or any of the other systems that
we used (including JQF-Zest, JaCoCo and Phosphor). We analyzed
thefuzzing resultsof both ConfettiandJQF-Zest quitecarefully,
conducting thousands of short debugging runs, using JaCoCo to
analyzethecoverage(orlackthereof)ofparticularbranches.We
note that in addition to our own implementation bugs that we
foundandpatchedinConfetti,wealsofoundseveralbugsinJQF-
Zest and JaCoCo. For example: we found that JQF-Zest’s coverage
implementation did not correctly distinguish between the multi-
ple cases of a single switch statement, and was generally prone to
frequent collisions, where multiple branches used the same cov-
eragecounter.TheseissuesresultedinJQF-Zestdiscardingmany
coverage-revealinginputs,ratherthansavingthemandmutating
them further. Weimplemented a newbranch coverageinstrumen-
tation and runtime for JQF-Zest that eliminated these collisions,
while also improving the fuzzer’s execution speed by 7-10x. We
used this enhanced coverage in our evaluation of JQF-Zest, and
submittedthischangeasapullrequesttotheJQF-Zestmaintainers,
who are excited to merge it in to their next release [25].
As part of this JQF-Zest debugging, we also found a bug in Ja-
CoCo that could cause branches to appear uncovered if the first
statement enclosed by the branch was a method invocation which
threwanexception.Tracingprecisebranchcoverageinthepres-
enceofexceptionalflowrequiresplacingprobesbeforeandafter
anyinstructionthatmightthrowanexception,whichcandecrease
performance, and hence, this may not be desirable as a general
feature.Afterconsiderablereflection,wedeterminedthatthisbe-
havior was acceptable within the scope of what JaCoCo aims to
detect, and did not submit these changes to the JaCoCo developers.
However,ourbranchofJaCoCowiththepatchforthisissueisin
our artifact [52].
To help support future research and development of Confetti,
JQF-Zest,andrelatedfuzzers,wehavecreatedandsharedaGitHub
Actionsworkflowthatautomaticallyexecutestheentireevaluation
that is described in this paper. We have found this workflow to be
extremelyusefulinourdevelopment.Forexample:whendebugging
amemoryleakinConfetti,wecouldeasilylaunchmanyparal-
lel experiments,collect metrics, andcompare performance across
branches. This workflow was also quite useful in our development
of the faster, collision-free coverage implementation for JQF-Zest,
whichallowedustoeasilycreateandshareperformanceevaluation
results in our pull request [25].
6 Related Work
Inclassicdynamicsymbolicexecution,forinstance,asproposed
byKLEE[ 32]orJPF-SE[ 22],programsareexecutedsymbolically,
by a special-purpose interpreter. Concolic execution, executes a
programconcretely,butusesruntimesupporttocollectpathcon-
straintsastheyrelatetotheinput,thenlaternegatessomeofthese
constraints, solves them using an SMT solver, and executes thenewly generated input [
31,71]. Hybridizing concolic execution
447CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
andrandomtesting/fuzzingwasfirstproposedbyMajumdarand
Sen[57].Thisworkshowedthatoncefuzzingsaturatescodecover-
age, concolic testing can help to discover new program states that
randomtestingdidn’totherwisefind.Morerecentworkhasalso
exploredhybridizingconcolicexecutionwithfuzzing[ 61,62,74],
but Confetti is the first work to use the global hinting strategy to
integrate concolic guidance with fuzzing.
Fuzzing parsers for well structured, human readable, input is
challenging. One line of research aims to guide a fuzzers with a
grammar that describes the input structure [ 41,43,67,77,78]. For
instance,SkyFireusedgrammarstogeneratewellformedinputs
as seeds for AFL [ 77], and Superion integrated the grammar with
AFL [78]. Such input grammars are required to be context-free,
whichlimitstheirapplicability. Toaddressthislimitation,previous
work focused on learning tree models [ 67] or probabilistic context-
sensitivegrammars[ 43]fromacorpusofvalidseeds.Incontrast,
Confetti’s generators are small programs that can generate so-
phisticatedinputs(e.g., anyvalidJavascriptprogram)withoutthe
restrictions of context-free grammars.
Manyothersystemsalsocombinesymbolicorconcolicexecu-
tion with fuzzing [ 33,35,63,72,79,80]. Perhaps most similar to
Confetti is Angora, which, like Confetti, also uses taint track-
ing to collect path constraints [ 33]. Confetti differs from these
prior systems in that it records strings generated by concolic ex-
ecutionas globalhints,allowingthesemagicvaluestobeusedin
elsewhere in the same or other inputs. In our evaluation, we found
that this strategy accounted for most of the coverage-revealing
inputs found by our fuzzer. These global hints are effectively a
dynamicallygenerated fuzzingdictionary—fuzzerslikeAFL[ 81],
libFuzzer[ 55]andJQF-Zest[ 66]allallowdeveloperstospecifya
pre-defineddictionaryofstringsthatmightbeinterestingtouseinfuzzing.Inourevaluation,allfuzzerswereseededwithdictionaries
by JQF-Zest’s original authors, providing a realistic representation
of the dictionaries that a developer would create.
Similarly, Confetti is not the first approach to combine taint
trackingwithfuzzing.LikeConfetti,VUzzercombinestainttrack-
ing with fuzzing in order to target the fuzzer and determine magic
bytes [69]. BuzzFuzz uses taint tracking to identify which input
bytes that flow into targeted branches, and then modifies thosebytes directly [
40]. Similarly, TaintScope uses taint tracking to
identify inputs that flow through checksum-like routines and at-
temptstouseasymbolicrepresentationtoensurethatthefuzzed
inputs still pass those checksums [ 80]. Again, Confetti differs
from all of this prior work in that it also introduces the notion
ofglobal hints,whichrepurposevaluesdetectedfromtainttrack-
ing particular bytes of one input to be used when fuzzing otherinputs. There have also been numerous advancements in fuzzer
seedselectionandscheduling,mostofwhicharecomplementary
to Confetti, and combinations of the approaches could be studied
in future work. For instance, directed greybox fuzzing guides a
traditional greyboxfuzzer bycasting guidanceas anoptimization
problem, and hence does not require whitebox guidance at all [ 30].
Confetti ameliorates the implicit flow problem by loosening
the coupling between values detected by taint tracking or con-
colic execution and the part of a particular input where that magic
value should be applied. Mathis et al.’s lFuzzer addresses tainttaglossthroughimplicitflowsininputtokenizationbyautomati-
callyidentifyingroutinesthatparseinputcharactersintotokens
and propagating taint tags along those conversions [ 58]. Like Con-
fetti, lFuzzer also adds these tokens to a global dictionary to
useinfuzzing.Inourevaluation,wefoundthatConfetti’shints
revealed bugs in program logic aftertokenization and parsing,
for instance, in the optimization phase of the Closure compiler
—outsideofthetokenizationroutinesthatlFuzzerwouldtarget.
Other taint-tracking-based fuzzersattempt toaddress theimplicit
flow problem by inferring control dependencies between branches
and input bytes, by comparing coverage results while mutatinginputs [
34,39]. However, these systems can only detect that re-
lationship afterthe fuzzer succeeds in covering the branch. We
demonstratedthatConfetti’sglobalhintscanbeusedtoreveal
branchesthatthefuzzercouldnototherwise.Futureworkmight
combineConfettiwithheuristicsforselectivelypropagatingtaint
tags through implicit flows [24, 49].
WhilepopularfuzzerslikeAFLtargetx86binaries,thereremains
aneedforfuzzerstargetinghigherlevellanguageslikeJava.Java
PathFinder (JPF) [ 76] is a model checker for Java programs that
usesacustom-builtinterpretertocollectandsolvepathconstraints
in order to explore different program states. JPF has been a sig-nificant resource for the Java testing community, and has been
extended in many ways to support various forms of dynamic sym-
bolic execution [ 22,48,56]. Prior concolic execution tools for Java
like JCute [ 70], CATG [ 73] and Cinger [ 21] used instrumentation-
based approaches to track constraints in a limited subset of classes.
In contrast, Confetti uses a dynamic taint tracking system totrack path constraints, and does so in all classes. To our best of
ourknowledge,Confettiisthefirstsystemthatsupportsconcolic
execution of real-world Java programs like those in our evaluation.
7 Conclusion
Confettiisaconcolic-guidedfuzzerforJVMsoftwarethatgen-
erates inputs covering more branches and revealing more bugs
than the existing state-of-the-art JVM fuzzer. Through our empiri-
calstudies,wehaveidentifiedthatConfetti’snovel globalhinting
mechanism yields a significant improvement in coverage and bug
finding compared to the state-of-the-art approach of targeted hint-
ing. Although we have only explored global hinting in the context
of a single fuzzer (JQF-Zest) and a single language (Java), we be-
lievethat thereis strongevidence thatthisapproach willbe quite
successful inother fuzzing domains, too.Based on our analysisof
thefailuresthatcouldbedetectedonlybyConfetti(andnotby
thevariantwithoutglobalhints),wehaveastrongintuitionthat
thesamekindsofprogrammingpatternsthatrestricttheefficacy
of targeted hints in our experiments occur in other applicationsand languages, as well. We hope that our open-source release ofConfetti and its CI workflow will help to support the growingcommunity of practitioners and researchers engaged in fuzzing
JVM-based software [51, 52].
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Katherine Hough for valuable feedback
on the design, implementation and debugging of Confetti, and
RohanPadhye forassistancemergingour fixesintoJQF.This work
was funded in part by NSF CCF-2100037 and NSF CNS-2100015.
448ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell
References
[1]2019. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3375. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3375.
[2]2019. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3380. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3380.
[3]2019. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3455. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3455.
[4]2020. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3591. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3591.
[5]2020. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3592. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3592.
[6] 2021. Apache Ant. https://ant.apache.org/.
[7]2021. Apache BCEL Issue Tracker Issue Number 357. https://issues.apache.org/
jira/projects/BCEL/issues/BCEL-357.
[8]2021. Apache BCEL Issue Tracker Issue Number 358. https://issues.apache.org/
jira/projects/BCEL/issues/BCEL-358.
[9]2021. Apache BCEL Issue Tracker Issue Number 359. https://issues.apache.org/
jira/projects/BCEL/issues/BCEL-359.
[10]2021. ApacheCommonsByteCodeEngineeringLibrary. http://commons.apache.
org/proper/commons-bcel/.
[11] 2021. Apache Maven. http://maven.apache.org/.[12] 2021. Google Closure. https://developers.google.com/closure/compiler.[13]
2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3857. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3857.
[14]2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3858. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3858.
[15]2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3859. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3859.
[16]2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3860. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3860.
[17]2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3861. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3861.
[18]2021. Google Closure Issue Tracker Issue Number 3862. https://github.com/
google/closure-compiler/issues/3862.
[19]2021. Mozilla Rhino. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Projects/
Rhino.
[20]AFL Contributors. 2021. AFL Dictionaries. https://github.com/mirrorer/afl/blob/
master/dictionaries/README.dictionaries.
[21] Saswat Anand,MayurNaik,MaryJean Harrold,andHongseokYang.2012. Au-
tomatedConcolicTestingofSmartphoneApps (FSE’12).AssociationforCom-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Article 59, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2393596.2393666
[22]SaswatAnand,CorinaS.Păsăreanu,andWillemVisser.2007. JPF-SE:ASymbolic
Execution Extension to Java PathFinder (TACAS’07). Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 134–138.
[23]DanielBaier,DirkBeyer,andKarlheinzFriedberger.2021. JavaSMT3:Interacting
withSMTSolversinJava.In ComputerAidedVerification,AlexandraSilvaand
K. Rustan M. Leino (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 195–208.
[24]TaoBao,YunhuiZheng,ZhiqiangLin,XiangyuZhang,andDongyanXu.2010.
StrictControlDependenceandItsEffectonDynamicInformationFlowAnalyses
(ISSTA’10).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,13–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/1831708.
1831711
[25]JonathanBell.2022. Faster,collision-freecoverageinstrumentation,PullRequest
#171 on rohanpadhye/JQF. https://github.com/rohanpadhye/JQF/pull/171.
[26]Jonathan Bell. 2022. Increase maximum depth of XML files generated for Maven,
PullRequest#165onrohanpadhye/JQF. https://github.com/rohanpadhye/JQF/
pull/165.
[27]JonathanBellandGailKaiser.2014. Phosphor-GitHub. https://github.com/gmu-
swe/phosphor.
[28]Jonathan Bell and Gail Kaiser. 2014. Phosphor: Illuminating Dynamic Data
Flow in Commodity JVMs (OOPSLA ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 83–101.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2660193.2660212
[29]Jonathan Bell and Luís Pina. 2018. CROCHET: Checkpoint and Rollback viaLightweight Heap Traversal on Stock JVMs (ECOOP ’18). Schloss Dagstuhl–
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik.
[30]MarcelBöhme,Van-ThuanPham,Manh-DungNguyen,andAbhikRoychoudhury.2017. DirectedGreyboxFuzzing (CCS’17).ACM,NewYork,NY,USA,2329–2344.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3133956.3134020
[31]EllaBounimova,PatriceGodefroid,andDavidMolnar.2013. BillionsandBillions
of Constraints: Whitebox Fuzz Testing in Production (ICSE ’13). IEEE Press,
122–131.
[32]Cristian Cadar, Daniel Dunbar, and Dawson Engler. 2008. KLEE: Unassisted and
AutomaticGenerationofHigh-coverageTestsforComplexSystemsPrograms
(OSDI’08). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, 209–224. http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1855741.1855756
[33]P.ChenandH.Chen.2018. Angora:EfficientFuzzingbyPrincipledSearch.In
2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 711–725.[34]Peng Chen, Jianzhong Liu, and Hao Chen. 2019. Matryoshka: Fuzzing DeeplyNested Branches (CCS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 499–513. https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3363225
[35]Jaeseung Choi, Joonun Jang, Choongwoo Han, and Sang Kil Cha. 2019. Grey-Box Concolic Testing on Binary Code (ICSE ’19). IEEE Press, 736–747. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00082
[36]LeonardoDeMouraandNikolajBjørner.2008. Z3:AnefficientSMTsolver.In
InternationalconferenceonToolsandAlgorithmsfortheConstructionandAnalysis
of Systems. Springer, 337–340.
[37]Stephen Dolan. 2017. Property fuzzing for OCaml. https://github.com/stedolan/
crowbar.
[38]Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Maier, Heiko Eibfeldt, and Marc Heuse. 2020. AFL++:
Combiningincrementalstepsoffuzzingresearch.In 14thUSENIXWorkshopon
Offensive Technologies (WOOT 20) .
[39]Shuitao Gan, Chao Zhang, Peng Chen, Bodong Zhao, Xiaojun Qin, Dong Wu,and Zuoning Chen. 2020. GREYONE: Data Flow Sensitive Fuzzing. In 29th
USENIXSecuritySymposium(USENIXSecurity20).USENIXAssociation,2577–
2594. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/gan
[40]VijayGanesh,TimLeek,andMartinRinard.2009.Taint-BasedDirectedWhiteboxFuzzing.In Proceedingsofthe31stInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(ICSE ’09). IEEE Computer Society, USA, 474–484. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.
2009.5070546
[41]Patrice Godefroid, Adam Kiezun, and Michael Levin. 2008. Grammar-based
WhiteboxFuzzing. Proceedings ofthe ACM SIGPLANConferenceon Programming
LanguageDesignandImplementation(PLDI) 43,206–215. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1379022.1375607
[42]Patrice Godefroid, Nils Klarlund, and Koushik Sen. 2005. DART: Directed Auto-
matedRandomTesting (PLDI’05).AssociationforComputingMachinery,New
York, NY, USA, 213–223. https://doi.org/10.1145/1065010.1065036
[43]PatriceGodefroid,HilaPeleg,andRishabhSingh.2017. Learn&Fuzz:Machine
Learning for Input Fuzzing (ASE 2017). IEEE Press, 50–59.
[44] Google. 2022. honggfuzz. https://honggfuzz.dev.
[45]IstvanHaller,AsiaSlowinska,MatthiasNeugschwandtner,andHerbertBos.2013.
Dowsing for Overflows: A Guided Fuzzer to Find Buffer Boundary Violations.
In22nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 13). USENIX Association,
Washington, D.C., 49–64. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity13/
technical-sessions/papers/haller
[46]Paul R. Holser. 2010. junit-quickcheck: Property-based testing, JUnit-style. https:
//github.com/pholser/junit-quickcheck.
[47]KatherineHoughandJonathanBell.2021. APracticalApproachforDynamic
TaintTrackingwithControl-FlowRelationships. ACMTrans.Softw.Eng.Methodol.
31, 2, Article 26 (dec 2021), 43 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3485464
[48]Karthick Jayaraman, David Harvison, and Vijay Ganesh. 2009. jFuzz: A Con-
colicWhiteboxFuzzerforJava.In Proceedingsofthe1stNASAFormalMethods
Symposium (NFM).
[49]MinGyungKang,StephenMcCamant,PongsinPoosankam,andDawnXiaodong
Song. 2011. DTA++: Dynamic Taint Analysis with Targeted Control-Flow Propa-
gation. In NDSS.
[50]GeorgeKlees,AndrewRuef,BenjiCooper,ShiyiWei,andMichaelHicks.2018.
EvaluatingFuzzTesting (CCS’18).AssociationforComputingMachinery,New
York, NY, USA, 2123–2138. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243804
[51]James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell. 2019. CON-
FETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers. https://github.com/neu-
se/CONFETTI.
[52] James Kukucka, Luís Pina, Paul Ammann, and Jonathan Bell. 2022. CONFETTI:
Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers. https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.
16563776
[53]Leonidas Lampropoulos, Michael Hicks, and Benjamin C. Pierce. 2019. Coverage
Guided,PropertyBasedTesting. Proc.ACMProgram.Lang. 3,OOPSLA,Article
181 (Oct. 2019), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3360607
[54]libFuzzer Contributors. 2021. libFuzzer Tutorial. https://github.com/google/
fuzzing/blob/master/tutorial/libFuzzerTutorial.md#dictionaries.
[55]LLVM Project. 2019. libFuzzer - a library for coverage-guided fuzz testing. https:
//llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html.
[56]Kasper Luckow, Marko Dimjašević, Dimitra Giannakopoulou, Falk Howar, MalteIsberner,TemesghenKahsai,ZvonimirRakamarić,andVishwanathRaman.2016.
JDart: A Dynamic Symbolic Analysis Framework. In Tools and Algorithms for
theConstructionandAnalysisofSystems.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,442–459.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49674-9_26
[57]RupakMajumdarandKoushikSen.2007. HybridConcolicTesting.In Proceedings
of the 29th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’07). IEEE
Computer Society, USA, 416–426. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2007.41
[58]Björn Mathis, Rahul Gopinath, and Andreas Zeller. 2020. Learning Input Tokens
forEffectiveFuzzing (ISSTA2020).AssociationforComputingMachinery,New
York, NY, USA, 2737. https://doi.org/10.1145/3395363.3397348
[59]Mountainminds GmbH & Co. KG and Contributors. 2021. JaCoCo Java Code
Coverage Library. http://www.eclemma.org/jacoco/.
449CONFETTI: Amplifying Concolic Guidance for Fuzzers ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
[60]Rickard Nilsson. 2019. ScalaCheck: Property-based testing for Scala. https:
//www.scalacheck.org.
[61]Yannic Noller, Rody Kersten, and Corina S. Păsăreanu. 2018. Badger: Complexity
Analysis with Fuzzing and Symbolic Execution (ISSTA 2018). Association for
ComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,USA,322–332. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3213846.3213868
[62]YannicNoller,CorinaS.Păsăreanu,MarcelBöhme,YouchengSun,HoangLam
Nguyen, and Lars Grunske. 2020. HyDiff: Hybrid Differential Software Analysis
(ICSE’20) .AssociationforComputingMachinery,NewYork,NY,USA,1273–1285.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380363
[63]SaahilOgnawala,ThomasHutzelmann,EiriniPsallida,andAlexanderPretschner.
2018. ImprovingFunctionCoveragewithMunch:AHybridFuzzingandDirected
Symbolic Execution Approach (SAC ’18). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1475–1482. https://doi.org/10.1145/3167132.3167289
[64]Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, and Koushik Sen. 2019. JQF + Zest: Coverage-
guided semantic fuzzing for Java. https://github.com/rohanpadhye/JQF.
[65]Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, and Koushik Sen. 2019. Jqf: Coverage-guided
property-based testing in java. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT Interna-
tional Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 398–401.
[66]Rohan Padhye, Caroline Lemieux, Koushik Sen, Mike Papadakis, and YvesLe Traon. 2019. Semantic fuzzing with zest. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 329–340.
[67]JibeshPatraandMichaelPradel.2016. Learningtofuzz:Application-independent
fuzztestingwithprobabilistic,generativemodelsofinputdata. TUDarmstadt,
Department of Computer Science, Tech. Rep. TUD-CS-2016-14664 (2016).
[68]Sebastian Poeplau and Aurélien Francillon. 2020. Symbolic execution with
SymCC: Don’t interpret, compile!. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security20).USENIXAssociation,181–198. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
usenixsecurity20/presentation/poeplau
[69]SanjayRawat,VivekJain,AshishKumar,LucianCojocar,CristianoGiuffrida,and
HerbertBos.2017. VUzzer:Application-awareEvolutionaryFuzzing.In NDSS.
https://www.vusec.net/download/?t=papers/vuzzer_ndss17.pdf
[70]Koushik Sen and Gul Agha. 2006. CUTE and jCUTE: Concolic Unit Testing and
ExplicitPathModel-CheckingTools.In CAV,ThomasBallandRobertB.Jones
(Eds.). 419–423.
[71]Koushik Sen, Darko Marinov, and Gul Agha. 2005. CUTE: A Concolic Unit
Testing Engine for C (ESEC/FSE-13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 263–272. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1081706.1081750[72]NickStephens,JohnGrosen,ChristopherSalls,AndrewDutcher,RuoyuWang,
Jacopo Corbetta, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vi-
gna. 2016. Driller: Augmenting Fuzzing Through Selective Symbolic Exe-cution. In 23rd Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
NDSS2016,SanDiego,California,USA,February21-24,2016.TheInternetSoci-
ety. http://wp.internetsociety.org/ndss/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2017/09/
driller-augmenting-fuzzing-through-selective-symbolic-execution.pdf
[73]H.Tanno,X.Zhang,T.Hoshino,andK.Sen.2015. TesMaandCATG:Automated
Test Generation Tools for Models of Enterprise Applications. In 2015 IEEE/ACM
37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 2. 717–720.
[74]Willem Visser and Jaco Geldenhuys. 2020. COASTAL: Combining Concolicand Fuzzing for Java (Competition Contribution). In Tools and Algorithms for
theConstructionandAnalysisofSystems,ArminBiereandDavidParker(Eds.).
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 373–377.
[75]Willem Visser, Jaco Geldenhuys, and Matthew B. Dwyer. 2012. Green: Reducing,
ReusingandRecyclingConstraintsinProgramAnalysis (FSE’12).Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 58, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2393596.2393665
[76]Willem Visser, Klaus Havelund, Guillaume Brat, Seungjoon Park, and Flavio
Lerda.2003. ModelCheckingPrograms. AutomatedSoftwareEngg. 10,2(April
2003), 203–232. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022920129859
[77]J. Wang, B. Chen, L. Wei, and Y. Liu. 2017. Skyfire: Data-Driven Seed GenerationforFuzzing.In 2017IEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy(SP).579–594. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.23
[78]Junjie Wang, Bihuan Chen, Lei Wei, and Yang Liu. 2019. Superion: Grammar-
Aware Greybox Fuzzing (ICSE ’19). IEEE Press, 724–735. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE.2019.00081
[79]MingzheWang,JieLiang,YuanliangChen,YuJiang,XunJiao,HanLiu,Xibin
Zhao,andJiaguangSun.2018. SAFL:IncreasingandAcceleratingTestingCov-
eragewithSymbolicExecutionandGuidedFuzzing (ICSE’18).Associationfor
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 61–64. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3183440.3183494
[80]Tielei Wang, Tao Wei, Guofei Gu, and Wei Zou. 2011. Checksum-Aware Fuzzing
CombinedwithDynamicTaintAnalysisandSymbolicExecution. ACMTrans.
Inf. Syst. Secur. 14, 2, Article Article 15 (Sept. 2011), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2019599.2019600
[81]Michal Zalewski. 2019. American Fuzzy Lop. http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/
technical_details.txt.
[82]LeiZhao,YueDuan,HengYin,andJifengXuan.2019. SendHardestProblems
MyWay:ProbabilisticPathPrioritizationforHybridFuzzing.In Proceedings2019
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. Internet Society, San Diego,
CA. https://doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2019.23504
450