Combinatorial Testing of RESTful APIs
Huayao Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
hywu@nju.edu.cnLixin Xu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
lxxu@smail.nju.edu.cn
Xintao Niu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
niuxintao@nju.edu.cnChanghai Nie
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
changhainie@nju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
ThispaperpresentsRestCT,asystematicandfullyautomaticap-
proachthatadoptsCombinatorialTesting(CT)totestRESTfulAPIs.
RestCT is systematic in that it covers and tests not only the in-
teractionsofacertainnumberofoperationsinRESTfulAPIs,but
also the interactions of particular input-parameters in every single
operation.Thisisrealisedbyanoveltwo-phasetestcasegeneration
approach,whichfirstgeneratesaconstrainedsequencecovering
array to determine the execution orders of available operations,
and then applies an adaptive strategy to generate and refine sev-
eral constrained covering arrays to concretise input-parameters of
each operation. RestCT is also automatic in that its application
relies on only a given Swagger specification of RESTful APIs. The
creation of CT test models (especially, the inferring of dependency
relationships in both operations and input-parameters), and the
generation and execution of test cases are performed without any
humanintervention.Experimentalresultson11real-worldRESTful
APIs demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of RestCT. In
particular,RestCTcanfindeightnewbugs,whereonlyoneofthemcanbetriggeredbythestate-of-the-arttestingtoolofRESTfulAPIs.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software testing and de-
bugging.
KEYWORDS
RESTful API, combinatorial testing, test case generation
ACM Reference Format:
Huayao Wu, Lixin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie. 2022. Combinatorial
Testing of RESTful APIs. In 44th International Conference on Software Engi-
neering(ICSE’22),May21–29,2022,Pittsburgh,PA,USA. ACM,NewYork,
NY, USA, 12pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510151
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.35101511 INTRODUCTION
Modern web applications are usually built as a composition of het-
erogeneouswebservicesthatinteractwitheachotherthroughweb
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). The REpresentation
State Transfer (REST) represents an architectural style for creating
suchAPIs, andthe APIsconformingto RESTare therebyreferred
toasRESTfulAPIs[ 39].TheuseofRESTfulAPIscanprovideauni-
form and flexible way to access and manipulate web resources via
HTTP method operations, which has become the de factostandard
for the design and implementation of modern web services [4, 5].
Given the increasing prevalence and widespread adoption of
RESTful APIs, it is of great importance for these APIs to be thor-
oughly tested. Currently, web service developers usually use the
Swaggerspecification(moreformally,OpenAPI)todocumentREST-
ful APIs, in which the exact operations that can be performed,and the format of input and output parameters are explicitly de-scribed [
9,42]. The availability of this common specification has
thenmotivatedresearcherstodevelopblack-boxtestingapproaches
of RESTful APIs [ 9,11,14,18,22,27,33,35,41–43]. However, it
remains challenging to design test cases that can effectively ex-ercise service behaviours, as the available operations (which canbeexecuted in manydifferent orders) andtheir associatedinput-
parameters (which can be concretised using many different values)
typically constitute a potentially huge input space that is unlikelyto be exhaustively explored.
Apart from the many possible ways to execute RESTful APIs,
thedependencyrelationships,i.e., constraints,inbothoperations
and input-parameters also contribute to the complexity of test case
generation. A constraint in RESTful APIs might prohibit specific
executionordersofoperations(e.g.,datareceivedintheresponseofoperation
Xisnecessaryforexecutinganotheroperation Y)[9,42];
itmightalsorestrictthewaysinwhichinput-parametersofasingleoperationcanbecombinedandconcretised(e.g.,ifinput-parameter
Xisset,theninput-parameter Ymustbesettoo)[ 30,31].Clearly,
anytestcasegenerationapproachthatcannotproperlyhandlesuchconstraints will lead to invalid HTTP requests, and thereby, reduce
testing effectiveness.
The huge and constrained input space of RESTful APIs espe-
ciallyasksforasmartapproachtogeneratetestcasesthatareas
cost-effectiveaspossible.Currently,despitethatapproacheslikemodel-based [
18,22] and fuzzing [ 8,9] are developed, they are
not in a position that takes “combinations” of operations (and also,
input-parameters) into account. In particular, a primary focus of
existingapproachesisontheconstructionofconstraints-satisfying
4262022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
operation sequences [ 9,42]. This helps to reach and exercise every
“testable” operation, but it is unlikely to effectively trigger failures
due to certain execution orders of operations (and also, certain
combinations of input-parameter values).
Moreover, for each given operation, the values of its input-
parameters should also be carefully determined to produce con-
crete and valid HTTP requests. Existing studies [ 1,9,20,22,42]
havepresentedavarietyofvaluerenderingstrategies(e.g.,using
dynamic objects, static directory, examples, random values, and
knowledgebases),butunfortunately,theyareusuallyunawareof
theconstraintsbetweeninput-parameters.Infact,thesupportof
inter-parameter constraints is important, because such constraints
are frequently observed in real-world RESTful APIs [ 31]. Although
testers can chooseto use formal languages tore-write constraints
to fulfil automatic constraints handling [ 29,30,33], it could be
moredesirabletoautomaticallyinfersuchconstraintsfromnatural
language descriptions of the Swagger specification.
In this study, we make use of Combinatorial Testing (CT) to
devisea systematicandfully automaticapproach,RestCT,to test
RESTful APIs. Our aim is to cover and test the interactions of a
certain number of operations (and also, a certain number of input-
parameters)describedinthespecification,sothattheservicebe-
haviours can be systematically exercised. Meanwhile, we also seekto automatically model the input space of RESTful APIs (including
theinferringofconstraintsinoperationsandinput-parameters),so
that the complete testing process can be fully automated.
Tothisend,RestCTadaptstheconceptsofbothsequenceand
classical covering arrays to implement a novel two-phase test case
generation approach. Specifically, given a Swagger specificationas the input, RestCT first generates a constrained sequence cov-ering array to determine the execution orders of operations, in
which the hierarchical relations of resources, and CRUD semantics
(create, read, update, and delete) are used together to handle the
constraints between operations. Next, for each operation sequence
generated before, RestCT uses an adaptive strategy to generate
several constrained covering arrays to concretise input-parameters
of each operation (i.e., producing concrete HTTP requests). In this
phase,RestCTreliesonseveralheuristicstrategiestodetermine
valuedomainsofinput-parameters,andleveragesnaturallanguage
processingtoimplementapattern-basedapproachforextracting
inter-parameter constraints.
WehaveimplementedRestCTasatestingtool1,andcarriedout
experimenton11real-worldRESTfulAPIsof GitLabandBingMaps
toevaluateitseffectivenessandefficiency.Theexperimentalresults
reveal that RestCT can successfully test, on average, 56% of opera-
tions described in the Swagger specification, while this proportion
is only 3% for the state-of-the-art testing tool, RESTler [ 9]. RestCT
isalsotimeefficient,asitspendsnomorethantenminutesin55%of
cases studied. In addition, we have further investigated the impact
of coverage strengths on the performance of RestCT. We find that
the coverage strengthapplied for generating operation sequences
tendstohave agreatinfluence,and coveragestrengthtwo isthe
most cost-effective choice. Overall, RestCT detects eight new bugs
of the subject APIs, where only one of them can be triggered by
RESTler.
1https://github.com/GIST-NJU/RestCT
Figure 1: An example of Swagger specification.
Summing up, the main contributions of this paper are two-
folds: (1) We proposed RestCT, the first systematic and fully au-tomatic approach that adopts combinatorial testing to test REST-fulAPIs;and(2)Wepresenteddetailedexperimentalresultsthatevaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of RestCT on 11 real-
worldRESTfulAPIs.Thisstudyalsoextendstheknowledgeofboth
RESTfulAPIsandcombinatorialtestingliteratures,asitnotonly
exploresasystematicstrategy(i.e.,CT)totestoperationsandinput-
parameters of RESTful APIs, but also provides an application of
CT in which the test models can be automatically created without
testers’ manual efforts.
Therestofthispaperisorganisedasfollows:Section 2covers
the background on Swagger specification of RESTful APIs andcombinatorialtesting. Section 3describesthedetailedprocess of
RestCT. Section 4presents the experiment for evaluating RestCT.
Section5discusses possible threats to validity. Section 6discusses
related works, and Section 7concludes this paper.
2 BACKGROUND
WebeginthisstudywithbackgroundonspecificationofRESTful
APIs, and basic concept of combinatorial testing.
2.1 Specification of RESTful APIs
Modern web services usually rely on RESTful APIs to expose their
services to the Web. In this way, each service should provide its
resourcesinatextualrepresentation(typically,inJSONformat),and
allowtheseresourcestobeaccessedandmanipulatedbyasetof
CRUD operations (create, read, update, and delete) [41].
In practice, a resource of RESTful APIs is generally identified by
aUniformResourceLocator(URL)overHTTPprotocol.TheCRUDoperationsarethenrealisedbyHTTPmethodoperations(i.e.,
POST,
GET,PUT, and DELETE). Accordingly, a client can send an HTTP
427
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. CombinatorialTesting of RESTful APIs ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 1: A 2-way Constrained Covering Array
#p1p2p3p4
11100
20111
31010
40100
51001
requestto the service, in which a certain URL, an HTTP method,
andcorrespondinginput-parametervaluesshouldbespecified.The
servicewillthenreturna responsewiththerequiredrepresentation
of the resource.
In order to document the necessary information for using REST-
fulAPIs,astructuredspecificationshouldbeprovided.Currently,
the most widely recognised choice is the OpenAPI specification (it
is also known as the Swagger specification for versions older than
v3.0),whichdefinesastandardtospecifytheexactsyntaxofallthe
available requests and expected responses of the APIs [9, 41,42].
Figure1,forexample,givesasnippetoftheSwaggerspecification
(inYAMLformat).Here,the pathsfielddescribesalistofresources
available(i.e.,APIendpoints),eachofwhichcorrespondstoasetofHTTPmethodsthatcanbeperformed(e.g.,the
POSTmethodissup-
portedfortheresource /users).ForeachHTTPmethod,theformat
of input and output parameters are described in the parameters
andresponses fields(e.g.,theinput-parameter password should
take a string value; it is optional, and should be sent in the request
body). In addition, some parameters might be associated with a
schema,whoseformatisdefinedinthe definitions field(e.g.,the
input-parameter username isassociatedwithanobject UserName ,
which consists of two parameters of the string type).
2.2 Combinatorial Testing
Combinatorial Testing (CT) is a popular testing approach to test in-teractionsofparametersthatinfluencethesoftware’sbehaviour[
24,
36].Therationalofthisapproachderivesfromtheobservationthat
many software failures are triggered by combinations of param-etervalues[
25,34].Accordingly,CTemploysa coveringarray as
the test suite to systematically cover such combinations, hoping to
achieveagoodbalancebetweentestsuitesizeandfailurerevelation
effectiveness.
Assumethatthebehaviourofasystemisinfluencedby nparam-
eters, P={p1,p2,..., pn},andeach parameter picantakediscrete
values from a finite set Vi, for 1≤i≤n. Such parameters Pand
their value domains V={V1,V2,..., Vn}constitute a test model of
CT,whichdepicttheinputspaceofthesystem.Then,atestcase
can be constructed by assigning to each parameter a specific value,
and we refer to a combination of tparameter values as a t-way
combination.
Definition 1 (Covering Array). Given a set of parameters and
their associated value domains, a t-way Covering Array (CA) is a set
of test cases, in which every t-way combination is covered at least
once. The value of tindicates the coverage strength of the array.
Inadditiontothecombinationofparametervalues,sometimes
the behaviour of the system can be influenced by a set of nevents,Table 2: A 3-way Constrained Sequence Covering Array
#Test Cases Unique 3-way Sequences Covered
1o1,o4,o3,o2(o1,o4,o3),(o1,o4,o2),(o1,o3,o2)
(o4,o3,o2)
2o3,o1,o4,o2(o3,o1,o4),(o3,o1,o2),(o3,o4,o2)
3o1,o3,o4(o1,o3,o4)
E={o1,o2,..., on}, that can be executed in different orders. In
thiscase,thetestmodelconsistsofasetofevents E,andatestcase
indicatesasequenceof k≤ndistincteventsin E(thatis,thetest
casescanbeofdifferentlengths2).Werefertoapermutationof t
events as a t-way sequence.
Definition 2 (Seqence Covering Array). Given a set of n
events, a t-way Sequence Covering Array (SCA) is a set of event
sequences,inwhichevery t-waysequenceiscoveredatleaseonce(the
tevents of a t-way sequence are not required to be adjacent in an
event sequence).
Theabovementionedcoveringarraysassumethatallpossible
t-waycombinations,or t-waysequences,arefeasibleandshould
thus be covered. However , this might be unrealistic due to the
presence of constraints [ 37,45]. Aconstraint of the system depicts
the dependency relationships between software parameters, or
events. Any test case that violates constraints is considered invalid,
and should thus be excluded from the final test suite.
To cater for the constraints in CT, the definition of a covering
array, or a sequence covering array, should be extended to that
ofaconstrainedcoveringarray,oraconstrainedsequencecovering
array.Specifically,givenasetofconstraints C,eachtestcaseina
constrained CA (or a constrained SCA) should be C-satisfying, and
every C-satisfying t-waycombination (or t-waysequence) should
be covered at least once in the array [ 45]. Accordingly, the CT test
modelshouldspecifynotonlythesetofparametersandtheirvaluedomains(orthesetofevents),butalsotheconstraintsinthesystem.
Forexample,Table 1givesa 2-wayconstrainedCA ofthetest
model with P={p1,p2,p3,p4},V1=V2=V3=V4={0,1}, and
one constraint: if p1=0 then p2=1. In addition, Table 2gives a
3-way constrainedSCA of the testmodel with E={o1,o2,o3,o4},
and two constraints: 1) o4can only be executed after o1; and 2) no
event can be executed after o2.
3 THE RESTCT APPROACH
Given a Swagger specification as the input, an effective black-box
testing approach of RESTful APIs should generate not only appro-
priate execution orders of available operations, but also valid value
assignments of each operation’s input-parameters. RestCT adopts
combinatorialtestingtoaddresstheabovetwoproblems.Itsoverall
workflow involves two main phases: (1) Operation Sequence Gener-
ation,whichseekstomodeltheinputspaceofavailableoperations,
and construct a sequence covering array as a representative setofoperationsequences;and(2) Input-ParameterValueRendering,
which seeks to model the input space of input-parameters of each
2We note that this definition of test case is different from that of traditional sequence
covering array [23], where all test cases should be of the equal length.
428
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
Figure 2: An example of hierarchical relations of resources.
operation,andsamplerepresentativevalueassignmentsviaseveral
covering arrays to produce concrete HTTP requests.
3.1 Operation Sequence Generation
Inthisstudy,werefertoan operation asacombinationofaresource
and an associated HTTP method (e.g., POST /users in Figure 1).
RestCT will first parse the Swagger specification to find the set of
available operations and their dependency relationships, and then
generatea ts-wayconstrainedsequencecoveringarray(i.e.,aset
of operation sequences) to determine the execution orders of these
operations.
3.1.1 Handling Constraints between Operations. Given a Swagger
specification,thesetofalltheavailableoperations, O={o1,o2,...,
om}, can be directly extracted from the pathsfield of the specifica-
tion.Thechallengehereistoappropriatelycaterfortheconstraints
between these operations [9, 42].
RestCT relies on the hierarchical relations of resources and
CRUDsemantics tohandle constraintsinoperation sequencegen-
eration. In RESTful APIs, the hierarchical relations of resources are
specifiedbytheforwardslash“ /”inresources’URLs.Suchrelations
canalsobedepictedusingatreestructure,astheexampleshown
inFigure 2(includingtheHTTPmethodsthatcanbeperformedon
eachresource).Inthiscase, /book/{id} isachildnodeof /book,
because it is a direct sub-resource of /book; by contrast, there is
no direct relation between /bookand/author.
According to the CRUD semantics, a resource (and its all sub-
resources)shouldnotbeaccessedbeforeitscreation,norafterits
deletion.Hence,a t-waysequence, s=(ok1,ok2,..., okt),isconsid-
eredconstraints-satisfying ifforanyresource Xinvolvedin s,noneof
the operations associated with XandX’s sub-resources appears be-
forePOST X,orafter DELETE X .Forexample,accordingtoFigure 2,
(GET /book/{id} ,GET /book ) is a constraints-satisfying 2-way se-
quence,becausenooperationappearsbefore POST,orafter DELETE
operations. The 2-way sequence ( GET /book/{id} ,POST /book )i s
notconstraints-satisfying,becausetheoperationassociatedwith
sub-resources of /book, i.e., GET /book/{id} , appears before POST
/book.Similarly,( DELETE /book/{id} ,GET /book/{id} )alsovio-
lates the constraints.
Onceaconstraints-satisfyingsequencecanbedecided,wecan
then determine whether an operation oican be used to extend
an existing operation sequence of length t,s=(ok1,ok2,..., okt).
In particular, we refer to oias afeasibleoperation for extendingAlgorithm 1 The Generation of Operation Sequences
Input:a set of operations O, and coverage strength ts
Output: a set of operation sequences Sthat satisfies ts-way se-
quence coverage
1:S=∅
2:U=set of constraints-satisfying ts-way sequences of O
3:while U/nequal∅do
4: s=an empty sequence
5:whileTruedo
6: A=candidate_operations( s,O)
7:ifA/nequal∅then
8: select a∈Athat contributes the most to ts-way se-
quence coverage (ties break by random)
9: ifacannot help cover any ts-way sequence then
10: break
11: end if
12: a/prime=predecessor_operations( s,a)
13: append a/primeandatos
14:else
15: break
16:end if
17:end while
18:addsintoS, and remove ts-way sequences that are covered
bysfrom U
19:end while
20:return S
s, if the(t+1)-way sequence constructed by appending oitos,
(ok1,ok2,..., okt,oi), is constraints-satisfying.
Here, an operation is feasible for extending sdoes not necessar-
ily mean that this operation can be directly executed after s. For
example, the operation GET /book/{id} is feasible for extending
s=(POST /author ),butitcannotbedirectlyexecuted,becausethe
resource /bookis yet-to-be created. In this case, the CRUD seman-
tics should be further accounted for, to determine the additional
predecessoroperationsthatarerequiredtobeexecutedearlierthan
executing a feasible operation (e.g., POST /book is the predecessor
operation for executing GET /book/{id} in the above example).
We note that the constraints handling strategy presented above
differs from previous strategies that rely on the common field in
bothresponsesandrequests[ 9,42].Givenaparticularoperationse-
quence,thepreviousstrategies[ 9,42]primarilyfocusonoperations
that can be directly executed (basically, every dynamic object that
isrequiredshouldhavebeenproduced).Bycontrast,ourstrategy
seeks to find operations that have the chance to be executed in
the future (even though the resource required is yet-to-be created),
whichismorehelpfulingeneratingoperationsequencesofhigh
sequence coverage.
3.1.2 Generating Operation Sequences. Withtheaboveconstraints
handling strategy, RestCT will then apply a greedy algorithm, i.e.,
Algorithm 1,togeneratea ts-wayconstrainedsequencecovering
arraytocoverinteractionsofany tsoperations.Thisalgorithmfirst
determinesthesetofconstraints-satisfying ts-waysequences, U,
oftheoperationsundertest(Line2).Then,itgeneratesanopera-
tion sequence that covers the most previously uncovered ts-way
429
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. CombinatorialTesting of RESTful APIs ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
sequencesateachtime,untilall ts-waysequencesin Uarecovered
(Lines 3-19).
To generate each operation sequence, Algorithm 1will start
with an empty sequence s, and then extend siteratively (Lines
5-17).The candidate_operations( s,O)function(Line6)willreturn
a set of candidate operations that are not included in s(i.e, each
operation in Ooccurs at most once in s), and at the same time,
are feasible for extending s(i.e., appending the operation to sdoes
not violate the constraints). At this step, if no candidate operation
can be found (i.e., A=∅), then the iteration terminates (Line 15),
and the sequence sconstructed so far is added into the final set
ofoperationsequences S.Otherwise,thealgorithmwillevaluate
thenumber of ts-waysequences thatcanbepotentially coveredby
appendingevery candidateoperation in Atos,and selectthe best
operation a∈Afor extension (Lines 8-13).
Notethatthebestoperation aselectedheremightnotbeableto
bedirectlyexecutedafter s(asexplainedinSection 3.1.1).So,the
algorithm will additionally account for the CRUD semantics to de-
termine the predecessor operations, a/prime, that should be additionally
executed before executing a(i.e., thepredecessor_operations( s,a)
function in Line 12; a/prime=Noneif no predecessor is required). Fi-
nally, the operations in a/primeandawill be appended to the current
sequence s(Line13),andthealgorithmwillrepeattheaboveprocess
to find the next best operation for extension.
3.2 Input-Parameter Value Rendering
Once the set of operation sequences is produced, RestCT will then
generate concrete HTTP requests to execute operations in these
sequences.Theaimofinput-parametervaluerenderingistocon-
cretise input-parameters with as many valid value assignments
aspossible,andatthesametime,coverinteractionsofparticular
input-parameters.Tothisend,RestCTwilluseanadaptivestrat-
egy to generate constrainedcovering arrays, in which the CTtest
models are dynamically created and modified according to both
specification and test execution results.
3.2.1 Identifying Input-Parameters and Their Value Domains. Given
eachoperation,RestCTwillextractallapplicableinput-parameters
fromthe parameters fieldoftheSwaggerspecification.Suchpa-
rameters can be located in Path,Query,Header,Form, and Body,
andtheycanbeofvarioustypes.Currently,RestCTsupportspa-
rameters of the String,Integer,Number,Boolean,Array, and
Objecttypes.Eachparameterofthenon- Objecttypeexactlyin-
dicates a unique input-parameter of the operation (in this study,
we let the length of the array be one). While for the Object-typed
parameters, their formats are defined as schemas, and each non-
Object-typedparameterinvolvedintheschemaisextractedasa
unique input-parameter (e.g., for the schema UserName in Figure 1,
twoinput-parametersofstringtype, FirstName andLastName ,will
be extracted).
For each input-parameter identified, RestCT will use one of the
followingstrategiestodetermineitsvalue domains(i.e.,thesetof
values that the input-parameter can take):
•DYNAMIC : using resources dynamicallycreated in a prior
operations. It takes run-time information of the service into
account, which is often necessary for constructing valid
HTTP requests[ 20]. Specifically, givenan input-parameter
Figure3:Apatternofconstraintbetweeninput-parameters.
pand a set of previously received responses R, this strategy
will usea heuristic namematching approach [ 42] tosearch
for output-parameters in Rto find those that have the most
similarnameswith p(duetothenaminginconsistencybe-
tween output and input-parameters). Then, the values of
such output-parameters will be used as p’s value domain.
•SPECIFICATION : using values described in the Swagger
specification. It relies on values provided by developers,
which could exploit domain-specific information of the ser-
viceundertest[ 20].Specifically,ifaninput-parameter pis
associated with an enumordefaultfield, the correspond-
ing values are directly used as its value domain. Otherwise,
this strategy will search the example fields of all input-
parameters that have the same name with p, and select at
most two example values (at random) as p’s value domain.
•SUCCESS :usingvaluesthatappearinprevioussuccessful
requests (i.e., returning HTTP status codes of 200 range),
whichreliesonthetestexecutionhistorytore-executean
operation.Here,ifthepreviousvalueisdeterminedbythe
RANDOM strategy, this value will be mutated to increase
the diversity of test inputs (e.g., avoiding to create resources
of the same name).
•RANDOM :generatingthreedifferentvaluesatrandomas
the value domain. This strategy will be used if no value can
be identified by the above strategies.
Here,becauseinput-parametersthatarelocatedin Path(i.e.,the
parameter valueis partof theoperation’s URL)must alwayshave
avalue andthe valueis usuallydependent onprevious responses,
their value domains will be determined by the DYNAMIC strat-
egyonly.Whilefortheotherparameters,RestCTwilltryallthe
above strategies in a decreasing priority, until the value domain
isdetermined.Inaddition,accordingtothe required fieldofthe
specification,eachinput-parameteriseither requiredoroptionalfor
constructing anHTTPrequest. For the optionalinput-parameters,
aNonevalue will be additionally added into its value domain, indi-
cating that no value is assigned to this parameter.
3.2.2 Inferring Constraints. Similar to the constraints between op-
erations, there are also inter-parameter dependencies that might
restrictthewayinwhichspecificinput-parametersofanoperation
canbeconcretised[ 31].Currently,theSwaggerspecificationjust
430
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
Figure 4: The adaptive strategy to generate concrete HTTP requests to execute each single operation.
encourages developers to use natural language to describe con-
straints between input-parameters as a part of the description
field [30,31] (e.g., from Figure 1,i f random_password isFalse,
then password musttakeavalue).Toautomaticallyinfersuchcon-
straintsfromtheinformaldescription,RestCTleverages spaCy3,an
open-source library for natural language processing, to implement
a pattern-based approach.
Figure3, for example, gives a pattern used in RestCT, which
describes the constraint “if PARAM_A is VALUE_B, PARAM_C is
required”.Here,the pattern fieldgivesthematchingrule,whichis
encoded as a combination of tokens (similar to regular expressions,butwithmoreflexibilityinmatchingnaturallanguage).Inthiscase,thefirsttokenmatchestheexactword if,thesecondtokenmatches
an entity (that is, an input-parameter name, or a specific input-parameter value), and the fifth token matches any punctuation
4.
Thismatchingrulewillthenbeusedbythepattern-basedmatching
engineof spaCytoextract constraint-describingsentencesfrom a
giventext.Inaddition,the constraint fieldinFigure 3givesthe
structuredrepresentationoftheconstraintdescribed,where AA,BB,
andCCindicatethefirst,second,andthirdentityinvolvedinthe
sentence, respectively. Once a constraint-describing sentence is ex-
tracted, the corresponding input-parameter names and values (i.e.,
entities) will then be reorganised according to this representation
to produce the final constraint.
In this study, we rely on an exiting catalogue of inter-parameter
dependencies[ 31]tomanuallycreateasetof23patternsforRestCT.
Thiscatalogueclassifiesconstraintsobservedin40real-worldREST-
fulAPIsintoseventypes,andprovidesthemostfrequentlyused
linguisticstructuresthatdescribeconstraintsofeachtype(eachcon-
straint type can be described in different ways). We carefully stud-
ied these structures, and tried to develop patterns correspondingly.
Some structures were excluded because they cannot be directlytransformed into the format required by the tool that we use to
generatecoveringarrays.Finally,23patternswereobtained,which
cover all linguistic structures involving two parameters (about 86%
of all structures available) and six of the seven constraint types.
3https://spacy.io
4Adetailedexplanationoftokenattributescanbefoundat https://spacy.io/usage/rule-
based-matching.3.2.3 Generating Concrete HTTP Requests. With the above ap-
proachestoidentifyinput-parametersandinferconstraints,RestCT
willthenutiliseanadaptivestrategy,asillustratedinFigure 4,to
generateconcreteHTTPrequeststoexecuteoperationsinthegiven
operation sequence one after another.
Suppose that the operation sequence is s=(o1,o2,o3,o4), and
RestCTisgoingtoexecutethethirdoperation o3.AsRestCTtypi-
cally generates multiple HTTP requests for each operation (in this
case, o1ando2),thereisaneedtodeterminewhichexactresponses
ofo1ando2should be used to identify the value domains of o3’s
input-parameters(thatis,the DYNAMIC strategyasexplainedin
Section3.2.1). To this end, RestCT will memorise a set of response
chains,R,inwhicheachresponsechainisalistofpreviouslyre-
ceived successful responses (i.e., the HTTP status code received
isin200range).Forexample,assumingthatthreeHTTPrequests
are generated and successfully executed for o1, leading to three
successful responses r1,1,r1,2, and r1,3(here, ri,jindicates the j-th
responsereceivedwhenexecutingoperation oi).Whilefor o2,all
subsequentHTTPrequestsgeneratedaccordingto r1,1andr1,3fail,
andtwoHTTPrequestsgeneratedafter r1,2success,leadingtotwo
successful responses r2,1andr2,2. At this point, the set of response
chains is R={r1,1,r1,2−r2,1,r1,2−r2,2,r1,3}, and RestCT will
baseonthelongestresponsechain R∈R(tiesbreakbyrandom)
to generate value assignments for executing the next operation.
Assumingthat R=r1,2−r2,1isselectedinthiscase.Thisindicates
that theDYNAMIC strategy will use the values received in r1,2and
r2,1to determine the value domains of o3’s input-parameters.
Onthebasisofthepreviouslyreceivedresponses R,RestCTwill
thenutiliseseveralconstrainedcoveringarraystogenerateconcrete
HTTP requests. The core idea is to ensure the successful execution
of thetarget operationfirst (notethat theinput-parameter values
identified and constraints extracted before might be incorrect), and
thenexerciseasmanyservicebehavioursaspossible.Tothisend,
RestCTwillexploretheinputspacegovernedbyessentialinput-
parametersfirst(Step1inFigure 4),andthengrowthisinputspace
to include all applicable input-parameters (Step 2 in Figure 4).
Specifically, in Step 1, RestCT creates a CT test model, Me, that
contains essential input-parameters only (including all required
parameters,andthoseoptionalparametersthathavedependency
431
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. CombinatorialTesting of RESTful APIs ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
relationships onrequired parameters). It thenuses a popular cover-
ingarraygenerationtool,ACTS5,togeneratea te-wayconstrained
covering array CAeofMe, and construct and send concrete HTTP
requests according to CAe. After this step, a set of successful re-
quests (i.e., returning HTTP status codes of 200 range) is obtained
and recorded (e.g., t2,t3, and t5in Figure 4).
Next,inStep2,RestCTextends MetoanotherCTtestmodel, Ma,
tofurtherincludeallapplicableinput-parameters.Thisextension
is basedon thetest executionresults ofStep 1,where allessential
input-parametersarecombinedasanabstractparameter pa,and
theparticularvalueassignmentsthatappearinprevioussuccessful
requests are used as pa’s value domain (e.g., in Figure 4,pacan
take three values, which correspond to the value assignments in t2,
t3, and t5, respectively). Then, RestCT uses the ACTS tool again
togeneratea ta-wayconstrainedcoveringarray CAaofMa,and
construct and send concrete HTTP requests accordingly.
At this moment, if at least one successful request is produced,
RestCTwillappendeverysuccessfulresponsereceivedin CAeand
CAatothecurrentresponsechain Rtoupdate R(e.g.,giventwo
successfulresponses r3,1andr3,2,R=r1,2−r2,1willbereplacedby
twonew chains r1,2−r2,1−r3,1andr1,2−r2,1−r3,2).Otherwise,
RestCT will analyse the message received in failed responses to
find input-parameters that cannot be appropriately concretised. It
will ignore such input-parameters, and repeat the above processwith a different response chain
R(Step 3 in Figure 4), hoping to
concretise input-parameters of this operation in a different way (in
this study, the maximum number of repetition is set to three).
4 EXPERIMENT
Thissectiondescribestheexperimentperformedtoevaluatetheef-
fectivenessandefficiencyoftheRestCTapproach.Inparticular,we
are interested in answering the following two research questions:
RQ1IsRestCTacost-effectiveapproachwhencomparingwith
the state-of-the-art testing tool of RESTful APIs?
RQ2Howdothecoveragestrengthsappliedimpacttheperfor-
mance of RestCT?
4.1 Subject APIs
In this study, we used 11 real-world RESTful APIs as the exper-imental subjects. Table 3summarises the number of operations
described in each subject’s Swagger specification, as well as the
average number of input-parameters that can be extracted in each
of these operations (using the approach described in Section 3.2).
Specifically, the first six RESTful APIs come from GitLab, a pop-
ular open-source web service for hosting Git repositories. This
serviceisselectedbecauseitcontainscomplexAPIsandhasbeen
usedinpreviousstudies[9].ThesubjectAPIsrepresentgroupsof
operations that are related to branches, commits, issues, groups,
projects,andrepositoriesfunctionalitiesof GitLab,andwefollowed
the previous study [ 9] to test these individual groups separately.
Wenotethat GitLabdoesnotprovideofficialSwaggerspecification
files for its current API version (v4). So we manually created therequired specifications based on its latest online document
6(we
5https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/automated-combinatorial-testing-for-software
6https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/ (accessed in April 2021)Table 3: The Subject APIs Used in the Experiment
APIs # Operations # Input-Parameters
GitLab Branch 9 15.2
Commit 15 11.3
Groups 17 13.2
Issues 27 11.3
Project 31 12.5
Repository 10 11.9
Bing Maps Elevations 4 3.5
Imagery 10 15.1
Locations 5 7.6
Route 14 15.2
TimeZone 45
excluded APIs that are only available in the paid services). In addi-
tion, we relied on an existing Docker image7to deploy GitLab, and
performed testing in a local environment (on a machine with Intel
Xeon CPU 2.3GHz and 128GB memory).
TheremainingfiveRESTfulAPIscomefrom BingMaps,aw eb
mappingservicedevelopedbyMicrosoft.Thisserviceisaddition-
ally selected because it contains a large number of inter-parameter
constraints[ 31].Similarly,sincethereisnoavailableSwaggerspec-
ificationfilesfortheseAPIs,wemanuallycreatedthespecifications
based on the latest online API document8. We note that the online
documentof BingMaps classifiesallavailableoperationsintoseven
APIgroups,andweexcludedtwogroupsthatcontainoneoperation
only. In addition, because Bing Maps is not an open source project,
we relied on its publicly hosted service to perform testing.
We note that the website https://apis.guru offers a repository
of Swagger specifications, and some previous studies [ 42] have
used this website as the resource of subject APIs. In this study, we
did not directly select specifications from that website, becausesuch specifications might be incorrect (in fact, a specification of
GitLabis available there, but many input-parameters are missing),
or inconsistency with the current services’ versions (the remotely
deployedservicesmightbeupdated).Instead,wechosetocreate
specificationsourselvestoensurethecorrectnessandcompleteness
of the inputs taken by the testing approaches studied.
4.2 Experimental Procedures
We chose to compare RestCT with RESTler (v8.0.0)9, a state-of-
the-art black-box fuzzing tool for testing RESTful APIs, for an-swering the first research question. RESTler is originally devel-oped to explore deep service states reachable only through spe-cific operation sequences [
9]. Currently, it is still under active
development and has incorporated several techniques reportedin recent studies [
10,20,21]. We note that there are other stud-
ies[15,18,22,27,33,42]thatproposeblack-boxtestingapproaches
ofRESTfulAPIs.Theseapproacheswerenotincluded,becausethey
cannot automatically handle the dependencies between operations
7https://hub.docker.com/r/gitlab/gitlab-ce (tag of image: 13.10.3-ce.0)
8https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/bingmaps/rest-services/ (accessed in May 2021)
9https://github.com/microsoft/restler-fuzzer
432
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
Table 4: The Numberof Operation Sequences Exercised (Seq ) and TheirAverage Length (Len ), Proportion of1-way and 2-way
Sequences that are Actually Tested ( C1-wayand C2-way), Number of Unique Bugs Detected (Bug ), Number of HTTP Requests
Executed (Total ), and Test Execution Cost (Cost, in minutes) of Different Testing Approaches
RESTler RestCT
Seq Len C1-way C2-wayBug Total Cost Seq Len C1-way C2-wayBug Total Cost
Branch 2 1 0 0 0 580 23.3 6.4 7.1 0.84 0.51 0 859.4 2.3
Commit 2 1 0 0 0 580 23.4 8.4 11.2 0.24 0.03 0 2851.8 4.4
Groups 2 1 0.06 0 1 41 0.5 10.2 11.4 0.12 0.01 1 3667.8 5.2
Issues 3 1 0 0 0 614.4 60.6 16.2 16.3 0.26 0.06 0 13287.4 27
Project 5 1 0 0 0 640 24.3 19 20 0.65 0.38 0 12225.6 25.5
Repository 2 1 0 0 0 580 23.1 6.6 7.5 0.5 0.12 0 1198.8 2.3
Elevations 4 1 0 0 0 13 0.2 3.2 3.4 0.25 0 0 112 1.3
Imagery 13.6 1.5 0.1 0 0 2929.2 60.2 6 7.4 0.9 0.74 4 3005.2 55.2
Locations 3.2 1 0.2 0 0 49 61.4 3.6 4.5 1.0 1.0 0 384.2 3.8
Route 2 1 0 0 0 31.2 60.8 9.2 9.9 0.34 0.06 3 7308.6 63.2
TimeZone 2.2 1 0 0 0 44 1 3 3.5 1.0 0.87 0 1820.8 28.6
Average 3.7 1.05 0.03 0 0.09 554.7 30.8 8.3 9.3 0.56 0.34 0.73 4247.4 19.9
(e.g.,someresourcesshouldbeinitiallycreated),oronlyaproof-of-
concept tool isprovided (e.g., the service authentication, whichis
required for testing both GitLabandBing Maps, is not supported).
Specifically, we configured RESTler with its default settings,
andusedits Fuzzmodetoperformtesting.Inthismode,RESTler
williterativelyextendoperationsequencesconstructedsofarby
a breadth-first-search strategy. While for RestCT, the coverage
strengths ts=2 (for operation sequence), te=3 (for essential
input-parameters), and ta=2 (for all input-parameters) were used.
We set tsandtato two because this is the most popular choice
in CT applications [ 24,36]; we set teto three because a higher
coverage strength could help in testing more interactions of essen-
tial input-parameters. We note that no initialisation process was
performed (e.g., creating resourcesthat are required for executing
someoperations)beforetheexecutionofbothRESTlerandRestCT,
because these two approaches are able to resolve the dependencies
betweenoperations.WeallocatedonehourtimebudgetforeachofthesetwoapproachestotesteachsubjectAPI,andtheirexecutions
wererepeatedfivetimestoaccountfortherandomnessinvolved
in their implementations.
To analyse the testing results, we followed the common practice
ofRESTfulAPIstestingthatusestheHTTPstatuscodereceivedin
responsesastestoracle[4, 9,42].Specifically,anHTTPrequestis
successful ifacodeof200rangeisreceived,andis invalidifthecode
isin400range(accordingly,anHTTPrequestis validifthecode
receivedisnot4xx).Thecodeof500rangerepresentsan Internal
ServerError exposed(i.e.,theservercrashisnothandledgracefully),
which is probably due to a defect in the system. A potential bug is
thus considered to be detected, if such a 5xx code is observed.
WithrespecttotheimpactofcoveragestrengthsusedinRestCT
(i.e., thesecond researchquestion), weperformed a base choice ex-
periment to investigate the relative performance of RestCT under
different coverage strength configurations. Specifically, we used
(ts,te,ta)=(2,3,2)as abaseconfiguration. Then, we changed the
values of each coverage strength separately (range [1,2,3]forts
andta,andrange [2,3,4]forte),whilelettingtheothersremainthe
same,tocreateaseriesofconfigurations.Lastly,foreachsubjectAPI,weranmultipleversionsofRestCTusingtheaboveconfig-
urations,andcomparedtheresultsobtained.Here,duetotheuse
ofhighercoveragestrengths(accordingly,higherexecutiontime
costs), the execution time budget was set to five hours, and the
execution of each configuration was repeated three times.
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Comparison with Existing Tool (RQ 1).Thefirstresearch
question concerns the relative performance of RestCT to the state-
of-the-art testing tool. Table 4gives the results obtained. Here,
an operation is considered actually tested, if at least one HTTP
request of this operation is a valid request, i.e., the status codereceived is either 2xx (the operation is successfully executed) or5xx (a potential bug is detected). Accordingly, a
t-way sequence
of operations is actually tested,i fe v e ry toperation involved in the
sequence is actually tested (note that each single operation exactly
indicates a 1-way sequence).
FromTable 4,wecanseethatRestCTgenerates,onaverage,8.3
operation sequences for each subject API (i.e., the size of 2-wayconstrained sequence covering array), and the average length of
theseoperationsequencesis9.3.Byutilisingseveralconstrained
coveringarraystoexecutetheseoperations,RestCTcanactually
test, on average, 56% of operations described in the specification
(i.e.,1-waysequences),andthisproportionishigherthan80%in
foursubjectAPIs(i.e., Branch,Imagery, Locations,and TimeZone ).
For 2-way sequence coverage, the operation sequences generated
by RestCT (with ts=2) ensure to cover all 2-way sequences of
operations (i.e., all elements in Uin Algorithm 1), where 34% of
them are actually tested. Nevertheless, there remain three subjects
(i.e.,Imagery, Locations, and TimeZone ), where more than 70% of
2-way sequences can be actually tested.
Bycontrast,wecanseethattheexistingtool,RESTler,cannot
performwellinalmostallsubjectAPIsstudied.Itcanonlyexercise
an average number of 3.7 operation sequences, and the average
lengthoftheseoperationsequencesisaboutone(i.e.,eachsequencecontainsoneoperationonly).Theaverageproportionofoperations
433
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. CombinatorialTesting of RESTful APIs ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Figure 5: The impact of tson the performance of RestCT.
(i.e., 1-way sequences) that are actually tested by RESTler is also
low,atonly3%,andthereisno2-waysequencethatcanbeactually
tested.WenotethattheaboveresultsofRESTleraredifferentfrom
thosereportedinthepreviousstudy[ 9].Themainreasonisthat
the previous study [ 9] only tries to test required input-parameters
ofeachoperation,whileinthisstudy,theRESTlertoolwasusedto
find value assignments of all input-parameters (the default setting
ofthistool).ThisindicatesthatRestCTismorelikelytoproduce
valid HTTP requests to test operations that have complex (and
constrained) input-parameters.
TheBugcolumn of Table 4gives the total number of unique
bugsthatarerevealedineachsubjectAPI.Inthisstudy,wereferto
acombinationofanoperationanda5xxerrorcodeasa bug,and
all bugs observed are clustered to determine the set of unique bugs.
Overall, RestCT can find a total number of eight bugs, where only
one of them can be triggered by RESTler. These bugs have been
manually analysed and reproduced to confirm their existence.
As far as the testing efficiency is concerned, from Table 4,w e
can see that RestCT usually takes fewer time costs to generate
and execute much more HTTP requests than RESTler. Specifically,
RestCT can generate and execute an average number of 4247.4
HTTPrequestsacrossallsubjectAPIs,andthisnumberisonly554.7forRESTler.Meanwhile,thetestexecutioncostofRestCTobserved
(on average, 19.9 minutes) is also lower than that of RESTler (30.8
minutes). Especially, in six subject APIs, RestCT takes no more
than ten minutes to perform the test.
Answerto RQ1:Theexistingtestingtool,RESTler,cannoteffec-
tivelytestthesubjectAPIsstudied,asittestsonly3%ofoperationsdescribedinthespecification.Bycontrast,RestCTcanactuallytest
56% of operations on average, and the test execution cost is less
than ten minutes in six out of 11 subjects. Especially, RestCT finds
eight new bugs of the subject APIs, where only one of them can be
triggered by RESTler.
4.3.2 Impact of Coverage Strengths (RQ 2).Thesecondresearch
questionconcernstheimpactofcoveringstrengthsontheperfor-
manceofRestCT.Thisincludesthecoveragestrengthofoperationsequences(
ts),andthecoveragestrengthsofessentialandallinput-
parameters in each operation ( teandta). Figures 5to7give the
increaseratesofspecificmetricswhenchangingthevaluesof ts,te,
andtaseparately(eachboxcontains11valuesobtainedfromthe
11subjectAPIs).Forexample,inFigure 5,theaveragenumberof
operationsequencesgeneratedfor Branchare1.7,6,and25.3when
Figure 6: The impact of teon the performance of RestCT.
Figure 7: The impact of taon the performance of RestCT.
tstakes 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The increase rates of 2-way/1-way
and3-way/2-way are thus 3.5 (6/1.7) and 4.2 (25.3/6).
Regarding the coverage strength of operation sequences ( ts),
from Figure 5, we can see that a larger tstends to lead to more
operation sequences (i.e., larger sequence covering arrays), andaccordingly, higher test execution costs. In particular, for half of
cases, the number of operation sequences and test execution costs
ofts=2areatleast5.3and4timeslargerthanthoseof ts=1;and
these two values will increase to 8.8 and 8 when tsincreases from
2 to 3. Whereas, the increase rate of average length of operationsequencesisrelativelylow,lessthan1.4inallcases.Generally,a
highertestingcostislikelytoresultinalargernumberofoperations
that can be tested. However, the increase rate of the number of
operations tested of 3-way/2-way is around 1.0, which is much
lowerthanthatof 2-way/1-way (onaverage,2.9).Thatis,theuse
ofts=3 will lead to much higher test execution costs than ts=2,
butitwillnottestsubstantiallymoreoperations.So ts=2tendsto
be the most cost-effective choice for the subject APIs.
Regardingthecoveragestrengthofessentialinput-parameters
(te),fromFigure 6,wecanseethattheimpactofdifferentchoices
ofteis not as great as that of ts, as the increase rates observed are
all less than 1.6. In particular, when comparing with te=2, the
use of te=3 will slightly increase the proportion of valid requests
generated per operation by a factor of 1.1 times (median value),
whereasthisincreaseratewilldropto0.9when tefurtherincreases
to 4. Since a similar trend can also be observed for the other three
434
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
metrics, a larger value of tedoes not necessarily result in a higher
testing performance of RestCT.
Lastly,regardingthecoveragestrengthofallinput-parameters
(ta), from Figure 7, we can see that a higher value of tawill lead to
more HTTP requests generated for each operation (i.e., larger cov-
ering arrays), and the median of increase rates observed is around
3.4 for both 2-way/1-way and3-way/2-way. However, increasing ta
from2to3isnotlikelytoresultinasubstantiallyhigherproportion
ofvalidHTTPrequestsperoperation(andalso,moreoperations
tested). Nevertheless, the use of ta=2 can result in, on average,
1.5 times higher proportion of valid HTTP requests per operation,
and test 1.1 times more operations than the use of ta=1.
Answer to RQ2: the coverage strength of operation sequences
(ts)greatlyinfluencestheperformanceofRestCT,and ts=2tends
to be the most cost-effective choice for the subject APIs studied
(theuseof ts=3willtakeabout8timeshighertestexecutioncosts
than ts=2, but it can only test a similar number of operations).
By contrast, the different choices of teandtatend to have little
influence on the number of operations tested, as the increase rates
observed are less than 1.7 in all cases.
5 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Asfarasinternalthreatstovalidityareconcerned,theexperimental
resultsreportedinthispapermightbeinfluencedbytheconcrete
implementation of the RestCT approach. We have carefully in-
spected our codes to avoid potential mistakes, and made them
publiclyaccessiblesothatotherscancheckandextend.Theexperi-mentalresultscanalsobeinfluencedbytheSwaggerspecificationsused. In this study, due to the unavailability of official specification
files of subject APIs, we manually created the required specifi-cations based on their online API documents. Note that RestCT
reliesona pattern-basedapproachtoextractconstraintsbetween
input-parameters. We manually developed 23 patterns based on an
existing catalogue of inter-parameter dependencies [ 31], and we
followedthelinguisticstructuresprovidedinthesamecatalogueto
describeconstraintswhenwritingspecifications(thesetwotasks
wereperformedindependentlybytwoauthorsofthispaper).We
chose such a strategy because we want to reflect thecommon prac-
ticeofwebdevelopersfordocumentingAPIs(whichcouldmake
these specifications more useful for future studies), rather thanusing our own writing styles. Consequently, RestCT (especially,the constraints extraction approach) might exhibit different per-
formance if the specifications arewritten in different ways. Given
the fact that the linguistic structures in the catalogue [ 31] indicate
the most frequently used ones in practice, we believe that RestCT
could work well for specifications of similar writing styles.
In addition, regarding the testing tool for comparison, we chose
to use the default (recommended) configuration to run the RESTler
toolintheexperiment.Weacknowledgethattheperformanceof
RESTlercanbeimprovedbyperformingseveralmanualupdates
(e.g., fixing specifications, adding new dependencies of operations,
providingadditionalfuzzingdictionaries,etc.),assuggestedinits
online document10.
10https://github.com/microsoft/restler-fuzzer/blob/main/docs/user-guide/
ImprovingCoverage.mdAsfarasexternalthreatstovalidityareconcerned,inthisstudy,
theeffectivenessandefficiencyofRestCTareonlyevaluatedon11
RESTfulAPIs.OnereasonthatpreventsRestCTfrombeingeval-
uatedmorebroadlyisthattheserviceundertestusuallyrequires
authentication. Moreover, the publicly hosted services typically
prohibitfrequentrequestsofshortperiodsoftime,andcouldban
theaccountinanunpredictableway,whichtherebyintroducesa
substantial manualeffort to applyand manageAPI keys (actually,
we had to create several accounts to test Bing Maps, but such costs
could be reduced if the testing is performed in a local environ-ment). As a result, RestCT might exhibit different performance
whentestingdifferentAPIs(especially,APIsofdifferentapplication
domains). Nevertheless, both GitLabandBing Maps are real-world,
large-scale,andpopularRESTfulwebservices.Webelievethatthey
are representative subjects for the evaluation of RestCT.
6 RELATED WORK
Inorderto automatically generatetestcasesforRESTfulAPIs,both
white-box [ 3–7,40,46–49] and black-box [ 12,13,16,17,19,26,
28,38,41,44]testingapproacheshavebeendeveloped.Black-box
approaches attract more attentions in the current literature [ 32],
because they require no access to the source code of the system,
which are more applicable for testing complex and remote web
services. Model-based testing [ 12,13,17,19,26,28,38,44]i sa
representative approach in early studies of this research direction.
Althoughtestcasesthatsatisfycertaincoveragecriterioncanbe
automaticallyderivedbasedonspecificmodels(e.g.,aUMLstate
machine[ 38]),testersshouldstillcreatesuchamodelbyhandat
the beginning of testing.
Recently, the increasing popularity of the Swagger specification
(more formally, OpenAPI) offers a more common and standard
way for documenting RESTful APIs [ 39]. Accordingly, a variety of
specification-basedapproaches[ 1,2,9,18,20,22,27,33,42]have
been developed, which seek to automatically generate test cases
basedontheSwaggerspecificationonly.Inthisway,theoperationsthattheserviceundertestprovides,andinput-parametersthateachoperationrequirescanbeeasilyidentified.Whilethechallengelies
inthedeterminationofthemostappropriateexecutionordersof
different operations, as well as the value assignments of input-
parameters of each operation.
Withrespecttotheexecutionordersofoperations,somestud-
ies[18,27,33,43]onlyfocusonthetestingofeachsingleoperation
(accordingly, certain resources should be created before the testing
proceeds).Bycontrast,Viglianisietal.[ 42]proposedtoconstructa
singlesequencethattraverseseveryoperationoncetotestnominal
and exceptional scenarios of RESTful APIs. Their approach firstanalyses the common data field in both responses and requeststo build an operation dependency graph. The next operation tobe executed will then be decided based on the graph and CRUD
semantics.Inaddition,Atlidakisetal.[ 9]proposedtoexploreall
possibleoperationsequencestotestdeepservicestates.Theirap-
proach, RESTler, relies on the producer-consumer relationship (i.e.,
whether a resource received in the response of a prior operation is
necessary as input of a followingoperation) to handle constraints
betweenoperations.Then,asearchstrategy,likebreadth-firstor
random search,is appliedto iteratively extendexisting sequences
435
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. CombinatorialTesting of RESTful APIs ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
with all constraints-satisfying operations. Later, RESTler is further
reused by several studies to develop approaches such as security
testing [10] and differential testing [21] of RESTful APIs.
Regardingthedeterminationofconcreteinput-parametervalues,
theusesofstaticmappingdirectoryandrandomvaluesareprobably
the most straightforward choices in current studies [ 9,20,42]. The
examplevaluesdescribedinthespecification[ 42],andadditional
knowledgebases[ 1]arealsousedtoaccountforthedomain-specific
informationoftheAPIs.Inaddition,whensequencesofoperations
areinvolved,thereisaneedtotaketheruntimeinformation,i.e.,
resources dynamically created in prior operations, into account [ 9,
42]. There are also studies [ 20] that seek to modify the schema
structures of payload to trigger as many error types as possible.
Similar to the constraints between operations, there are also
inter-parameterdependenciesineachsingleoperation.Theempiri-
calstudyofMartin-Lopezetal.[ 31]hasrevealedthatconstraints
between input-parameters are pervasive in real-world RESTful
APIs,butunfortunately,theyarebarelyaddressedintheabovemen-
tionedapproaches[ 9,18,20,22,27,42].Inordertohandlesuchcon-
straints, Martin-Lopez et al. [ 29,30] proposed a formal constraints-
describinglanguagefortheOpenAPIspecification.Theyalsodevel-
oped automatic approaches [ 33] to generate constraints-satisfying
value assignments, as long as the constraints can be formally de-
scribed in the specification. More recently, Mirabella et al. [ 35]
proposed to use deep learning techniques to predict whether a
value assignment is constraints-satisfying or not.
Discussions . The RestCT approach presented in this paper
differsfrompreviousapproachesinthreemainaspects.First,un-
like previous model-based approaches [ 18,22], RestCT is fully
automatic (thatis, the testmodels ofcombinatorial testing areau-
tomatically created). Second, RestCT applies combinatorial testing
to systematically cover and test the interactions of available op-
erations,whiletheprimarygoalofpreviousapproachesiseither
to test every operation once [ 18,27,33,42,43], or to explore all
possibleoperationsequences[ 9].Atlast,RestCTcanautomatically
extract constraints between input-parameters from natural lan-
guage descriptions in the Swagger specification. This differs from
approaches [ 33] that rely on a specific formal language (should be
written by testers) to realise automatic constraints handling.
7 CONCLUSION
ThispaperpresentstheRestCTapproachthatadoptscombinatorial
testing to test RESTful APIs. The primary goal of RestCT is to
systematically and automatically cover and test the interactions of
available operations (and also, input-parameters of each operation)
describedintheSwaggerspecification.Tothisend,RestCTutilises
the concepts of both sequence and classical covering arrays to
generate concrete HTTP requests, during which the constraints in
both operations and input-parameters are automatically extracted
andhandled.TheeffectivenessandefficiencyofRestCT,aswellas
the impact of coverage strengths applied, are evaluated on 11 real-
world RESTful APIs of GitLabandBing Maps. The experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of RestCT against the state-of-
the-art testing tool of RESTful APIs.
In order to aid others to replicate and extend our experiment,
weprovideSwaggerspecificationsofallsubjectAPIsandscriptstoreplicateexperimentat https://github.com/GIST-NJU/RestCT.An
archived artifact is also available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
5909761.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThisworkissupportedinpartbytheNationalKeyResearchandDe-
velopmentProgramofChina(No.2018YFB1003800),NationalNatu-
ral Science Foundation of China (No. 61902174, No. 62072226), and
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20190291).
REFERENCES
[1]Juan C Alonso. 2021. Automated generation of realistic test inputs for web
APIs. InACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
SymposiumontheFoundationsofSoftwareEngineering(ESEC/FSE).1666–1668.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3473491
[2]Fuad Sameh Alshraiedeh and Norliza Katuk. 2020. A URI parsing technique
and algorithmforanti-pattern detectionin RESTfulWeb services. International
JournalofWebInformationSystems 17,1(2020),1–17. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJWIS-08-2020-0052
[3]AndreaArcuri.2017.RESTfulAPIautomatedtestcasegeneration.In International
Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS). 9–20. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/QRS.2017.11
[4]AndreaArcuri.2019.RESTfulAPIautomatedtestcasegenerationwithEvoMaster.
ACMTransactionsonSoftwareEngineeringandMethodology(TOSEM) 28,1(2019),
1–37.https://doi.org/10.1145/3293455
[5]AndreaArcuri.2020. AutomatedblackboxandwhiteboxtestingofRESTfulAPIs
with EvoMaster. IEEE Software (2020).https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2020.3013820
[6]Andrea Arcuri and Juan P Galeotti. 2020. Handling SQL databases in automated
systemtestgeneration. ACMTransactionsonSoftwareEngineeringandMethodol-
ogy (TOSEM) 29, 4 (2020), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3391533
[7]AndreaArcuriandJuanPGaleotti.2021. Enhancingsearch-basedtestingwith
testability transformations for existing APIs. ACM Transactions on Software
EngineeringandMethodology(TOSEM) 31,1(2021),1–34. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3477271
[8]Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Patrice Godefroid, Marina Polishchuk,and Baishakhi Ray. 2020. Pythia: grammar-based fuzzing of REST APIs with
coverage-guided feedbackand learning-based mutations. arXiv preprint (2020).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11498.
[9]Vaggelis Atlidakis, Patrice Godefroid, and Marina Polishchuk. 2019. RESTler:
statefulRESTAPIfuzzing.In InternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering
(ICSE). 748–758. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00083
[10]VaggelisAtlidakis,PatriceGodefroid,andMarinaPolishchuk.2020. Checking
security properties of cloud service REST APIs. In International Conference on
Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST). 387–397. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICST46399.2020.00046
[11]Steven Bucaille, Javier Luis Cánovas Izquierdo, Hamza Ed-Douibi, and Jordi
Cabot.2020. AnOpenAPI-basedtestingframeworktomonitornon-functional
propertiesofRESTAPIs.In InternationalConferenceonWebEngineering .533–537.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50578-3_39
[12]SujitKumarChakrabartiandPrashantKumar.2009. Test-the-REST:AnapproachtotestingRESTfulweb-services.In ComputationWorld:FutureComputing,Service
Computation, Cognitive, Adaptive, Content, Patterns . 302–308. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ComputationWorld.2009.116
[13]Sujit Kumar Chakrabarti and Reswin Rodriquez. 2010. Connectedness testing of
RESTfulweb-services.In Indiasoftwareengineering conference.143–152. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1730874.1730902
[14]Yixiong Chen, Yang Yang, Zhanyao Lei, Mingyuan Xia, and Zhengwei Qi.2021. Bootstrapping automated testing for RESTful web services. In Interna-
tional Conference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering. 46–66.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-71500-7_3
[15]DavideCorradini,AmedeoZampieri,MichelePasqua,andMarianoCeccato.2021.
Empiricalcomparison ofblack-boxtest casegenerationtools forRESTfulAPIs.
InInternationalWorkingConferenceonSourceCodeAnalysisandManipulation
(SCAM). 226–236. https://doi.org/10.1109/SCAM52516.2021.00035
[16]DavideCorradini,AmedeoZampieri,MichelePasqua,andMarianoCeccato.2021.
Restats: A test coverage tool for RESTful APIs. In International Conference on
SoftwareMaintenanceandEvolution(ICSME).594–598. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSME52107.2021.00063
[17]Alexandre L. Correa, Thiago Silva-de-Souza, Eber Assis Schmitz, and Anto-nio Juarez Alencar. 2012. Defining RESTful web services test cases from UML
models.In InternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering&KnowledgeEngi-
neering. 319–323.
436
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Huayao Wu, Linxin Xu, Xintao Niu, and Changhai Nie
[18]HamzaEd-Douibi,JavierLuisCánovasIzquierdo,andJordiCabot.2018. Auto-
matic generation of test cases for REST APIs: a specification-based approach.
InInternational Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference. 181–190.
https://doi.org/10.1109/EDOC.2018.00031
[19]TobiasFertigandPeterBraun.2015. Model-driventestingofRESTfulAPIs.In
International Conference on World Wide Web: Companion. 1497–1502. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2740908.2743045
[20]PatriceGodefroid,Bo-YuanHuang,andMarinaPolishchuk.2020.IntelligentREST
API datafuzzing. In JointMeeting onEuropean Software EngineeringConference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). 725–736.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409719
[21]PatriceGodefroid,DanielLehmann,andMarinaPolishchuk.2020. Differential
regressiontesting forRESTAPIs. In International SymposiumonSoftware Testing
and Analysis (ISSTA). 312–323. https://doi.org/10.1145/3395363.3397374
[22]Stefan Karlsson, Adnan Čaušević, and Daniel Sundmark. 2020. QuickREST:
property-based test generation of OpenAPI-described RESTful APIs. In Interna-
tional Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST). 131–141.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST46399.2020.00023
[23]DRichardKuhn,JamesMHigdon,JamesFLawrence,RaghuNKacker,andYu
Lei. 2012. Combinatorial methods for event sequence testing. In International
ConferenceonSoftwareTesting,VerificationandValidation(ICST).601–609. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICST.2012.147
[24]D.RichardKuhn,RaghuN.Kacker,andYuLei.2013. Introductiontocombinatorial
testing. CRC press.
[25]D.RichardKuhnandDoloresR.Wallace.2004. Softwarefaultinteractionsand
implicationsforsoftwaretesting. IEEETransactionsonSoftwareEngineering(TSE)
30, 6 (2004), 418–421. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2004.24
[26]Pablo Lamela Seijas, Huiqing Li, and Simon Thompson. 2013. Towards property-
based testing of RESTful web services. In ACM SIGPLAN workshop on Erlang.
77–78.https://doi.org/10.1145/2505305.2505317
[27]Nuno Laranjeiro, João Agnelo, and Jorge Bernardino. 2021. A black box toolfor robustness testing of REST services. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 24738–24754.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3056505
[28]Li Li and Wu Chou. 2015. Compatibility modeling and testing of REST API
basedonRESTchart.In InternationalConferenceonWebInformationSystemsand
Technologies. 194–202. https://doi.org/10.5220/0005441301940202
[29]AlbertoMartin-Lopez.2020.Automatedanalysisofinter-parameterdependencies
in web APIs. In International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion
(ICSE-Companion). 140–142. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377812.3382173
[30]AlbertoMartin-Lopez,SergioSegura,CarlosMuller,andAntonioRuiz-Cortés.
2021. Specification andautomated analysisof inter-parameterdependencies in
web APIs. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (2021).https://doi.org/10.
1109/TSC.2021.3050610 to-be-published.
[31]AlbertoMartin-Lopez,SergioSegura,andAntonioRuiz-Cortés.2019. Acatalogueofinter-parameterdependenciesinRESTfulwebAPIs.In InternationalConference
on Service-Oriented Computing (ICSOC). 399–414. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-33702-5_31
[32]AlbertoMartin-Lopez,SergioSegura,andAntonioRuiz-Cortés.2019. Testcover-agecriteriaforRESTfulwebAPIs.In InternationalWorkshoponAutomatingTEST
CaseDesign,Selection,andEvaluation.15–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3340433.
3342822
[33]AlbertoMartin-Lopez,SergioSegura,andAntonioRuiz-Cortés.2020. RESTest:
black-box constraint-based testing of RESTful web APIs. In International Confer-
enceonService-OrientedComputing(ICSOC).459–475. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-65310-1_33
[34]Flávio Medeiros, Christian Kästner, Márcio Ribeiro, Rohit Gheyi, and Sven Apel.
2016. A comparison of 10 sampling algorithms for configurable systems. InInternational Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 643–654. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2884781.2884793
[35]A Giuliano Mirabella, Alberto Martin-Lopez, Sergio Segura, Luis Valencia-Cabrera, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. 2021. Deep learning-based prediction oftest input validity for RESTful APIs. In International Workshop on Deep Learn-
ing for Testing and Testing for Deep Learning. 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1109/
DeepTest52559.2021.00008
[36]Changhai Nie and Hareton Leung. 2011. A survey of combinatorial testing.
Comput. Surveys 43, 2 (2011), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1145/1883612.1883618
[37]Justyna Petke, Myra B Cohen, Mark Harman, and Shin Yoo. 2015. Practical
combinatorialinteractiontesting:Empiricalfindingsonefficiencyandearlyfault
detection. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE) 41, 9 (2015), 901–924.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2015.2421279
[38]PedroVictorPontesPinheiro,AndreTakeshiEndo,andAdenilsoSimao.2013.
Model-basedtestingofRESTfulwebservicesusingUMLprotocolstatemachines.
InBrazilian Workshop on Systematic and Automated Software Testing. 1–10.
[39]Leonard Richardson, Mike Amundsen, Michael Amundsen, and Sam Ruby. 2013.
RESTful web APIs: services for a changing world. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
[40]Omur Sahin and Bahriye Akay. 2021. A discrete dynamic artificial bee colony
with hyper-scout for RESTful web service API test suite generation. Applied SoftComputing 104 (2021), 107246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.107246
[41]Sergio Segura, José A Parejo, Javier Troya, and Antonio Ruiz-Cortés. 2018. Meta-
morphic testing of RESTful web APIs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
44, 11 (2018), 1083–1099. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2764464
[42]Emanuele Viglianisi, Michael Dallago, and Mariano Ceccato. 2020. RestTestGen:
automated black-box testing of RESTful APIs. In International Conference on
Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST). 142–152. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICST46399.2020.00024
[43]DibaVosta.2020. Evaluationofthet-wiseapproachfortestingRESTAPIs. Master’s
thesis. KTH, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
[44]HenryVu,TobiasFertig,andPeterBraun.2018. Automationofintegrationtesting
of RESTful hypermedia systems: A model-driven approach. In International
ConferenceonWebInformationSystemsandTechnologies.404–411. https://doi.
org/10.5220/0006932004040411
[45]HuayaoWu,ChanghaiNie,JustynaPetke,YueJia,andMarkHarman.2021. Com-parativeanalysisofconstrainthandlingtechniquesforconstrainedcombinatorialtesting.IEEE Transactionson Software Engineering (TSE) 47, 11 (2021), 2549–2562.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2955687
[46]Man Zhang and Andrea Arcuri. 2021. Adaptive hypermutation for search-based
systemtestgeneration:AstudyonRESTAPIswithEvoMaster. ACMTransactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 31, 1 (2021), 1–52. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3464940
[47]Man Zhang and Andrea Arcuri. 2021. Enhancing resource-based test case gener-
ation for RESTful APIs with SQL handling. In International Symposium on Search
Based Software Engineering (SSBSE). 103–117. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
88106-1_8
[48]Man Zhang,Bogdan Marculescu, andAndrea Arcuri. 2019. Resource-basedtest
case generation for RESTful web services. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computa-
tion Conference (GECCO). 1426–1434. https://doi.org/10.1145/3321707.3321815
[49]Man Zhang, Bogdan Marculescu, and Andrea Arcuri. 2021. Resource and depen-
dencybasedtestcasegenerationforRESTfulWebservices. EmpiricalSoftware
Engineering 26, 4 (2021), 1–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09937-1
437
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 07:54:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 