MANDO-GURU: Vulnerability Detection for Smart Contract
Source Code by Heterogeneous Graph Embeddings
Hoang H. Nguyen
ehoang@l3s.de
L3S Research Center,
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, GermanyNhat-Minh Nguyen
nmnguyen@smu.edu.sg
Singapore Management University
SingaporeHong-Phuc Doan
phuc.dh194647@sis.hust.edu.vn
Hanoi University of
Science and Technology
Hanoi, Vietnam
Zahra Ahmadi
ahmadi@l3s.de
L3S Research Center,
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, GermanyThanh-Nam Doan
me@tndoan.com
Independent Researcher
Atlanta, Georgia, USALingxiao Jiang
lxjiang@smu.edu.sg
Singapore Management University
Singapore
ABSTRACT
Smart contracts are increasingly used with blockchain systems for
high-value applications. It is highly desired to ensure the quality of
smart contract source code before they are deployed. This paper
proposes a new deep learning-based tool, MANDO￿GURU , that
aims to accurately detect vulnerabilities in smart contracts at both
coarse-grained contract-level and ￿ne-grained line-level. Using a
combination of control-￿ow graphs and call graphs of Solidity code,
we design new heterogeneous graph attention neural networks to
encode more structural and potentially semantic relations among
di￿erent types of nodes and edges of such graphs and use the en-
coded embeddings of the graphs and nodes to detect vulnerabilities.
Our validation of real-world smart contract datasets shows that
MANDO￿GURU can signi￿cantly improve many other vulnerability
detection techniques by up to 24% in terms of the F1-score at the con-
tract level, depending on vulnerability types. It is the ￿rst learning-
based tool for Ethereum smart contracts that identify vulnerabili-
ties at the line level and signi￿cantly improves the traditional code
analysis-based techniques by up to 63.4%. Our tool is publicly avail-
able at https://github.com/MANDO-Project/ge-sc-machine . A test
version is currently deployed at http://mandoguru.com , and a demo
video of our tool is available at http://mandoguru.com/demo-video .
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies !Machine learning approaches ;
•Security and privacy !Software security engineering .
KEYWORDS
heterogeneous graphs, graph neural networks, vulnerability detec-
tion, smart contracts, Ethereum blockchain
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for pro￿t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ￿rst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speci￿c permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9413-0/22/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558927ACM Reference Format:
Hoang H. Nguyen, Nhat-Minh Nguyen, Hong-Phuc Doan, Zahra Ahmadi,
Thanh-Nam Doan, and Lingxiao Jiang. 2022. MANDO-GURU: Vulnerability
Detection for Smart Contract Source Code by Heterogeneous Graph Em-
beddings. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineer-
ing Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’22), November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 5pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3558927
1 INTRODUCTION
Smart contracts are increasingly used for creating and enforcing
high-value business transactions, such as stock purchases, life in-
surance certi￿cates, inventory management, and supply-chain pay-
ment and tracking since their ￿rst introduction in the 1990s by Nick
Szabo [ 34]. Blockchain-based smart contracts provide append-only,
non-repudiation and transparency for their executions, preventing
double-spending or breaches of contracts. On the other hand, like
traditional software programs, smart contracts can still contain
programming bugs or vulnerabilities intentionally or unintention-
ally created by their programmers1. Such bugs or vulnerabilities
may have more serious impact than those in traditional software
as the buggy smart contracts, once deployed to a blockchain, are
irreversible unless self-destructed, and may lead to huge ￿nancial
losses if misused by attackers. Thus, it is highly desirable to have
methods for detecting vulnerabilities in smart contract code during
their early development and before deployment.
In this paper, we propose a new tool with a new method for rep-
resenting smart contracts as specialized graphs and learning their
patterns automatically via graph neural networks on a large scale
to detect vulnerabilities at both the line-level and contract-level
accuracy. In particular, (1) we represent Ethereum smart contract
source code written in Solidity as heterogeneous contract graphs
that combine control-￿ow graphs (CFGs) and call graphs (CGs)
using unique properties of Solidity to capture contract code se-
mantics, and (2) we design specialized metapaths for the graphs
and build heterogeneous attention graph neural networks to learn
multi-level embeddings of the contract code in various levels of
granularity, which are then used together with known instances of
smart contract vulnerabilities to train classi￿ers that can recognize
1In this paper, we use the two terms “bug” and “vulnerability” interchangeably.
1736
ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore HH Nguyen, NM Nguyen, HP Doan, Z Ahmadi, TN Doan, and L Jiang
Figure 1: A sample vulnerability detection page of MANDO￿GURU for an Ethereum smart contract includes summary detection results for
seven bug types (Top), code snippet (Left), and its corresponding heterogeneous contract graph (Right). Line 19 with a yellow background is
the root cause of a Reentrancy bug (Left); the nodes containing the Reentrancy bug are highlighted with red (Right).
vulnerabilities accurately in new smart contract code at both line-
level and contract-level. Our tool is named MANDO￿GURU .W e
have constructed a dataset containing both buggy and clean smart
contracts, and compared MANDO￿GURU with several state-of-the-
art and conventional baselines. Our validation results show that
MANDO￿GURU outperforms the baselines in both contract- and
line-level vulnerability detection with signi￿cant improvements.
2 RELATED WORK
Existing studies have proposed methods to detect vulnerabilities,
either based on traditional program analysis, testing, veri￿cation
techniques (e.g., [ 6,9,10,13,15,26,28,32,33,36,37]), or based on
machine learning and deep learning (e.g., [ 2,4,5,7,8,16,19,22–
25,31,40,41,43–45]). Traditional techniques often rely on some
bug patterns manually de￿ned by experts, leading to low scalability
(as the techniques can be slow in performing extensive checks on
large codebases for complex patterns), low generalizability (as new
patterns need to be manually de￿ned for new types of bugs or
new programming languages for smart contracts). Deep learning
techniques alleviate the problem by automatically learning bug pat-
terns from certain representations of existing code, such as syntax
trees, data-/control-dependency graphs, etc. Still, the learning-based
techniques have treated the trees/graphs as ￿attened sequences or
conventional graphs disjointing each other and has not utilized par-
ticular kinds of control ￿ow and call relations in the contract code
to capture their semantics more comprehensively. Moreover, they
often treat nodes and edges in the tree- and graph-representations
of source code homogeneously , ignoring ￿ne-grained di￿erences in
their types and locations. There may be only one recent study on
using heterogeneous graphs for source code representation [ 42],
but it has not yet been applied to smart contracts. As a result, they
could only search for coarse-grained whole-graph-level smart con-
tract vulnerabilities, which are not accurate enough to locate the
line-level locations of vulnerabilities. Besides, some approaches
also apply graph neural networks for vulnerability detection, suchas Devign [ 44] and IVDETECT [ 21]. However, they are designed
for other languages and unsuitable for Solidity.
3 USAGE
Figure 1illustrates MANDO￿GURU ’s main user interface and core
features. More speci￿cally, after a user submits a Solidity source
￿le using the submit button on the top, MANDO￿GURU scans the
input and summarizes the coarse-grained contract-level detection
results of seven bug types (the red/green buttons near top). A red
button indicates a bug type detected for the contract, and users can
click it to show the ￿ne-grained line-level detection results. On the
left side of the ￿gure, the source code lines containing detected
bugs would be highlighted with a yellow background. The right
side visualizes the corresponding heterogeneous contract graph of
the input contract. If a node is detected having a bug, it is colored
red. When users hover the pointer over a node, the node details
will be shown, and when they click a node, the code lines relevant
to that node will be marked with the red border on the left.
Besides the core features, MANDO￿GURU also provides various
statistics charts for general analyses of the generated heterogeneous
contract graphs. In particular, after getting the detection results,
users could click the “Show Statistics” button to get three extended
charts, including the number of clean and buggy nodes, running
time for coarse-grained and ￿ne-grained detection, and the density
of each bug type. We explain in detail the charts in our demo video.
4 TOOL DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 2illustrates an overview of MANDO￿GURU with three main
components: Backend ,RESTful APIs , and Frontend . Backend plays a
vital role with several core sub-components such as heterogeneous
representation for the generated graphs from input smart contracts,
heterogeneous graph fusion, custom multi-metapaths extraction,
heterogeneous graph neural network, and vulnerability detections
in coarse-grained and ￿ne-grained levels. The technical details of
Backend are described in [ 29]. The Frontend component services
1737MANDO-GURU: Vulnerability Detection for Smart Contract Source Code by Heterogeneous Graph Embeddings ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
Backend
FrontendControl Flow Graph (CFG) GenerationCall Graph (CG) GenerationHeterogeneous CFG-CG FusionNode Feature InitializationMANDO-GURU Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network Labeled Smart Contracts For TrainingNew Smart Contract For Predicting
Coarse-Grained DetectionCustom Multi- Metapaths Extraction
RESTful APIsVisualizationPrediction ResultsStatisticsHeterogeneous RepresentationFine-Grained DetectionFigure 2: Overview of the MANDO￿GURU Tool.
are used to visualize the prediction results and the statistics of
the analyzed smart contracts. RESTful APIs are implemented as a
bridge to communicate between the Backend and the Frontend.
4.1 Backend
4.1.1 Heterogeneous Representation for the Generated Control-Flow
Graphs and Call Graphs. First, to generate the basic control-￿ow
graphs and call graphs, we use Slither [ 13] to process the source
code of each input Ethereum smart contract. Then, we convert the
graphs into heterogeneous forms, called heterogeneous control-￿ow
graphs (HCFGs) andheterogeneous call graphs (HCGs) , to represent
the relations of di￿erent node and edge types and graph topologies.
In particular, a heterogeneous graph is de￿ned as a special graph
consisting of multiple-type of nodes or edges. Unlike some recent
studies [ 24,45] that use only homogeneous graph structures and
lead to loss of valuable information on the code semantics in smart
contracts, one primary contribution of MANDO￿GURU is to focus
on capturing and retaining more structures and semantics of source
code through our heterogeneous representations.
4.1.2 Fusion of Heterogeous Control-Flow Graphs and Heterogeous
Call Graphs. An HCFG can represent each function in a smart
contract, and it contains an entry node corresponding to the entry
point/header of the function. Generally, a smart contract may be
considered as a set of HCFGs since it consists of more than one
function. The invocation relations among the functions in one
contract or between contracts are represented by HCGs.
The structures of the heterogeneous graphs can be shared or
combined to enrich information for graph learning. Hence, we
design a sub-component as a core fusion of HCGs and HCFGs into
a global graph. Accordingly, the HCG edges of a contract act as
bridges to link the discrete HCFGs of the contract functions into
a global fused graph. We call the fusion graphs as heterogeneous
contract graphs . Intuitively, for each and every function node 8in
the call graph ⌧⇠, the function control-￿ow graph ⌧8
⇠ is attached
to the function node 8at the entry node of ⌧8
⇠ , and thus the call
graph ⌧⇠is expanded with control-￿ow graphs to produce the
heterogeneous contract graph ⌧ DB8>= . The heterogeneous graph
generation also allows us to expand the generalizability of theproposed method to other programming languages (e.g., C/C++,
Java) with minor modi￿cations.
4.1.3 Node Feature Initialization. In the default setting of MANDO￿
GURU, the one-hot vectors based on node types are used to initialize
node features. Besides, various state-of-the-art node embedding
techniques can be plugged into MANDO￿GURU to capture the
graph topology and extract the node features. For a more compre-
hensive validation of the e￿ectiveness of various initialization of
node features, we use both embedding methods for homogeneous
graphs (e.g., node2vec [ 18]) and embedding methods for heteroge-
neous graphs (e.g., metapath2vec [ 11]) (see Section 5).
4.1.4 Extraction of Custom Multi-Metapaths. A metapath \is a
path in the form of  1'1  ! 2'2  !...';  ! ;+1, which de￿nes
relations '8(i.e., edge types) from node types  8to 8+1in a hetero-
geneous graph. The length of\is the number of relations in \.W e
extract length-2 metapaths of each node type pair from a heteroge-
neous contract graph, since learning the extracted metapaths can be
an e￿ective way to learn the graph structures [ 11,39]. Similar to the
method used in HAN [ 39], we only focus on metapaths of length 2
to capture the relations between each node type pair and its neigh-
bors and to prevent the explosion of metapaths when the generated
heterogeneous contract graphs contain a dynamic number of node
types (reaching eighteen in some large smart contracts, with ￿ve
di￿erent connections per node type) and pre-de￿ning all possible
metapaths with any length according to all possible node types and
edge types would lead to an exponential explosion of metapaths,
increased data sparsity, and reduced accuracy in training data.
In addition, the heterogeneous contract graphs have mostly tree-
like structures, with very few of their own back-edges induced by
the LOOP-related statements in the smart contracts’ source code,
leading to the lack of metapaths connecting many types of leaf-node
in the graphs. Therefore, we customize the length-2 metapaths by
re￿ecting the relation '8between adjacent nodes, from type  8to
type  8+1and also from  8+1to 8to extract multiple-metapaths.
4.1.5 Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network. Our unique hetero-
geneous graph neural network learns to weigh the importance of
every metapath and node by the node-level attention mechanism
and can handle multiple dynamic custom metapaths without pre-
de￿ning the list of input metapaths. In particular, with the initialized
node features (node embeddings) 4q:
8for each node 8whose type is
q:; then, we construct a corresponding weighted node feature by
a linear transformation. Next, we measure the weight of the C-th
metapath according to the node type q:of(8, 9)pair by leveraging
the self-attention mechanism [ 38] between 8and9.
We concatenate all node embedding "q:
8corresponding to all
node type q:of all node 8to generate a uni￿ed embedding vector
for a node, which is used to train a ￿ne-grained bug classi￿er. The
average of all node embeddings in a graph is used as the graph
embedding, which is used to train a coarse-grained bug classi￿er.
Also, we employ the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with a softmax
activation function for predicting, with the inputs depending on
the type of detection tasks. Moreover, the loss function for the
training process is cross-entropy, and the parameters of our model
are learned through back-propagation.
1738ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore HH Nguyen, NM Nguyen, HP Doan, Z Ahmadi, TN Doan, and L Jiang
4.1.6 Coarse-Grained Detection and Fine-Grained Detection. First,
MANDO￿GURU classi￿es if a contract is clean or contains a type of
vulnerabilities at the contract level by using coarse-grained graph
classi￿cation. Next, MANDO￿GURU identi￿es the actual locations
of the vulnerabilities in the smart contract source code at the line
level using ￿ne-grained node classi￿cation. Providing line-level
locations of vulnerabilities is one of our primary contributions,
while the previous graph learning-based methods (e.g., [ 25,45])
only report vulnerabilities at the contract or function level.
4.2 RESTful APIs and Frontend
MANDO￿GURU is based on the FastAPI framework [ 30] to create
our RESTful APIs as well as validation data to handle the requests
and respond the detection results to the Frontend services. Also, we
use a token for each request to validate and reduce the unexpected
demands to our system via the basic HTTP authentication method.
All RESTful APIs in MANDO￿GURU are implemented and provided
under POST methods. Besides, to ensure the MANDO’s overall
performance, we encode the source code of smart contracts to
Base64 format before processing. Our APIs could be categorized into
two groups depending on the request purposes from the Frontend
component services: (1) Coarse-Grained requests for predicting
whether a source code has any bug; and (2) Fine-Grained requests
for getting the lines and nodes detected as having bugs.
Our Frontend web application is built on ReactJS [ 27] and Apex-
ChartsJS [ 1] libraries. When users submit a source ￿le to our web
app, it scans through the ￿le for a total of seven bug kinds sup-
ported and returns the summary and details of detection results for
each bug type. We also provide some sample smart contracts in a
dropdown menu, which may help the users who lack the Solidity
source ￿les to test MANDO￿GURU more ￿exibly. The detection
results are then visualized by interactive graphs and highlighted
code snippets for users to double-check them easier.
5 TOOL VALIDATION
5.1 Setup
Our evaluaiton uses two tasks: (i) contract-level vulnerabilty detec-
tion; and (ii) line-level vulnerabilty detection. We combine the three
following datasets for our training: (1) Smartbugs Curated [12,
14](2) SolidiFI-Benchmark [17] and (3) Clean Smart Contracts
from Smartbugs Wild [12,14]. In total, we have 2,742 clean con-
tracts and 493 annotated buggy contracts.
We use the following four state-of-the-art methods as the graph-
based neural network comparison methods: node2vec [18];LINE [35];
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [20]; and metapath2vec [11].
We use the output embeddings of the homogeneous and heteroge-
neous graph neural networks in two ways in our validation: First,
directly as the baselines for the coarse-grained graph classi￿cation
tasks and ￿ne-grained node classi￿cation tasks. Second, each of
the graph neural networks is plugged into MANDO￿GURU as the
topological graph neural network; the generated embeddings are
considered the node features besides those based on the node-type
one-hot vectors of the default setting and then fed to MANDO￿
GURU Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network (HGNN). We also
used six detection tools built upon traditional software engineeringtechniques: Manticore [28];Mythril [9];Oyente [26];Securify [37];
Slither [13]; and Smartcheck [36].
We use F1-score and Macro-F1 scores to measure the perfor-
mance of our node/graph classi￿cation for the detection tasks. F1-
score is used to validate the models’ performance when ￿nding
bugs, and is also called Buggy-F1 . Macro-F1 is considered to avoid
biases in the clean and bug labels.
5.2 Empirical Results
Contract-Level Vulnerabilty Detection :2
•MANDO￿GURU outperforms baseline GNNs. E.g., an improve-
ment of 24% in both metrics is achieved by MANDO￿GURU over
the best baselines for detecting the Front Running type of bugs.
•The node feature generatation methods help MANDO￿GURU
outperform all the baselines; and it shows that our architecture
is general for plugging in various kinds of GNNs.
•Being competible with Slither [ 13] makes MANDO￿GURU more
e￿ectively with various versions of Solidity; MANDO￿GURU is
able to ￿nd newly-appeared bugs that graph learning methods
[24,45] struggle to achieve.
Line-Level Vulnerabilty Detection :
•MANDO￿GURU outperforms conventional tools signi￿cantly
with improvement up to 63.4% compared to the best performing
tools for the Reentrancy type of bugs. It can be explained by (i)
more CFG structures retained by our heterogeneous graphs; and
(ii) the ￿exibility of our architecture.
•Our method beats the results of the baseline GNNs where the
macro-F1 scores of our model is up to 20% higher than the ones
of the baseline GNNs.
•Conventional detection tools perform well in detecting arith-
metic bugs because they mostly use symbolic execution and such
technique is suitable for detecting arithmetic bugs [ 3]. However,
MANDO￿GURU performance is still on par with the tools.
6 CONCLUSION
This paper presents a new tool, MANDO￿GURU , for detecting vul-
nerabilities in Ethereum smart contracts written in Solidity. Our
detection technique is new, based on a kind of heterogeneous atten-
tion graph neural networks that learn the embeddings of combined
control-￿ow graphs (CFGs) and call graphs (CGs) of Solidity smart
contract code. We can generate both node-level and graph-level em-
beddings of smart contracts and train classi￿ers to recognize various
types of vulnerabilities in smart contracts at both the ￿ne-grained
line level and the coarse-grained contract level. Our validation on
some datasets curated from the real world shows that MANDO￿
GURU can detect seven types of smart contracts more accurately
on average than several baseline methods and thus is a promising
complement to other vulnerability detection techniques.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant
agreement No. 833635 (project ROXANNE: Real-time network, text,
and speaker analytics for combating organized crime, 2019-2022)
and by the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Re-
search Fund (AcRF) Tier 1 grant.
2Due to the page limit, we only report highlights of our contributions and achievements
here and shift more comprehensive evaluations to the arXiv version [ 29].
1739MANDO-GURU: Vulnerability Detection for Smart Contract Source Code by Heterogeneous Graph Embeddings ESEC/FSE ’22, November 14–18, 2022, Singapore, Singapore
REFERENCES
[1]ApexCharts. 2022. APEXCHARTS.JS: Modern & Interactive Open-source Charts .
https://apexcharts.com/
[2]Nami Ashizawa, Naoto Yanai, Jason Paul Cruz, and Shingo Okamura. 2021.
Eth2Vec: learning contract-wide code representations for vulnerability detec-
tion on ethereum smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM International
Symposium on Blockchain and Secure Critical Infrastructure . 47–59.
[3]Roberto Baldoni, Emilio Coppa, Daniele Cono D’Elia, Camil Demetrescu, and
Irene Finocchi. 2018. A Survey of Symbolic Execution Techniques. ACM Comput.
Surv. 51, 3 (2018).
[4]Sicong Cao, Xiaobing Sun, Lili Bo, Ying Wei, and Bin Li. 2021. BGNN4VD:
Constructing Bidirectional Graph Neural-Network for Vulnerability Detection.
Information and Software Technology 136 (2021), 106576.
[5]Saikat Chakraborty, Rahul Krishna, Yangruibo Ding, and Baishakhi Ray. 2021.
Deep learning based vulnerability detection: Are we there yet. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering (2021).
[6]Checkmarx. 2022. https://checkmarx.com/
[7]Xiao Cheng, Haoyu Wang, Jiayi Hua, Guoai Xu, and Yulei Sui. 2021. DeepWukong:
Statically detecting software vulnerabilities using deep graph neural network.
ACM TOSEM 30, 3 (2021), 1–33.
[8]Xiao Cheng, Haoyu Wang, Jiayi Hua, Miao Zhang, Guoai Xu, Li Yi, and Yulei
Sui. 2019. Static detection of control-￿ow-related vulnerabilities using graph
embedding. In 24th ICECCS . IEEE, 41–50.
[9]ConsenSys. 2019. MythX Tech: Behind the Scenes of SmartContract Security Anal-
ysis. https://blog.mythx.io/features/mythx-tech-behind-the-scenes-of-smart-
contract-analysis/ .https://github.com/ConsenSys/mythril
[10] Coverity. 2022. https://scan.coverity.com/
[11] Yuxiao Dong, Nitesh V Chawla, and Ananthram Swami. 2017. metapath2vec: Scal-
able representation learning for heterogeneous networks. In 23rd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 135–144.
[12] Thomas Durieux, João F Ferreira, Rui Abreu, and Pedro Cruz. 2020. Empiri-
cal review of automated analysis tools on 47,587 ethereum smart contracts. In
ACM/IEEE 42nd ICSE . 530–541.
[13] Josselin Feist, Gustavo Grieco, and Alex Groce. 2019. Slither: a static analysis
framework for smart contracts. In IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop on
Emerging Trends in Software Engineering for Blockchain . 8–15.
[14] João F Ferreira, Pedro Cruz, Thomas Durieux, and Rui Abreu. 2020. SmartBugs: a
framework to analyze solidity smart contracts. In 35th IEEE/ACM ASE . 1349–1352.
[15] Flaw￿nder. 2022. https://dwheeler.com/￿aw￿nder/
[16] Zhipeng Gao, Lingxiao Jiang, Xin Xia, David Lo, and John Grundy. 2020. Checking
smart contracts with structural code embedding. IEEE TSE (2020).
[17] Asem Ghaleb and Karthik Pattabiraman. 2020. How E￿ective Are Smart Contract
Analysis Tools? Evaluating Smart Contract Static Analysis Tools Using Bug
Injection. In 29th ACM SIGSOFT ISSTA .
[18] Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. 2016. node2vec: Scalable feature learning
for networks. In the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining . 855–864.
[19] Sowon Jeon, Gilhee Lee, Hyoungshick Kim, and Simon S Woo. 2021. SmartConDe-
tect: Highly Accurate Smart Contract Code Vulnerability Detection Mechanism
using BERT. In KDD Workshop on Programming Language Processing .
[20] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. 2016. Semi-supervised classi￿cation with graph
convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016).
[21] Yi Li, Shaohua Wang, and Tien N Nguyen. 2021. Vulnerability detection with
￿ne-grained interpretations. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of
Software Engineering . 292–303.
[22] Zhen Li, Deqing Zou, Shouhuai Xu, Zhaoxuan Chen, Yawei Zhu, and Hai Jin.
2021. VulDeeLocator: a deep learning-based ￿ne-grained vulnerability detector.
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2021).
[23] Zhen Li, Deqing Zou, Shouhuai Xu, Hai Jin, Yawei Zhu, and Zhaoxuan Chen. 2021.
SySeVR: A framework for using deep learning to detect software vulnerabilities.IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (2021).
[24] Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Xiang Wang, Lei Zhu, Qinming He, and Shouling
Ji. 2021. Smart Contract Vulnerability Detection: From Pure Neural Network
to Interpretable Graph Feature and Expert Pattern Fusion, In 13th IJCAI. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.09282 .
[25] Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Xiaoyang Wang, Yuan Zhuang, Lin Qiu, and Xun
Wang. 2021. Combining graph neural networks with expert knowledge for smart
contract vulnerability detection. IEEE TKDE (2021).
[26] Loi Luu, Duc-Hiep Chu, Hrishi Olickel, Prateek Saxena, and Aquinas Hobor. 2016.
Making smart contracts smarter. In the ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
communications security (CCS) . 254–269.
[27] Meta Platforms, Inc. 2022. React: A JavaScript library for building user interfaces .
https://reactjs.org/
[28] Mark Mossberg, Felipe Manzano, Eric Hennenfent, Alex Groce, Gustavo Grieco,
Josselin Feist, Trent Brunson, and Artem Dinaburg. 2019. Manticore: A user-
friendly symbolic execution framework for binaries and smart contracts. In 34th
IEEE/ACM ASE . 1186–1189.
[29] Hoang H. Nguyen, Nhat-Minh Nguyen, Chunyao Xie, Zahra Ahmadi, Daniel
Kudendo, Thanh-Nam Doan, and Lingxiao Jiang. 2022. MANDO: Multi-Level
Heterogeneous Graph Embeddings for Fine-Grained Detection of Smart Contract
Vulnerabilities. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2208.13252
[30] Sebastián Ramírez. 2022. FastAPI framework, high performance, easy to learn, fast
to code, ready for production . Berlin, Germany. https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/
[31] Rebecca Russell, Louis Kim, Lei Hamilton, Tomo Lazovich, Jacob Harer, Onur
Ozdemir, Paul Ellingwood, and Marc McConley. 2018. Automated vulnerabil-
ity detection in source code using deep representation learning. In 17th IEEE
international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) . 757–762.
[32] SonarQube. 2022. https://www.sonarqube.org/
[33] SpotBugs. 2022. https://spotbugs.github.io/
[34] Nick Szabo. 1994. Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets.
[35] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei.
2015. Line: Large-scale information network embedding. In WWW .
[36] Sergei Tikhomirov, Ekaterina Voskresenskaya, Ivan Ivanitskiy, Ramil Takhaviev,
Evgeny Marchenko, and Yaroslav Alexandrov. 2018. SmartCheck: Static Analysis
of Ethereum Smart Contracts. In the 1st International Workshop on Emerging
Trends in Software Engineering for Blockchain . 9–16.
[37] Petar Tsankov, Andrei Dan, Dana Drachsler Cohen, Arthur Gervais, Florian
Buenzli, and Martin Vechev. 2018. Securify: Practical Security Analysis of Smart
Contracts. In 25th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security .
[38] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems . 5998–6008.
[39] Xiao Wang, Houye Ji, Chuan Shi, Bai Wang, Yanfang Ye, Peng Cui, and Philip S
Yu. 2019. Heterogeneous graph attention network. In WWW . 2022–2032.
[40] Hongjun Wu, Zhuo Zhang, Shangwen Wang, Yan Lei, Bo Lin, Yihao Qin, Haoyu
Zhang, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2021. Peculiar: Smart Contract Vulnerability Detec-
tion Based on Crucial Data Flow Graph and Pre-training Techniques. In the 32nd
International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering .
[41] Yueming Wu, Deqing Zou, Shihan Dou, Wei Yang, Duo Xu, and Hai Jin. 2022.
VulCNN: An Image-inspired Scalable Vulnerability Detection System. In ICSE .
[42] Kechi Zhang, Wenhan Wang, Huangzhao Zhang, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2022. Learn-
ing to Represent Programs with Heterogeneous Graphs. In ICPC .
[43] Hui Zhao, Peng Su, Yihang Wei, Keke Gai, and Meikang Qiu. 2021. GAN-Enabled
Code Embedding for Reentrant Vulnerabilities Detection. In Knowledge Science,
Engineering and Management . 585–597.
[44] Yaqin Zhou, Shangqing Liu, Jingkai Siow, Xiaoning Du, and Yang Liu. 2019.
Devign: E￿ective vulnerability identi￿cation by learning comprehensive program
semantics via graph neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
systems 32 (2019).
[45] Yuan Zhuang, Zhenguang Liu, Peng Qian, Qi Liu, Xiang Wang, and Qinming He.
2020. Smart Contract Vulnerability Detection using Graph Neural Network. In
IJCAI . 3283–3290.
1740