Evaluating Unit Testing Practices in R Packages
Melina Vidoni
RMIT University, School of Computing Technologies
Melbourne, Australia
melina.vidoni@rmit.edu.au
Abstract —Testing Technical Debt (TTD) occurs due to
shortcuts (non-optimal decisions) taken about testing; it is the test
dimension of technical debt. R is a package-based programming
ecosystem that provides an easy way to install third-party
code, datasets, tests, documentation and examples. This structure
makes it especially vulnerable to TTD because errors present in
a package can transitively affect all packages and scripts that
depend on it. Thus, TTD can effectively become a threat to the
validity of all analysis written in R that rely on potentially faulty
code. This two-part study provides the ﬁrst analysis in this area.
First, 177 systematically-selected, open-source R packages were
mined and analysed to address quality of testing, testing goals,
and identify potential TTD sources. Second, a survey addressed
how R package developers perceive testing and face its challenges
(response rate of 19.4%). Results show that testing in R packages
is of low quality; the most common smells are inadequate and
obscure unit testing, improper asserts, inexperienced testers and
improper test design. Furthermore, skilled R developers still face
challenges such as time constraints, emphasis on development
rather than testing, poor tool documentation and a steep learning
curve.
I. I NTRODUCTION
There are many popular languages, tools and environments
for statistical computing. R (and its accompanying software
environment) is a robust open-source competitor, regardless
of how popularity is measured [1, 2]. R is a package-
based programming ecosystem and provides an easy way
to install third-party code, datasets, tests, documentation and
examples [3]. The main R distribution installs a few base
and recommended packages. Though CRAN (Comprehensive
R Archive Network)1distributes R packages, many are
developed on public version control repositories.
Technical Debt (TD) is a metaphor used to describe the
situation where long-term software code quality is traded for
a quick, short-term solution —it incurs in future costs of
maintenance, adaptability and revisions [4]. It is a metaphor
used to reﬂect the implied cost of additional rework caused
by choosing an easy solution in the present, instead of using a
better approach that would take longer [4]. Testing Technical
Debt (TTD) occurs due to shortcuts (non-optimal decisions)
related to testing, and it is the test dimension of TD [5]. This
is because not performing unit testing or writing incomplete
tests can speed up development, at the cost of lowering the
quality of the software and increasing the number of faults.
Addressing the problem of inadequate software testing
requires deﬁning what this means. Since R is a package-based
programming language, errors present in one can transitively
1https://cran.r-project.org/affect all packages and scripts that depend on it, effectively
becoming a threat to their validity of the analysis written after
that. Therefore, it is essential to thoroughly test R packages
before releasing them. Common R packages for unit testing
R code rely on concepts developed for object-oriented (OO)
programming [6]. However, R is a dynamic language that
combines lazy functional features with minimal OO features
[2]. This combination of paradigms can set it apart from the
current OO-focused knowledge of TTD.
Although this problem has been explored in other domains
[7, 8, 9], it has not been addressed in R so far. Despite the
growth of the R community, there has been (to the author’s
knowledge) no research assessing how developers test these
packages in practice. This study is needed to understand how
unit testing is approached, what are the TTD“hot-spots” in R
packages and what challenges developers face.
This manuscript addresses this need through a two-part
empirical study. The ﬁrst part analysed 177 systematically-
selected, open-source R packages hosted on GitHub; the
dataset included both popular and newer packages, maintained
since 2018. Both automated and manual analysis were
conducted to address quality of testing, to deﬁne what is being
tested, and to identify harmful practices that increase TTD
in R packages. The second part of the study addressed how
R developers perceive unit testing; it involved contacting the
developers of the packages selected before to ask them to
complete an anonymous survey. The survey was sent to 469
developers and received 91 responses (response rate of 19.4%).
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
This is the ﬁrst study conducted to understand unit testing
culture in the R packages development community. It
analyses the extent to which R packages are tested by
mining open, public R packages repositories hosted in
GitHub, by performing a number of analysis.
About testing practices, ﬁndings indicate that few
alternative paths are tested, and test suits seem to be
irrelevant since bugs are often found when tests are
passing. Developers lack in-depth training, expected due
to the absence of technical programming background
[10]. Moreover, there is a striking amount of manual
testing, potentially due to the statistical nature of R
packages, and the lack of statistically centred unit testing.
Regarding existing testing tools, results show that R’s
unit testing tools may be incomplete, lacking assertion
functionalities and automatic data initialisation (e.g.
Junit’s @BeforeAll ).
15232021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00136
It surveys many developers to understand their perspec-
tive in testing tools and challenges faced by them when
testing their R packages.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II explains the
study design, including research questions, data collection,
and survey design. Results are presented in Section III. After
that, Section IV discusses additional interesting points and
describes threats to the validity of the previous sections.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper and mentions future
lines of work.
A. Related Works
Studies related to R programming practices are scarce.
Decan et al. [11] explored how the use of GitHub inﬂuences
the R ecosystem, both for the distribution of R packages
and inter-repository package dependency management, while
Ramirez et al. [12] studied their maintenance to explore change
frequency and variability between versions. Furthermore,
Morandat et al. [2] assessed the success of different R features
to evaluate the fundamental choices behind the language
design.
Furthermore, two-part studies combining of mining software
repositories (MSR) and developer surveys are present in
different areas of software engineering research. For example,
it has been used to assess the popularity of open-source
repositories in GitHub (stars and watches) [13], as well as
to evaluate the reasoning behind forking repositories [14].
In terms of testing, it was used to analyse code coverage
visualisations in closed-source software [15], but also to
determine TTD in Scala projects and identify potential testing
smells [16]. Other authors used it to assess the quality (in
terms of smells) of external contributions in GitHub projects
[17].
Finally, K ˇrikava and Vitek [18] did study unit tests in
R packages, but with different research questions. They
conducted an MSR to inspect R packages source code
and propose a tool that automatically generates unit tests.
They reported the implementation and empirical evaluation
of the proposed tool. However, They did not focus on other
topics related to unit testing cultures, such as technical debt
constraints or the challenges faced by developers.
II. S TUDY DESIGN
This section presents the design of the study. This includes
research questions investigated in this study, how data wascollected through an MSR approach, survey design and
distribution.
The methodology used in this manuscript, and described in
the sections below, was approved by RMIT University Human
Ethics Research Committee (HREC), with project code 2020-
22968-10378.
A. Research Questions
The goal of this study is to understand how R packages are
tested in order to deﬁne best testing practices in this language
as well as to identify Testing TD hot-spots. This leads to the
following research questions (RQs):
RQ1. Are R packages well tested? To understand which
testing tools are used in R packages, identify common
practices, types of testing, and how unit testing tailors
to a multi-paradigm language like R.
RQ2. Which are potential Testing TD weak-spots? To
discover and understand negative practices that affect
unit testing in R packages. The long-term goal of this
is to identify testing smells.
RQ3. How do R package developers perceive unit
testing? Part of the MSR involved collecting public
email addresses of developers, disclosed in packages’
ﬁles, to send them a structured survey. Questions
aimed to understand their subjective perception of
testing and the challenges they face.
B. Mining R Packages (Part I)
The ﬁrst part of the study addresses RQ1 and RQ2 by
mining open-source R package repositories hosted in GitHub.
The following inclusion and exclusion criteria were used to
search repositories:
Inclusion Criteria: The repository must be an R-package,
originally posted during or after 2010; it needs to show
maintenance activity (commits) in the last two years (i.e.
from 2018). It must have a correct package structure, with
all dependencies available.
Exclusion Criteria: The repository is an R data package,
a book, or a personal package. The state of the repository
is archived, deprecated, or outdated. It is an R package
with scripts used in a book. It has incomplete or missing
ﬁles (i.e. description, namespace, or readme ﬁles). It is a
fork from another R package.
The gathering followed a systematic selection process,
summarised in Figure 1. GitHub’s Advanced Search was used
Fig. 1. Repository selection ﬁltering steps.
1524with the keywords language:R package and conﬁgured
to automatically ﬁlter results by the date of the last push,
as well as by words (speciﬁcally, ‘deprecated’, ‘outdated’,
‘archived’, ‘personal’) and fork status. This search produced
about 27000 packages, and 405 were selected for this process,
at the Initial Selection step. This number was a threshold
deﬁned by considering how many repositories were used on
other MSR papers with mostly manual analysis.
For the ﬁrst screening , GitHub metadata was used to exclude
repositories not automatically ﬁltered. The folder structure in
the main branch was used to determine a correct package
structure. Remaining packages were listed in a text ﬁle using
their slugs (i.e. username/repositoryName ). This was
used in the following phase.
The second screening implied automatically downloading
the repositories listed in the entry text ﬁle, running basic
tests to determine suitability according to the remaining
aspects of the inclusion/exclusion criteria. This was done using
covr2andtestthat3. For each package, this required
downloading the source from GitHub, installing it along
with all dependencies, running covr to obtain a basic
analysis of the tests, and devtools::test to run all unit
testings. This automated double-checking ensured an analysis
of the package’s integrity but also their test suitability while
discarding possible errors in the cloning.
After this process, 177 packages remained after all
selection steps . Finally, the repositories were further ﬁltered
according to the results obtained from this analysis; Table I
provides an overview, with the number of packages removed
at each stage.
TABLE I
SECOND SCREENING FILTERING RESULTS ,WITH C O V R AND T E S T H A T
RESULTS .
covr testthat Result Number
Yes Yes Both analysis run correctly 159
Yes Failed covr runs, but there are issues with
testthat18
NA NA Analysis are unable to run. Empty test
structure, or manual test cases45
NA Manual 20
Error Yes Filtered. covr is unable to complete the
analysis. testthat provides mixed
results19
Error Failed 6
Error NA 6
In the above table, ”failed” means all tests included in the
package are unit tests, but most of them failed and produced
an early stop; NAis an R-speciﬁc value that indicates missing
results (i.e. tests are not available). Moreover, covr has a
known bug with dependencies when installing packages in a
speciﬁc directory4. Though in one case packages had a correct
unit testing structure (Table I, row 5), it was not possible to
analyse them. This will be further discussed when addressing
the threats to the validity of this study (see Section IV-D).
Finally, a manual backward check (see Figure 1) was
performed to evaluate repositories discarded by the automated
2https://covr.r-lib.org/
3https://testthat.r-lib.org/
4See: https://github.com/r-lib/covr/issues/248checking. This step ensured that both analyses were running
correctly. No repositories were added after this.
C. Developers Survey (Part II)
For this part of the study, an anonymous online survey was
prepared. Table II details the questions and answers included
in it. This survey was implemented in Qualtrics and used
its services to distribute it. Email-related information was
removed to ensure the anonymity of respondents. Questions
labelled with ”[S]” indicate a single choice answer.
TABLE II
STRUCTURE OF THE SURVEY GENERATED FOR PART II.
Question Possible Answers
How many R packages have you
authored? (Regardless if they are in
CRAN/Bioconductor or not)<2 packages / 2-5 / 5-10 / >10
How many years of experience do
you have as an R programmer?<2 years / 2-5 / 5-10 / 10+ years
How do you test your code? [S] Manually / I don’t test / Using
testing packages
What type of testing do you do? Individual Functions Only / Func-
tions Clusters / Using my package
externally / Other
If you use testing packages, what
are the names of them?Comment box
Why do you use testing packages? Generating or executing test cases
/ Creating and evaluating results /
Analysing code coverage / Finding
bugs / Reporting bugs / Fulﬁlling
CRAN requirements.
Do you face the following chal-
lenges during testing? And if you
do, how serious are they?Likert Scale 1-5
What are the top two things you
look for/need/would like to see?Comment box
Do you use coverage visualisation
tools? [S]Always / Occasionally / Never
Name the coverage visualisation
tools that you use.Comment box
Does coverage visualisation affect
you? [S]It motivates me / It makes me
anxious / It makes me conﬁdent in
my code / I trust my code is bug-
free / Other
Did you ever have all tests passing,
but found a bug in your code? [S]Yes, at least once / Yes, more than
one time / I don’t remember / Never
The question regarding challenges included the following
options: time constraints, compatibility issues, lack of
exposure to tools, emphasis on development rather than
testing, lack of support from their organisation, unclear testing
beneﬁts, poor documentation, lack of experience and steep
learning curve.
Regarding distribution, R packages list information about
their maintainers in the ‘description’ ﬁle, including their email
address; these emails are publicly shown in CRAN (if the
package is available there) as well as in the IDEs (Integrated
Development Environment) upon installation. Because of this,
an R script was used to extract this information and remove
the duplicates, obtaining 469 email addresses. Qualtrics’
distribution tools were used to send the survey to potential
candidates. Overall, 22 emails bounced, and 91 replies were
collected (response rate of 19.4%).
1525It is worth highlighting that this methodology underwent a
thorough ethical review and was approved (see Section II).
To preserve the identity of those contacted for the survey, as
well as avoiding a potential re-identiﬁcation of the responses,
the names of the packages explored in this manuscript (see
Section II-B) are not shared. As a result, the datasets used are
not made public.
III. R ESULTS
This section reports the result of analysing the testing
and coverage of 177 systematically-selected, open-source R
packages, as well as the 91 survey responses. Results are
presented by RQ to be addressed.
It is worth noticing that during the ﬁltering phase, several
repositories were excluded due to testing quality (see Table I).
First, 20 repositories were excluded because they had manual
testing only. This implied having correct package structure
and testing folders (using testthat folder hierarchy), but
without including asserts in test methods. Thus, the “tests”
were manual, and packages were incapable of running an
automated coverage report. Second, 51 repositories (45+6) had
testthat folders, with a main testthat.R ﬁle, but did
not include any tests.
As a result, 71 R packages were ﬁltered because of low-
quality testing by not using automated unit testing frameworks,
or having incomplete folders that disabled automated checks.
Though the following analysis was completed with the 177
repositories that did have automated unit testing, the reason to
ﬁlter these 71 packages is indicative of low testing quality
(RQ1) and two crucial testing smells (RQ2): lack of unit
testing, and manual testing.
A. Testing Quality and Smells (Part I - RQ1, RQ2)
The following subsections discuss all the analysis conducted
over the packages, to answer RQ1 and RQ2. The ﬁndings
and implications relevant to R packages are later summarised
on Sections IV-A and IV-B.
1) Testing Coverage: Code coverage analysis reveals the
areas not exercised by a set of test cases [15]. There is no
proven direct relation that a complete test coverage guarantees
a defect-free code [19]. Furthermore, focusing only on test
coverage instead of logic being tested is also a source of
TTD [5]. Nonetheless, coverage remains a useful tool when
analysing testing quality.
This ﬁrst analysis used the total coverage calculation given
bycovr , and additionally classiﬁed repositories by discipline
and type. This was done by reading their ”readme.md” and
description ﬁles. The types identify what tools or algorithms
are provided by the package.
Figure 2 summarises the averages. The mean total coverage
is 48.3%, with the largest distribution of packages having
values between 14% and 80%. Overall, the coverage of
bioinformatics packages varies dramatically by type, and
software-oriented packages (which are just tools or data
parsing) are below the mean. This can potentially indicate
Fig. 2. Average coverage in selected repositories by discipline and type.
that few methods are thoroughly tested.
2) Relevancy vs Tested Lines: Selected packages included
886738 lines of code (LOC), of which about 40% were
relevant (i.e. R code, without comments, empty lines, or
similar). covr was used to evaluate the proportion of relevant
lines that were tested (see Table III). Overall, only 43% of
relevant lines are tested.
To explain these results, two in-depth analysis paths were
followed. Their goal was to understand a) what is written in the
untested relevant lines, and b) what proportion of those lines
belongs to non-exported methods; the latter can be thought as
the R-equivalent of OO’s private methods. This is discussed
in the following subsections.
TABLE III
TESTED AND UNTESTED RELEVANT LINES IN SELECTED REPOSITORIES .
Irrelevant Lines Relevant Lines
Tested Lines 154543
Untested Lines 204652
Total 527540 359198
3) Untested Lines Analysis: A sub-study was designed to
analyse what is written in the untested relevant LOCs, and if
those lines belonged to exported or non-exported methods.
R’s non-exported functions are equivalent to OO’s private
functions, as they can only be used internally by the package.
Not testing private functions is a conﬂicting topic discussed
among practitioners: it often implies a violation of the single
responsibility principle, requiring the use of techniques such
as reﬂection [5]. In this line of thought, private methods are
not testing “directly” but “indirectly” through the methods that
call them —it is not that ‘they are not tested’, rather than ‘they
are tested indirectly’. The analysis of this manuscript adopts
this position, recommending an indirect test of private/non-
exported methods or functions.
There are two ways for exporting methods in R: i) using
1526roxygen2 @export annotation5, or ii) labelling as not-
exported all functions whose name starts with a given syntax
pattern. Though the former is widely accepted and writes
a list of exported functions in the package’s “namespace”
ﬁle, the latter is also common. A custom R script mined
the “namespace” ﬁle of all packages to obtain the names
of exported functions, covering option (i). To account for
functions exported with (ii), the list was revisited in a second
step, automatically adding functions exported by name pattern.
This sub-study required classifying LOCs in categories
according to their goal: returns (stops, breaks and similar
lines that stop a behaviour and go back in the callstack),
alternatives (optional, alternatives or switch blocks), logs
(lines that printed information, such as warnings, errors, logs),
loops (R’s one-liner loops such as lapply ,do.call and
similar), wrangling (lines that allow reorganising data), and
online operations (such as getting API tokens, and similar).
For the 177 repositories, the dataset of untested relevant
lines consisted of 558588 cases. It was not possible to analyse
this automatically since there was no pre-classiﬁed data, and
manually sorting the whole dataset was infeasible due to time
constraints. For this reason, a representative sample of untested
relevant LOCs (URLOC) was manually classiﬁed.
A conservative sample size calculation was performed, by
selecting from 5 categories, with a margin of error of 3 percent
at 95% conﬁdence using the approach of Thompson [20].
Based on this calculation, a random subset of 1416 URLOCs
were sampled from the 558588 and then manually classiﬁed
by looking at the source code in the speciﬁc line. Hence, the
results generated from this sub-sampling are considered, at
least to some extent, generalisable.
Both datasets (manual classiﬁcation in types, and list
of exported functions by package) were crossed, to obtain
5roxygen2 is a package that provides R with functionalities similar to
those of Javadoc, mixed with behaviour from Java annotations
Fig. 3. Tested and untested relevant lines in selected repositories.the proportion of exported and non-exported URLOCs by
type (Figure 3). Overall, 55.3% of URLOCs belong to
non-exported functions. The most representative group are
speciﬁc alternatives (32.6%); this is quite negative for TTD,
as it highlights a smell since not all paths are appropriately
tested. Other relevant groups are variable preparation and
wrangling ; these represent an essential operation for data
science, as organising and cleaning data is a critical activity
[21]. Such a high number of URLOCs in these groups points
to another TTD smell, lowering the testing quality.
4) Informative Asserts: Assertions are critical elements for
unit testing, as they evaluate whether a predicate is true
or false; it compares an expected result to the actual value
obtained by the method under testing [15]. An assert ”passes”
when expected and actual are equal. Though not-passing
asserts symbolise bugs, the opposite does not guarantee a
defect-free system [22]. Asserts are positioned inside of test
methods .
Furthermore, most unit testing tools offer the ability to
print a custom message in assertions, test methods, or both.
Confusing, ill-worded messages are a source of TTD and
identiﬁed as a testing smell [5].
R’s most common unit testing package, testthat locates
messages in the test method signature. An R script pre-
classiﬁed the signatures, determining that 98% of them had
a written text message, while less than 0.5% of test methods
stored the messages in a variable. Regarding the former,
another script counted the length in words and determined
that half of them used between 3 and 7 words per message.
Nonetheless, a second manual sub-study was conducted
to analyse the clarity of those messages subjectively. Once
again, given the size of the complete dataset, a sub-sample
was calculated and extracted. This used the same procedure
detailed in Section III-A3, also following Thompson [20]. Due
to this, results are also considered somewhat generalisable.
Fig. 4. Clarity and understandability of messages in test methods. Clarity
refers to the use of natural language semantics, while understandability
concerns grasping what it is being tested
1527Fig. 5. Proportion of repositories categorised by range of FPR, TPF and APT.
For ten categories, a conﬁdence level of 95% and a margin
of error of 3 percent, another sample of 1416 test method
messages were randomly extracted from the complete dataset.
The ten categories are represented in two Likert scales that
indicate clarity (in terms of natural language semantics), and
understandability (recognising what is being tested). The latter
requires more technical knowledge of R. Figure 4, compiles
results.
Almost 40% messages being labelled very clear (Likert
5) and only less than 20% are very unclear orunclear
(Likert 1-2). Nonetheless, about 44.7% are also challenging
to understand (Likert 1-2). Furthermore, except for Clarity
Likert 5, each category has a larger proportion of mixed-to-
lower understandability (Likert 3-1). This is quite negative
in terms of TTD, indicating a code smell. Obscure unit tests
that are harder to grasp reduce the maintainability of the code.
5) Test Files Organisation : A custom R script was used to
crawl the source code of the selected repositories, extracting
the signature of test methods, assertions, and LOC position.
This was used to analyse the distribution of test methods and
assertions per selected repository. Table IV summarises the
distributions in quartiles; it is worth noticing that only the
ﬁrst row (FPR) presents data per repository.
TABLE IV
STRUCTURE OF THE SURVEY GENERATED FOR PART II.
Criteria Code Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Test ﬁles per repository FPR 1 2 5.5 14 75
Test methods per test ﬁle TPF 1 1 3 6 454
Asserts per test ﬁle 1 4 10 21 799
Asserts per test method APT 1 1 2 4 198
The script identiﬁed 9957 test methods in the 177
repositories, with 37166 assertions. This yields a mean of 3.74
assertions per test method, in alignment with the quartiles of
APT.
To further this analysis, repositories were classiﬁed by range
ofﬁle per repository (FPR), test methods per test ﬁle (TPF)
andassert per test method (APT). The ranges were deﬁned
using the quartiles identiﬁed in Table IV. Therefore, Figure 5
showcases the proportion of repositories for each combination
of ranges.As can be seen, most repositories have between 2 and 5.5
test ﬁles, regardless of their size in terms of LOC or R ﬁles. In
this group, most repositories also include 3-to-6 test methods
per test ﬁle, with a predominant structure of 2-to-4 assertions
in each of them. All groups have a substantial proportion of
repositories that have more than one assertion per test method.
Having a single assertion per test method has often been
identiﬁed as a positive practice; appropriate initialisation
methods should be used to avoid repeating preparation process
[23]. For example, the JUnit framework for Java handles this
with the @BeforeAll and@BeforeEach annotations.
Nonetheless, according to testthat ’s speciﬁcation6,
this commonly used framework does not provide means to
replicate this initialisation behaviour.
6) Asserts Type and Goals : Asserts are useful to evaluate
the internal state of the program. Most unit testing frameworks
provide multiple assertion methods to compare different types
of actual-vs-expected variables. Assessing which assertions are
used the most can help understand what is being tested.
Since all packages analysed used testthat as a
framework for unit testing, the assertions extracted by crawling
the source code of selected repositories were classiﬁed as
”default” (if provided by testthat ) or ”custom” (if created
by the repository’s developers). This was checked against
testthat ’s speciﬁcation and automatically classiﬁed
through an R script.
Overall, of 37166 assertions detected among all selected
repositories, 80.2% were user-deﬁned (custom). There
were 102 unique expressions, of which 81 were custom.
Furthermore, testthat provides 27 default assertions,
but only 21 were found in these repositories; those left
behind are: expect_condition ,expect_vector ,
expect_reference , expect_mapequal ,
expect_invisible , and expect_visible .
Figure 6 summarises the popularity of assertions across all
of the evaluated repositories, showcasing the total number
of uses. Though some custom assertions have multiple uses,
this analysis did not validate that implementations across
repositories were equivalent.
When designing test cases, good practices indicate that
developers should test common cases (the ”traditional” or
6See https://testthat.r-lib.org/reference/index.html
1528Fig. 6. Top 15 assertions more used in selected repositories, classiﬁed as
default if offered by testthat .
”more used” path of an algorithm or function) as well
asedge cases (values that require special handling, hence
testing boundary conditions of an algorithm or function) [24].
Additionally, dummy tests may also appear in the code: these
are assertions that ”test nothing” (i.e. asserting if a hard-coded
true value is true), commonly used to rank up the coverage
at the expense of correct testing. Besides those three types,
tests can be automated (automatically executed and compared
using assertions) or manual (maybe automatically run, but
afterwards it needs a manual check by a person.
Classifying asserts in these groups can highlight quality
deﬁciencies as well as gaps in the unit testing of packages.
This was evaluated through a third manual sub-study, that
required analysing the code of each assert to classify it in
one of the corresponding groups (common, edge or dummy,
and automated or manual). Following the same procedure for
sub-sampling detailed in Section III-A3, a third sample of
1416 assertions was randomly extracted from the source code
of all repositories. As before, results from this analysis are
considered to be somewhat generalisable.
Fig. 7. Manual classiﬁcation of asserts subsample to determine testing goals.Figure 7 summarises the results. It is quite negative to see
that about 82.5% of the asserts were used to assess common
cases , disregarding the value of edge cases . This indicates the
presence of TTD as the latter should also be evaluated since
it often generates most bugs; furthermore, it can potentially
indicate a lack of exception handling in R code, but more
studies are required to assess this further. On a positive note,
only 3% of asserts were manual and, upon close inspection,
all of them evaluated plots.
B. R Developers Survey (Part II - RQ3)
This section presents the results of the survey conducted on
R package developers. Structure, preparation and distribution
of the survey were discussed in Section II-C.
Figure 8 summarises the answers to the demographic
questions. About half respondents have between 5-10 years of
experience as R developers, with almost 27.5% having more
than ten years. Furthermore, about 29.7% had between 5-10
R packages published, and 23% had more than ten packages.
This indicates that the respondents are mostly very experienced
developers, and it is safe to assume they are well-versed in R
programming.
Fig. 8. Self-reported demographics of survey participants.
1) Testing Practices : Regarding testing practices, about
86.8% said they test their code using ”unit testing packages”,
while 12% indicated they only test manually. This is
problematic, as manual testing indicates an inappropriate
structure, incurs in automation debt and is unable to work as
efﬁciently as unit testing. It could also potentially indicate a
lack of functionalities provided by standard R tools. Regarding
the latter, 54.9% of respondents declared using testthat ;
other unit testing packages had less than 1% of use.
Table V summarises answers regarding the type of testing
performed; it is positive to see that developers are interested in
assessing functions individually, but also in testing the package
as a whole.
About 58% of respondents replied to the question about
the desired improvement to existing tools. The most common
1529TABLE V
TYPE OF TESTING PRIORITISED BY DEVELOPERS .
Testing Type Answers %
Unit, evaluating functions individually 50.9%
Integration, studying clusters of functions 28.1%
Systems, using my package externally 14%
Other 1.3%
N/A 5.7%
reply (though worded differently) was ”better documentation,
tutorials and examples”. Due to space limitations, the
following is a list of highlighted replies; the full table of replies
to this answer is available as supplementary material7.
”Honestly anything that would make it faster or automate
bits of it. I do a terrible job of testing, and it is largely
because it just takes so much time for so little immediate
beneﬁt”.
”1- A document that would explain how to create
meaningful/efﬁcient unit tests (i.e. beyond just boosting
the code coverage). 2- I only use testthat , maybe a
comparison with the different testing packages would be
helpful”.
”Understanding of how to build tests for data science (and
data tables generally)”.
”Easier ways to generate test data that’s small and easy
to include in a package, easy documentation of test
result changes to track function changes over time in a
documented way.”
2) Testing Challenges : Figure 9 summarises the challenges
screened in the survey and their reported severity. Similar
to other languages, time constraints is the most popular
limitation, followed by emphasis on development rather than
testing . On the positive side, few respondents (less than 22%)
have trouble discerning the beneﬁts of unit testing tools.
Fig. 9. Severity of challenges, as reported by developers, faced regarding to
testing R packages.
However, almost 16% declared lack of testing experience as
a Serious/Very Serious issue, with similar severity regarding
7See: https://tinyurl.com/y9ymuv8jtopoor documentation . Furthermore, almost 10% still face
asteep learning curve for unit testing. This is especially
concerning given that participants self-reported a high level of
expertise in R package development (see Figure 8). If senior
developers still face these challenges at this stage of their
careers, junior developers may ﬁnd this even more taxing.
Though overall, 20-40% of respondents do not currently
face any of the surveyed challenges, between 22%-49% still
deal with them at different degrees of severity.
Furthermore, a typical example of incorrect testing practices
is when a unit testing suite passing all test cases, but
developers still ﬁnd bugs in the code when using the package.
Close to 58% participants said this happened to them “more
than one time”, and almost 22% estimated “at least once”;
almost 9% “did not remember”. Though the option of “this
never happened to me” was available, none of the participants
chose it.
Though this is quite negative, it aligns with the results
obtained in Part I of this study. The extensive focus on
testing common cases enables test suites that successfully
pass all unit testing, but that do not wholly test the code. This
supports the existence of TTD with regards to inadequate
unit testing.
3) Coverage Practices: The survey questioned participants
about their reliance on coverage tools. About 39.5% said
they use them occasionally. About 25% said they “always”
use them, and another quarter replied the opposite (”never”).
Regarding coverage tools, 24% agreed on using Codecov8,
while 26% used the covr R package.
The last question evaluated how developers perceive the
coverage of their packages (see Table VI). As can be seen,
many participants could be understanding that greater coverage
implies better testing (answers like being conﬁdent, and bug-
free), when this is not always correct. This is demonstrated by
a large number of tests suites failing to ﬁnd bugs and the lack
of assertions evaluating edge cases.
TABLE VI
SELF-REPORTED EFFECTS OF COVERAGE VISUALISATIONS .
Coverage Perception Answers %
It motivates me 30.8%
It makes me more conﬁdent in my code 23%
It makes me anxious (there is work left) 5.5%
I trust my code is bug-free 2.2%
Other / None of the above 27.5%
NA 11%
IV. D ISCUSSION
This section discusses the answer to the RQs, and results
obtained from both parts of the study.
A. RQ1: Quality Testing
This section answers question RQ1, regarding the correct-
ness of the tests found in R packages.
8https://codecov.io/
1530First of all, it is worth noticing that during the repository
ﬁltering, 71 packages were separated due to low-quality
testing: 20 of them had manual testing only, and the remaining
51 had empty tests. Furthermore, though high coverage values
cannot ensure that the code is defect-free [19], there is high
variability in the coverage of packages, with some groups
having as little as 10%.
Second, only about 43% of relevant lines are tested, but
code inspections showcased that alternative paths are the least
explored and covered when unit testing R packages. Moreover,
the developers’ survey conﬁrmed that most of them continue
to face test suites with all test passing, yet still ﬁnd bugs in
their code.
Furthermore, R unit testing tools may be incomplete. In
particular, though some provided asserts are widely used,
others are not, leading many developers to deﬁne their custom
asserts. Related to this, the most common tool, testthat
(see Section III-B1) does not provide functions for automated
initialisation of test data (see Section III-A5). As a result, this
may also hinder the quality of unit testing in R packages.
Overall, it is concerning to see that the unit testing of R
packages cannot be considered comprehensive or high-quality.
This can be linked to the developers’ appraisal of potential
improvements for existing tools: better documentation,
tutorials and examples, including ways to generate small test
data.
B. RQ2: TTD Smells
Smells are ”symptoms of poor developing choices”, and are
related to each type of technical debt [26]. In particular, TTD
smells have been previously classiﬁed and studied by other
authors, providing a well-accepted taxonomy.As a result, this section answers RQ2 using the information
and conclusions extracted from both parts of this study. It
organises current testing concerns into the TTD classiﬁcations
proposed by Samarthyam et al. [5]. Table VII summarises
problematic testing types, testing smells, and the results of
the study that support it.
Overall, three groups of TTD smells were identiﬁed in the
mined R packages:
The most common group are Unit Testing smells. These
are inadequate cases (testing few paths, with few relevant
tests), obscure tests (under the premise of unit testing
as live documentation), and improper asserts (non-
optimal usage of asserts, focus on coverage rather than
common/edge cases, and so on).
After that, issues in Exploratory Testing are also
present due to inexperience testers. Results here are
related to self-reported challenges regarding unit testing
documentation and learning materials (survey results).
Finally, Manual Testing smells are present due to limited
test execution (manual testing demands more resources
and time, also identiﬁed as challenges), and improper test
design (requiring manual conﬁrmation and reporting).
C. RQ3: Developer Challenges
The main goal of Part II of this study, the anonymous survey,
was to understand developers’ subjective perception of testing
and the challenges they face. As presented in Section III-B
(see Figure 9), the most common concern is regarding time
constraints , as most developers cannot invest more time in
testing, but rather develop the package quickly. Furthermore,
different organisations and employers emphasise development
rather than testing , reasserting this issue.
TABLE VII
TYPES OF TTD, SMELLS ,AND RESULTS SHOWCASING WEAK -SPOTS
Type Smell Reason
Unit TestingInadequate Unit Tests Elevated number of relevant lines still untested (see Table III and Figure 3).
Many alternative paths, belonging to exported functions, are not being tested (see Figure 3).
Elevated variability of coverage between packages of the same discipline. This may indicate incomplete
or excess testing (see Figure 2).
Increased focus on testing common cases, with little focus on assessing edge cases (see Figure 7).
Obscure Unit Tests Though many asserts have messages, they are mostly unclear and not understandable (see Figure 4).
In average, there are too many asserts per test method, lowering the readability of automated testing
results (see Table IV and Figure 5).
Excessive use of custom asserts may hinder testing understandability (see Section III-A6).
Improper Asserts Too many common cases are being tested, and few common cases are being evaluated (see Figure 7).
Excessive use of custom asserts may indicate potential issues with testing frameworks and developers
training (see Section III-A6).
Developers ﬁnding bugs regardless of having test suites with all test passing (see Section III-B2).
Exploratory Testing Inexperienced Testers Though most survey participants reported a high level of expertise (see Figure 8), their main concern
in terms of improvement for existing tools was better documentation, tutorials and examples, as well
as guides to create meaningful tests for data science. This is also supported by the indicated severity
(medium-to-high) of challenges such as steep learning curve, and poor documentation.
Manual TestingLimited Test Execution About 20 papers were ﬁltered as they included only manual testing cases, with no unit testing.
About 12% of survey participants acknowledged performing only manual testing in their packages (see
Section III-B1).
Improper Test Design About 3% of asserts were determined to be manual, as they were always testing plots. Though the
number is small, there was also a low amount of plotting-related R packages in the selected sample. As
plotting and visualisation are vital for data science [25], better testing tools should be developed.
1531Nonetheless, even though participants are quite experienced
developers, the steep learning curve andpoor documentation
of testing tools continue to be a challenge. This is coupled to
desired improvements in current testing packages, where better
documentation and tutorials were the most common request.
It is safe to assume that common challenges can be linked
to two potential sources:
Lack of training in developers. Besides self-reported
issues on the survey carried out in this study, previous
research also demonstrated that most R programmers
come from diverse technical backgrounds not focused on
programming [10].
Incomplete tools due to the towering number of custom
asserts, challenges such as compatibility issues, and
desired improvements such as better automation, test data
generation, and comparison between testing suits. This is
also supported by the lack of methods that could be used
to initialise test data.
D. Threats to Validity
External Validity. These relate to the generalisability of the
results. The dataset consisted of 177 systematically-selected,
open-source R packages mined from GitHub. Still, it is
unclear if the ﬁndings would generalise to all R packages.
Furthermore, the survey respondents sample may not be
representative of the entire population of developers, and
thus results might not generalise to all of them. Attempts to
minimise these biases include surveying a large number of
R packages (almost 200), ﬁltered by maintenance conditions,
with a large sample of developers. To the best of the author’s
knowledge, so far, this is the ﬁrst and largest study regarding
unit testing in R packages.
Internal Validity. These concern the conditions under
which experiments are performed. Though packages were
systematically selected, 31 of them had to be discarded due
to being unable to download all required dependencies and
run the automated analysis (see covr ’s limitations, in Table
I). Furthermore, since there was no baseline data to use as
training sets for automated algorithms, a set of analysis was
conducted on randomised sub-samples of data. Though the
numbers were statistically deﬁned, they may not be entirely
generalisable.
It is worth noticing that the manual classiﬁcation conducted
in Section III-A (i.e. Analysis of Untested Lines and
Informative Asserts ) was completed by a single author,
which may lead to researcher bias. In each sub-study using
this approach, this threat was minimised by completing the
classiﬁcation twice: after the ﬁrst attempt, the author repeated
the process. There was a difference of a week between
ﬁnishing the ﬁrst attempt and commencing the second. For
theuntested lines , there were only 17 disagreements, solved
by revising the classiﬁcation; the resolution method used in
Informative Asserts implied averaging the numbers of both
attempts (only for the disagreements).V. C ONCLUSION
R is a package-based programming ecosystem, mostly
targeted to statistics and data science, that provides a simple
way to install third-party code and extend the language’s
functionalities. As a result, defects and bugs present in R
packages can transitively affect all packages and scripts that
depend on it, effectively becoming a threat to their validity.
Testing technical debt (TTD) has been identiﬁed as shortcuts
(non-optimal decisions) related to testing, that may reduce the
quality of the code produced.
This study reports the current state of testing of almost 200
systematically-selected, open-source R packages available in
GitHub. The source code of the repositories was analysed to
determine the quality of testing and possible smells standard
across most R packages. Furthermore, this study also surveyed
the developers of these packages to understand the testing
culture and determine the challenges they face while testing.
The ﬁndings can be summarised as follows:
R package testing cannot be considered comprehensive
or high-quality. Several reasons support this: many
alternative paths are not being tested, there is a highly
variable coverage, and the occurrence of manual testing.
Several TTD smells have been identiﬁed by comparing
the results of the study to existing TTD smells
classiﬁcations. Common smells are: inadequate and
obscure unit tests, improper asserts, inexperienced testers,
and improper test design.
R packages developers face numerous challenges. Partici-
pants of the survey self-reported a high level of expertise.
However, they agreed on the following challenges: time
constraints, emphasis on development rather than testing,
poor documentation of tools, steep learning curve, and
still ﬁnding bugs despise of having test suits with all-
passing tests.
This study is the ﬁrst exploratory step to understand
unit testing practices in R package programming. This is
considerably novel because R is a multi-paradigm language
that combines lazy functional features with minimal object-
oriented (OO) features, setting it apart from current OO-
focused knowledge of technical debt.
In the future, the authors would like to expand the
study by analysing more repositories and surveying more
developers. Automated tools can be developed using the
manually classiﬁed data that was generated in this study,
opening the door to large-scale studies. Also, this study
focused on R packages but not in R scripts; the latter are a
completely different way of programming in R, fundamental
to data science based in this language. As a result, an empirical
study on common practices and basic technical debt would be
required before addressing TTD in this context. Finally, there
are also three lines of work related to the results obtained from
this study:
1) The automated code analysis identiﬁed a large number of
irrelevant code lines, with a majority of them potentially
linked to comments. Analysing these lines could highlight
1532the presence of admitted technical debt (either generic or
TTD).
2) There is a high variability of coverage in the mined R
packages. Though the ideal coverage has been studied
in OO-centric programming languages, this number may
vary dramatically for R. Further studies could address this
area.
3) The study showcased a large amount of non-exported
functions being tested. Though this concept is somewhat
similar to private methods in OO programming, it is not
precisely the same. The impact of testing (or not testing)
non-exported functions also requires further analysis.
4) Common unit testing tools used for R packages are
incomplete, lacking means to handle a systematic
initialisation or cleanup of elements to be tested, thus
effectively adding complexity to the process.
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The methodology used in this manuscript, and described in
the sections below, was approved by RMIT University Human
Ethics Research Committee (HREC), with project code 2020-
22968-10378.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author thanks Associate Professor John Ormerod, from
the School of Mathematics and Statistics at University of
Sydney (Australia), for his assistance when calculating the
sample sizes for the manual analysis of the data extracted. The
author also gratefully acknowledges the anonymous reviewers
for their careful reading of the manuscript and their insightful
comments and suggestions, as well as the R developers who
participated in the survey.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Muenchen, “The popularity of data
analysis software,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://r4stats.com/articles/popularity/
[2] F. Morandat, B. Hill, L. Osvald, and J. Vitek, “Evaluating
the design of the r language,” in ECOOP 2012 –
Object-Oriented Programming , J. Noble, Ed. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 104–
131.
[3] K. Hornik, “Are there too many r packages?” Austrian
Journal of Statistics , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 59–66, 2012.
[4] W. Tracz, “Refactoring for software design smells:
Managing technical debt by girish suryanarayana, ganesh
samarthyam, and tushar sharma,” SIGSOFT Softw. Eng.
Notes , vol. 40, no. 6, p. 36, Nov. 2015. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2830719.2830739
[5] G. Samarthyam, M. Muralidharan, and R. K.
Anna, Understanding Test Debt . Singapore: Springer
Singapore, 2017, pp. 1–17. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-1415-4 1
[6] A. Mueller, “Unit testing in r,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/unit-testing-
in-r-68ab9cc8d211[7] F. Palomba and A. Zaidman, “Notice of retraction: Does
refactoring of test smells induce ﬁxing ﬂaky tests?”
in2017 IEEE International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) , 2017, pp. 1–12.
[8] V . Garousi, B. Kucuk, and M. Felderer, “What we know
about smells in software test code,” IEEE Software ,
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 61–73, 2019.
[9] A. Qusef, M. O. Elish, and D. Binkley, “An exploratory
study of the relationship between software test smells
and fault-proneness,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 139 526–
139 536, 2019.
[10] D. M. German, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan, “The
Evolution of the R Software Ecosystem,” in 2013 17th
European Conference on Software Maintenance and
Reengineering , Mar. 2013, pp. 243–252, iSSN: 1534-
5351.
[11] A. Decan, T. Mens, M. Claes, and P. Grosjean,
“When github meets cran: An analysis of inter-
repository package dependency problems,” in 2016 IEEE
23rd International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER) , vol. 1, 2016, pp.
493–504.
[12] C. Ramirez, M. Nagappan, and M. Mirakhorli, “Studying
the impact of evolution in r libraries on software
engineering research,” in 2015 IEEE 1st International
Workshop on Software Analytics (SWAN) , 2015, pp. 29–
30.
[13] H. Borges and M. T. Valente, “What’s in a github star?
understanding repository starring practices in a social
coding platform,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol.
146, pp. 112–129, 2018.
[14] J. Jiang, D. Lo, J. He, X. Xia, P. S. Kochhar, and
L. Zhang, “Why and how developers fork what from
whom in github,” Empirical Software Engineering ,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 547–578, Feb 2017. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-016-9436-6
[15] J. Lawrence, S. Clarke, M. Burnett, and G. Rothermel,
“How well do professional developers test with code
coverage visualizations? an empirical study,” in 2005
IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
Centric Computing (VL/HCC’05) , 2005, pp. 53–60.
[16] J. De Bleser, D. Di Nucci, and C. De Roover, “Assessing
diffusion and perception of test smells in scala projects,”
in2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International Conference on
Mining Software Repositories (MSR) , 2019, pp. 457–467.
[17] Y . Lu, X. Mao, Z. Li, Y . Zhang, T. Wang, and G. Yin,
“Internal quality assurance for external contributions
in github: An empirical investigation,” Journal of
Software: Evolution and Process , vol. 30, no. 4, p.
e1918, 2018, e1918 smr.1918. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/smr.1918
[18] F. K ˇrikava and J. Vitek, “Tests from traces: Automated
unit test extraction for r,” in Proceedings of the
27th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis , ser. ISSTA 2018.
New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing
1533Machinery, 2018, p. 232–241. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3213846.3213863
[19] A. Bertolino, B. Miranda, R. Pietrantuono, and S. Russo,
“Hybrid is better: Why and how test coverage and
software reliability can beneﬁt each other,” in Web
Information Systems and Technologies , M. J. Escalona,
F. Dom ´ınguez Mayo, T. A. Majchrzak, and V . Monfort,
Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp.
25–38.
[20] S. K. Thompson, “Sample size for estimating
multinomial proportions,” The American Statistician ,
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 42–46, 1987. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2684318
[21] F. Endel and H. Piringer, “Data wrangling: Making data
useful again,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 48, no. 1, pp.
111 – 112, 2015, 8th Vienna International Conferenceon
Mathematical Modelling.
[22] R. Khalid, “Towards an automated tool for software
testing and analysis,” in 2017 14th International Bhurban
Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology (IB-
CAST) , 2017, pp. 461–465.
[23] G. Meszaros, xUnit Test Patterns: Refactoring Test Code ,
ser. Addison-Wesley Signature Series. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/xunit-
test-patterns/9780131495050/
[24] E. Daka and G. Fraser, “A survey on unit testing
practices and problems,” in 2014 IEEE 25th International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering , 2014,
pp. 201–211.
[25] M. Molina-Solana, D. Birch, and Y . ke Guo, “Improving
data exploration in graphs with fuzzy logic and large-
scale visualisation,” Applied Soft Computing , vol. 53, pp.
227 – 235, 2017.
[26] M. Tufano, F. Palomba, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta,
R. Oliveto, A. De Lucia, and D. Poshyvanyk, “An
empirical investigation into the nature of test smells,”
inProceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering , ser.
ASE 2016. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 4–15. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970340
1534