Prioritize Crowdsourced Test Reports
via Deep Screenshot Understanding
Shengcheng Yu, Chunrong Fang, Zhenfei Cao, Xu Wang, Tongyu Li, Zhenyu Chen
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
Corresponding author: fangchunrong@nju.edu.cn
Abstract —Crowdsourced testing is increasingly dominant in
mobile application (app) testing, but it is a great burden for app
developers to inspect the incredible number of test reports. Many
researches have been proposed to deal with test reports based
only on texts or additionally simple image features. However, in
mobile app testing, texts contained in test reports are condensed
and the information is inadequate. Many screenshots are included
as complements that contain much richer information beyond
texts. This trend motivates us to prioritize crowdsourced test
reports based on a deep screenshot understanding.
In this paper, we present a novel crowdsourced test report
prioritization approach, namely DEEPPRIOR . We ﬁrst represent
the crowdsourced test reports with a novelly introduced feature,
namely DEEPFEATURE , that includes all the widgets along with
their texts, coordinates, types, and even intents based on the
deep analysis of the app screenshots, and the textual descriptions
in the crowdsourced test reports. DEEPFEATURE includes the
Bug Feature , which directly describes the bugs, and the Context
Feature , which depicts the thorough context of the bug. The
similarity of the DEEPFEATURE is used to represent the test
reports’ similarity and prioritize the crowdsourced test reports.
We formally deﬁne the similarity as DEEPSIMILARITY . We also
conduct an empirical experiment to evaluate the effectiveness of
the proposed technique with a large dataset group. The results
show that DEEPPRIOR is promising, and it outperforms the state-
of-the-art approach with less than half the overhead.
Index Terms —Crowdsourced testing, Mobile App Testing,
Deep Screenshot Understanding
I. I NTRODUCTION
Crowdsourcing has been one of the mainstream techniques
in many areas. The openness of crowdsourcing brings many
advantages. For example, the operations on crowdsourcing
subjects can be simulated in multiple different real practical
environments. Such advantages help alleviate the severe “frag-
mentation problem” in mobile application (app) testing [1].
There are hundreds of thousands of different mobile device
models with different brands, operating system (OS) versions,
and hardware sensors, which is the well-known “fragmentation
problem” in Android testing. Crowdsourced testing is one of
the best solutions faced with such a problem. App developers
can distribute their apps to crowdworkers with different mobile
devices and require them to submit test reports containing
app screenshots and textual descriptions . This helps app
developers reveal as many problems as possible.
However, report reviewing efﬁciency in crowdsourced test-
ing is a severe problem. The openness of crowdsourcing
can lead to a great number of reports being submitted, and
almost 82% of the submitted reports are duplicate [2]. Itis quite tough work to review all the reports automatically
due to the complexity. In the text part, the complexity of
neural language can lead to ambiguity, and crowdworkers may
use different words to describe the same objects or use one
word to describe completely different scenarios. In the image
part, screenshot similarity can also provide little help because
many app functions share similar UI. Therefore, it is hard but
important for app developers to reveal all the mentioned bugs
as early as possible.
Among the recent researches, test reports’ disposal is always
divided into two parts: app screenshots and textual descrip-
tions. Existing researches analyze these two parts separately to
extract features. For textual descriptions, existing approaches
extract the keywords and normalize the keywords according
to predeﬁned vocabulary. For app screenshots, they treat each
screenshot as a whole and extract the image features repre-
sented with numeric vectors. After obtaining the results from
two parts, most researches currently rely on texts and consider
screenshots as supplemental materials or simply concatenate
image information and text information. However, we think
this kind of disposal can cause much valuable information to
be missing. The relationship between textual descriptions and
app screenshots is left out, and the report deduplication or
prioritization can be less effective.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, namely D EEP-
PRIOR , to P RIOR itize crowdsourced test reports via D EEP
screenshot understanding. D EEPPRIOR considers the deep
understanding of both app screenshots and textual descriptions
in detail. For a submitted test report, we extract information
from both screenshots and texts. In screenshots, we collect all
the widgets according to computer vision (CV) technologies,
and we locate the problem widget (denoted as WP) according
to the textual descriptions (details in Section III-A1). The
remaining widgets are treated as context widgets (denoted as
WC). Texts are processed with Natural Language Processing
(NLP) technologies and are divided into two parts: the repro-
duction steps (denoted as R) and the bug description (denoted
asP). The reproduction steps are further normalized into
“action-object” sequences. The bug description is also further
processed to extract the problem widget description for WP
localization.
Instead of processing app screenshots and textual descrip-
tions separately, we take them as a whole and collect all
the information as a D EEPFEATURE for a report. Based on
the relativity to the bug itself, D EEPFEATURE includes Bug
9462021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00090
Feature (BFT) and Context Feature (CFT). The Bug Feature
consists of WPandP, and it represents the information
directly relevant to the bug revealed in the report. The Context
Feature consists ofWCandR, and it represents the context
information, including the operation track triggering the bug
and the activity information where the bug occurs.
After integrating the above features into the D EEPFEATURE ,
DEEPPRIOR calculates the D EEPSIMILARITY among all the
reports for prioritization. For Bug Feature andContext Fea-
ture, we calculate D EEPSIMILARITY separately.
ForBug Feature , to calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY of the
WPin the reports, we use CV technologies to extract and
match the feature points. Pis a short textual description, so
we use NLP technologies to extract the bug-related keywords
based on our self-built vocabulary, and compare the keyword
frequency as the D EEPSIMILARITY .
ForContext Feature ,WCis fed into a pre-trained deep
learning classiﬁer to identify each widget’s type, and the
number vector for each type is considered as the WCDEEP-
SIMILARITY .Ris composed of a series of actions and the
corresponding widgets, representing the sequence from the
app launching to the bug occurrence. Therefore, we extract
the actions and the objects using NLP technologies in the R
order. We take the “action-object” sequence as the operation
track and calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY .
Then starts the prioritization. We ﬁrst construct a NULL Re-
port (deﬁned in Section III-D) and append it to the prioritized
report pool. Then, we repeatedly calculate the D EEPSIMILAR -
ITYbetween each unprioritized report and all the reports in the
prioritized report pool. The report with the lowest “minimum
DEEPSIMILARITY ” with all the reports in the prioritized report
pool is put into the prioritized report pool.
We also design an empirical experiment, using a large-scale
dataset group from a large and active crowdsourced testing
platform1. We compare D EEPPRIOR with two other strategies,
and the results show that D EEPPRIOR is effective.
The noteworthy contributions of this paper are as follows.
We propose a novel approach that prioritizes crowd-
sourced test reports via deep screenshot understanding
and detailed text analysis. We extract all the widgets from
the screenshots, classify textual information to different
categories and form the D EEPFEATURE .
We construct an integrated dataset group for deep screen-
shot understanding, including a large-scale widget image
dataset, a large-scale test report keyword vocabulary, a
large-scale text classiﬁcation dataset, and a large-scale
crowdsourced test report dataset.
Based on the dataset group, we conduct an empirical
evaluation of the proposed approach D EEPPRIOR , and
the results show that D EEPPRIOR outperforms the state-
of-the-art approach with less than half the overhead.
More resources can be found on our online package2.
1anonymous for double-blind principle
2https://sites.google.com/view/deeppriorII. B ACKGROUND & M OTIVATION
Crowdsourced testing has gained a large amount of pop-
ularity in mobile app testing, its advantages are obvious,
but its drawbacks are also unignorable. On most mainstream
crowdsourced testing platforms, crowdworkers are required to
submit a report to describe the bug they meet. The main body
of a report is a screenshot of the bug and a textual description.
The app screenshot and the textual description are also the
principal basis to prioritize the crowdsourced test reports.
Current solutions for crowdsourced test report processing
that consider the screenshots like [2] [3] mainly analyze the
app screenshot features and textual description information to
measure the similarity among all the reports. Though they
consider the app screenshots, they simply treat the images as
widthheightRGB matrixes. However, these approaches
ignore the rich and valuable information, and we hold the
opinion that the app screenshots should be viewed as a
collection of meaningful widgets instead of the collection of
meaningless pixels. We make such a stand because while
reviewing the crowdsourced test report dataset, we ﬁnd some
vivid examples that the existing approaches have difﬁculty
handling because they merely make simple feature extraction
instead of deep screenshot understanding.
A. Example 1: Different App Theme
Nowadays, apps support different themes, making it pos-
sible for users to customize the app appearance according
to their preferences (Fig. 1). Moreover, the supported “dark
mode” makes the color scheme more complex. Image feature
extraction algorithms can hardly handle such complexity and
will make mistakes. From the examples, we can ﬁnd that
the app screenshots in three reports are of blue, white, and
green themes. All these three reports are reporting the loading
failure of the music resource ﬁles. However, according to
[2], the image color feature is one vital component of the
report surrogate. App screenshots with different colors will be
recognized as different screenshots.
Fig. 1. Example 1: Different App Theme
947Report #1135 : Choose a directory containing music ﬁles
and “mark as music dir”, but music ﬁles do not show
when returning to main page.
Report #1128 : The song list cannot show the music ﬁles.
Report #1163 : The page shows “No media found” after
choosing the music library.
B. Example 2: Different Bugs on the Same Screenshots
As shown in Fig. 2, the two reports use the screenshots
of the same app activity, and the image feature extraction
algorithm will assign a high similarity between these two
screenshots. However, according to the bug description, the
two reports are describing completely different bugs. In D EEP-
PRIOR , for Report #1128 , we can extract the text “no media
found”; for Report #1127 , we can extract the volume widget
besides the prompt information, and D EEPPRIOR can identify
the different problems.
Fig. 2. Example 2: Different Bugs on the Same Screenshots
Report #1127 : When the headphones are plugged in, the
volume is automatically increased while playing.
Report #1128 : The song list cannot show the music ﬁles.
C. Example 3: Same Bug on Different Screenshots
As shown in Fig. 3, the ImageView widget on the top is
of different contents, and it occupies a large proportion of the
entire page. Also, the comments are different due to different
testing time. Therefore, existing approaches will consider the
two screenshots are of low similarity which will pull down
the whole similarity even if the textual descriptions are with
high similarity. With D EEPPRIOR , we can extract the pop-
up information on the bottom, saying “comment failed”, and
assign a high similarity to the two reports. Such pop-ups are
considered as a quite signiﬁcant widget that contains the bug.
Report #25 : The page reminds failure after submitting
comment, but the submission shows in the list.
Report #146 : When inputing the comment, the page
reminds submit failure, but when reentering the page,
the comment has been in the list.
Fig. 3. Example 3: Same Bug on Different Screenshots
III. A PPROACH
This section presents the details of D EEPPRIOR , which
means prioritizing crowdsourced test reports via deep screen-
shot understanding. D EEPPRIOR consists of 4 stages, includ-
ing feature extraction, feature aggregation, D EEPSIMILARITY
calculation, and report prioritization. In the ﬁrst stage, we
collect 4 different types of report features from both app
screenshots andtextual descriptions . We then aggregate the
extracted features into a D EEPFEATURE , which includes Bug
Feature andContext Feature . Based on the D EEPFEATURE ,
we design an algorithm to calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY
between every two test reports. Based on the pre-deﬁned
rules (details in Section III-D), we prioritize the test reports
according to the D EEPSIMILARITY . The general framework
of the D EEPPRIOR approach can be referred to in Fig. 4.
A. Feature Extraction
The ﬁrst and most important step is feature extraction.
In this step, we analyze the app screenshots and textual
descriptions in the crowdsourced test reports separately.
1)Features from App Screenshot :App screenshots are
vital in crowdsourced test reports. Crowdworkers are required
to take screenshots while the bugs occur to better illustrate
the bug. As described in [2], texts can be confusing, because
textual descriptions can only provide limited information.
Therefore, screenshots are taken into consideration to provide
much more information besides textual descriptions. In a
screenshot, there exist many different widgets, and some
widgets can prompt the bug information. Therefore, the deep
understanding of the screenshots mainly rely on the widgets.
In D EEPPRIOR , we use both CV technologies and deep
learning (DL) technologies to extract all the widgets and
analyze their information. DL technologies are powerful and
CV technologies can process tasks in a larger variety [4].
Problem Widget. An app activity3can be seen as an
organized widget4set. Generally speaking, in crowdsourced
testing tasks, the bugs that can be found by crowdworkers
are sure to be revealed through the widgets. Therefore, it
3https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/Activity
4https://developer.android.com/reference/android/widget/package-summary
948Fig. 4. D EEPPRIOR Framework
is important to locate the widget that triggers the bug and
distinguish this widget, which is what we deﬁne as Problem
Widget (WP), from other widgets. In order to distinguish
the Problem Widget, we analyze the textual descriptions.
In crowdsourced test reports, crowdworkers will point out
which widget is operated before the bug occurs. As shown
in Section III-A2, we can extract the problem widget from
the textual descriptions, and to locate the Problem Widget, we
adopt two different strategies for different situations:
If the extracted widget contains texts, we will match
the texts from the widget screenshot and the textual
description. The matched widget will be considered as
the Problem Widget.
If there are no texts on the widgets or the text matching
fails, we will feed the extracted widgets into a deep
neural network to identify the simple widget intention.
The deep neural network is modiﬁed from the research of
Xiao et al. [5]. The model encodes the widget screenshot
into a feature vector with a convolutional neural network
(CNN). The output is a short text fragment decoded from
the feature vector with a recurrent neural network (RNN),
and the text fragment describes the widget intent.
Context Widget. Besides the Problem Widget, the widget
set representing the app screenshot also contains many more
widgets that make up the context, which is also critical to deep
image understanding. From the early stage survey, we ﬁnd that
the situations are common when app activities are entirely
different even if the problem widget, the reproduction step
(the activity launching path), and the bug description are the
same (like motivating example in Section II-C). At this time,
the context widget is signiﬁcant to identify the differences.
Therefore, we collect the rest of the widgets as Context Widget
(WC). For each context widget, we feed the widget screenshot
into a convolutional neural network to identify its type. The
amount for each type consists of a 14-dimensional vector.
The convolutional neural network is capable of identifying
14 different types of most widely used widgets, including
Button (BTN), CheckBox (CHB), CheckTextView(CTV), EditText (EDT), ImageButton (IMB),
ImageView (IMV), ProgressBarHorizontal (PBH),
ProgressBarVertical (PBV), RadioButton (RBU),
RatingBar (RBA), SeekBar (SKB), Switch (SWC),
Spinner (SPN), TextView (TXV)5. To train the neural
network, we collect 36,573 widget screenshots that evenly
distribute in 14 types. The ratio of the training set, validation
set, and test set is 7:1:2, which is a common practice for an
image classiﬁcation task. The neural network is composed
of multiple Convolutional layers, MaxPooling layers,
and FullyConnected layers. AdaDelta algorithm
is used as the optimizer, and this model adopts the
categorical_crossentropy loss function.
2)Features from Textual Description :Besides app screen-
shots, textual descriptions can provide bug information more
intuitively and directly. Also, textual descriptions can make
a positive supplement for app screenshots. In D EEPPRIOR ,
we adopt NLP technologies, speciﬁcally DL algorithms, to
process the textual descriptions in the test reports.
In the textual description, crowdworkers are required to
describe the bug in the screenshot and provide the reproduction
step, which is the operation sequence from the app launching
to the bug occurrence. However, on most crowdsourced testing
platforms, the bug descriptions and the reproduction steps are
mixed together, and crowdworkers are not required to obey
speciﬁc patterns due to the great diversity of their professional
capability [6]. Therefore, it is complex to distinguish bug
descriptions from reproduction steps. In order to handle this
problem, we adopt the TextCNN model [7].
The TextCNN model can complete sentence-level classi-
ﬁcation tasks with pre-trained word vectors. Before feeding
the texts into the model, we pre-process the data. The textual
descriptions of the test reports are segmented into sentences,
and then we use jieba library6to segment sentences into
words, and then we ﬁlter out the stop words according to a
5the short name is used in this paper for convenience
6https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba
949stop word list7. After the pre-processing, we feed the texts
into a WordEmbedding layer. In this layer, the texts are
transformed into 128-dimensional vectors using a Word2Vec
model [8]. Afterwards, we adopt several Convolutional
layers and MaxPooling layers to extract the text features.
In the last layer, we use SoftMax activation function and get
the probability of whether each sentence is a bug description
or a reproduction step. Finally, we merge all the sentences
classiﬁed as bug description or reproduction step. To train
the TextCNN model, we form a large-scale text classiﬁcation
dataset composed of 2,252 bug descriptions and 2,088 repro-
duction steps. We set the ratio of the training set, validation
set, and test set as 6:2:2, following the common practice.
Bug Description. Bug descriptions are always in the form
of a short sentence. Therefore, we represent the sentence with
a vector, which is also encoded using the Word2Vec model.
Most of the bug descriptions are following some speciﬁc kind
of patterns, like “ apply SOME operation on SOME widget, and
SOME unexpected behavior happens ”, so even if the speciﬁc
words would vary, it is effective to extract such feature.
One more important process is to extract the description
of the problem widget in order to help localize the prob-
lem widget. To achieve this goal, we use text segmentation
algorithms based on HMM (Hidden Markov Model) models
[9] and analyze the part-of-speech of each part of the bug
descriptions after text segmentation. Then, we extract the ob-
ject components as the basis for problem widget localization,
and such object components of the sentences are the widgets
that trigger the bugs. After acquiring the objects, we use the
strategies introduced above to localize the problem widget.
Reproduction Step. In addition to the bug description,
another signiﬁcant part of the textual description is the repro-
duction step. The reproduction step is a series of operations,
describing the user’s operations from the app launching to the
bug occurrence. For sentences classiﬁed to the reproduction
step class, we process in the initial order in the reports. We
use the same NLP algorithms to make text segmentation and
analyze the part-of-speech for each text segment for each
sentence. Then, the action part and the object part are collected
to form the “action-object” pair. Then, we concatenate the
“action-object” pairs to an “action-object” sequence. Also,
besides the action words and the objects, we add some
complementary information for some speciﬁc operations. For
example, suppose one operation is a typing action, we will add
the input content as the supplementary information, because
different test inputs can lead to different consequences and
make the app directed to different activities. Finally, after the
formalizing processing, we can obtain the Reproduction Step
from the textual descriptions.
B. Feature Aggregation
After acquiring all the features both from app screenshots
and textual descriptions, we aggregate them into two feature
categories: Bug Feature (BFT) and Context Feature (CFT).
7https://github.com/goto456/stopwordsBug Feature refers to the features that directly reﬂect or
describe the bug in the crowdsourced test report, while Context
Feature is assembled by the features that provide a depiction
for the environment of the bug occurrence.
1)Bug Feature (BFT): Bug Feature can directly provide
information about the bugs. Since a crowdsourced test report
is composed of the app screenshot and the textual descrip-
tion, both components contain critical information about the
occurring bug. In the app screenshot, we extract the Problem
Widget, which is a widget screenshot. D EEPPRIOR can extract
such information automatically. In the textual description, the
Bug Description part directly describes the bug. Therefore,
with a balanced consideration of the app screenshot and the
textual description, we aggregate the Problem Widget and the
Bug Description as the Bug Feature .
2)Context Feature (CFT): Context Feature includes the
features that construct a thorough context for the bug oc-
currence. In the app screenshot, the Context Widget consists
of all the widgets expect the Problem Widget. In the textual
description, the Reproduction Step information is taken into
consideration because it provides the full operation path from
the app launching to the bug occurrence, and it can help
identify whether the bugs of two test reports are on the same
app activity. Therefore, Context Widget and Reproduction Step
are aggregated together to form the Context Feature .
3) Feature Aggregation: With Bug Feature andContext
Feature , we can aggregate all the obtained features from both
app screenshots and textual descriptions of the crowdsourced
test reports into the ﬁnal D EEPFEATURE . We have a deep
screenshot understanding for app screenshots instead of di-
rectly transforming the app screenshots into simple feature
vectors. We also have a tighter combination between app
screenshots and textual descriptions. Moreover, we take the
app screenshots and textual descriptions as a whole and divide
them according to their roles in bug reﬂection. Bug Feature is
undoubtedly important, and we hold that Context Feature also
plays a crucial role in crowdsourced test report prioritization
because the calculation of the bug similarity relies heavily on
the whole context.
C.DEEPSIMILARITY Calculation
To prioritize the crowdsourced test reports, one signiﬁcant
step is to calculate the similarity among all the reports.
Because we are the ﬁrst to introduce the deep screenshot
understanding into report prioritization, we name the similarity
as D EEPSIMILARITY . As the common practice to merge
different features in previous studies [2] [3], we calculate the
DEEPSIMILARITY of different features separately, and allocate
different weights for the results of different features. The
formal expression is as follows ( Sim is short for similarity):
DeepSimilarity =Sim BFT + (1 )Sim CFT (1a)
Sim BFT =Sim WP+ (1 )Sim P (1b)
950Sim CFT =Sim WC+ (1 )Sim R (1c)
1)Bug Feature :We calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY of
Problem Widget and the Bug Description separately and merge
them with the weight parameter .
Problem Widget. Problem Widget is a widget screenshot
extracted from the app screenshot according to the strategies
introduced in Section III-A1. To calculate the D EEPSIMILAR -
ITYof the problem widget, we extract the image features of
the widget screenshots. To extract the image features, we adopt
the state-of-the-art SIFT (Scale-Invariant Feature Transform)
algorithm [10]. Therefore, each widget is represented by a
feature point set. SIFT algorithm has the advantage of being
able to process the images with different sizes, positions, and
rotation angles, which is a common phenomenon in such
an era when mobile devices are of hundreds of thousands
of different models. To compare and match the problem
widgets from different crowdsourced test reports, we use the
FLANN Library8[11]. After the calculation, we can get a
score ranging from 0 to 1, and 0 means completely different,
and 1 means completely the same. This score can be viewed
as the D EEPSIMILARITY of Problem Widget.
Bug Description. Bug Description is a shot sentence brieﬂy
describing the bug in the crowdsourced test report. Therefore,
we use NLP technologies to encode bug descriptions. Follow-
ing the approaches in previous studies, we use the Word2Vec
model as the encoder. To improve the performance of the
Word2Vec Model, we construct a test report keyword database .
The test report keyword database contains 8,647 keywords re-
lated to software testing, mobile app, and test report, including
labeled synonyms, antonyms, and polysemies. The encoded
bug description is a 100-dimensional vector. Afterward, also
referring to the previous studies like [2] [3], we adopt the
widely used Euclidean Metric algorithm to calculate the
DEEPSIMILARITY of bug descriptions of different test reports
in pair. To unify values of different scales, we normalize each
resultxto [0, 1] interval with the functionx min
max min, where
max is the maximum value of all results and min is the
minimum value of all results.
2)Context Feature :We also calculate the D EEPSIMILAR -
ITYof Context Widget and the Reproduction Step separately
and merge them with a weight parameter .
Context Widget. Context Widget is also a very important
component of the whole context of the occurring bug. To have
a deep understanding of the app screenshots, speciﬁcally the
widgets on the app screenshot, we use a convolutional neural
network to identify the widget type for each extracted widget
screenshot and form a vector containing the number of the
14 types of the widgets. Afterward, we use the Euclidean
Metric algorithm to calculate the distance of the acquired 14-
dimensional vectors. We consider the absolute amount of the
widgets for each type and all the widgets’ distribution. The
result of the Euclidean Metric algorithm (from 0 to 1) is
considered as the Context Widget D EEPSIMILARITY .
8https://github.com/mariusmuja/ﬂannReproduction Step. Reproduction Step is transformed into
an “action-object” sequence during the feature extraction. To
calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY of the “action-object” se-
quence, we adopt the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [12] al-
gorithm to process the to-compare “action-object” sequences.
DWT algorithm is most widely known for the capability of
automatic speech recognition. In this paper, we adapt the DWT
algorithm to process the operation path that triggers the bug
in the corresponding crowdsourced test reports. DWT algo-
rithm can measure the similarity of the temporal sequences,
especially the temporal sequences that may vary in “speed”.
Speciﬁcally speaking, the “speed” in our task refers to the
situation that the different user operations can reach the same
app activity through a different path. Compared with other
track similarity algorithms, DTW has a better matching effect
because it can process the sequences with different lengths,
which is suitable for processing the “action-object” sequences.
D. Report Prioritization
After aggregating the D EEPFEATURE , and deﬁning the
DEEPSIMILARITY calculation rule, we start to prioritize the
crowdsourced test reports. First, we construct two null report
pools: the unprioritized report pool and the prioritized report
pool. All the crowdsourced test reports are put into the
unprioritized report pool initially.
Different from the strategy adopted in [3], where a report
is randomly chosen as the initial report, we think all reports
should be treated equally, and the randomly chosen report is
likely to affect the ﬁnal prioritization. Therefore, to formal-
ize and unify the prioritization algorithm, we introduce the
concept of NULL Report , which also contains four features.
Problem Widget : the screenshot of the problem widget
is essentially a 3-dimensional matrix representing the
width, the height, and three color channels. Therefore,
we construct the problem widget as a zero matrix. The
width and the height of the zero matrix are set as the
average size of all the actual crowdsourced test reports.
Intuitively speaking, it is an all-black image.
Bug Description : the bug description of the NULL Report
is directly set as an empty string, and since the string
length is 0, obviously it contains no words, after the
Word2Vec processing, the feature vector will be a 100-
dimensional vector of all ‘0’s.
Context Widget : for the context widget of the NULL
Report , we directly construct the vector representing the
numbers of the 14 different types of widgets, and all
elements are 0. This represents that there are “no” widgets
on the app screenshot of the crowdsourced test report.
Reproduction Step : the reproduction step of the NULL
Report is also set as an empty string, and the “action-
object” sequence is also with a length of 0.
The primary consensus for prioritization is to reveal all the
bugs as early as possible under the circumstances when some
reports would describe the problems repetitiously [3] [13] [14].
Therefore, it is important to provide as many reports de-
scribing different bugs as possible for the developers early.
951Algorithm 1 Crowdsourced Test Report Prioritization
Input: Crowdsourced Test Report Set Rinitial
Output: Prioritized Crowdsourced Test Report Set P
1:initiate unprioritized report pool U Rinitial
2:initiate prioritized report pool P=;
3:initiate target report rt
4:initiate NULL Report rnull
5:P.append(rnull)
6:whilejUj6= 0 do
7: initiatesimilarity = 2
8: foreachr2Udo
9: foreachrp2Pdo
10: initiatesimilarity r= 2
11: Sim BFT =Sim WP+ (1 )Sim P
12: Sim CFT =Sim WC+ (1 )Sim R
13: calSemSim() =Sim BFT +(1 )Sim CFT
14: similarity r+ = calSemSim( r,rp)
15: ifcalSemSim( r,rp)<similarity rthen
16: similarity r= calSemSim( r,rp)
17: end if
18: end for
19: ifsimilarity r<similarity then
20: rt=r
21: similarity =similarity r
22: end if
23: end for
24:P.append(rt)
25:U.remove(rt)
26:end while
27:returnP
Based on this idea, we design our prioritization strategy as
follows, and the formal expression is presented in Algorithm 1.
First, we construct the NULL Report according to the rules.
mentioned above and append the NULL Report to the null
prioritized report pool. Following is a iterative process. We
calculate the D EEPSIMILARITY of each unprioritized report
to the whole prioritized report pool, which is deﬁned as the
minimum D EEPSIMILARITY of the unprioritized report to all
the reports in the prioritized report pool. The report with the
lowest D EEPSIMILARITY with the prioritized report pool will
be moved to the prioritized report pool.
IV. E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setting
To evaluate the proposed D EEPPRIOR , we design an em-
pirical experiment. To complete the experiment, we collect
536 crowdsourced test reports from 10 different mobile apps
(details in TABLE I). The apps are labeled from A1 to A10,
and the number of test reports of different apps ranges from
10 to 152. We also invite software testing experts to manually
classify the test reports according to the bugs they describe,
and the average number of reports in a bug category is 8.06.
Based on the crowdsourced test report dataset, we build
three speciﬁc datasets to better support the evaluation, includ-TABLE I
EXPERIMENT APP
App No. App Category Report #Bug
Category #Report per
Category
A1 Finance 134 9 14.89
A2 System 29 6 4.83
A3 Reading 23 4 5.75
A4 Reading 152 8 19.00
A5 System 75 7 10.71
A6 Finance 26 5 5.20
A7 Finance 10 2 5.00
A8 Music 51 8 6.38
A9 Life 12 3 4.00
A10 System 24 5 4.80
Total 536 Average 8.06
ing1)a large-scale widget image dataset, 2)a large-scale
test report keyword set, and 3)a large-scale text classiﬁcation
dataset. All the 4 dataset build up the integrated dataset group.
In total, we design three research questions (RQ) to evaluate
the proposed test report prioritization approach, D EEPPRIOR .
RQ1 : How effective can D EEPPRIOR identify the widget
type extracted from the app screenshots?
RQ2 : How effective can D EEPPRIOR classify the textual
descriptions from the crowdsourced test reports?
RQ3 : How effective can D EEPPRIOR prioritize the
crowdsourced test reports?
B. RQ1: Widget Type Classiﬁcation
The ﬁrst research question is set to evaluate the effectiveness
of our processing to the app screenshots. The most important
component of app screenshot processing is the widget extrac-
tion and classiﬁcation. Therefore, we evaluate the accuracy of
the widget type classiﬁcation CNN. 36,573 different widget
images are collected from real-world apps, and the images
have an even distribution in 14 categories.
The details of the CNN is presented in Section III-A1. The
dataset is divided by the ratio 7:2:1 into the training set, the
validation set and the test set, as the common practice. After
the CNN model is trained, we evaluate the accuracy on the test
set. The overall accuracy of widget type classiﬁcation reaches
89.98%. Speciﬁcally speaking, we use precision ,recall and
F-Measure values to evaluate the network. The calculating
formula can be seen as follows, where TPmeans true positive
samples, FPmeans false-positive samples, TNmeans true
negative samples, FNmeans false negative samples.
precision =TP
TP +FP; recall =TP
TP +FN(2)
2
F Measure=1
precision+1
recall(3)
The evaluation results can be seen in TABLE II. The
precision value reaches an average of 90.05%, and the lowest
precision is 74.36% and the highest is 99.81%. For recall ,
which measures the total amount of relevant instances that
are actually retrieved, the average values is 89.98%, and the
recall values range from 70.83% to 100.00%. F-Measure is a
harmonic mean of the precision andrecall , and it reaches an
952average of 89.92%. The above results reﬂect the outstanding
capability of the proposed classiﬁer.
TABLE II
WIDGET TYPE CLASSIFICATION
Widget Type precision recall F-Measure
BUT 82.30% 76.53% 79.31%
CHB 96.35% 94.89% 95.61%
CTV 93.27% 92.73% 93.00%
EDT 74.66% 87.81% 80.70%
IMB 76.73% 85.26% 80.77%
IMV 74.36% 72.01% 73.17%
PBH 98.65% 93.78% 96.15%
PBV 94.35% 99.81% 97.00%
RBU 94.17% 93.45% 93.81%
RBA 99.05% 99.81% 99.43%
SWC 98.85% 97.73% 98.29%
SKB 99.23% 94.89% 97.01%
SPN 99.81% 100.00% 99.90%
TXV 78.95% 70.83% 74.67%
Average 90.05% 89.97% 89.92%
We also have an in-depth insight into the results. We
ﬁnd that there are two groups of widgets that are easy to
be confused. The ﬁrst group includes ImageButton and
ImageView . It is easy to understand that from a visual
perspective, these two types can hardly be identiﬁed. The
only difference between these 2 types is that ImageButton
can trigger an action while ImageView is a simple image.
However, one important thing to mention is that the in app
design, developers can add a hyperlink to the ImageView
widget to realize the equivalent effect. The second group
includes Button ,EditText andTextView . These three
widgets are all a ﬁxed area containing a text fragment, which
is also visually similar and hard to identify even for humans.
Moreover, some special renderings make the widgets even
harder to identify. According to our survey, we ﬁnd that these
two confusing groups will not affect much, and the widgets
can be treated as equivalent from both visual perspective and
function perspective.
Results for RQ1 : The overall accuracy of the CNN to
classify the widget types reaches 89.98%. For each speciﬁc
type, the average precision is 90.05%, the precision is 74.36%
and the F-Measure is of 89.92%. Also, according to our
survey on real test reports, even if some types that are with
low precision, their visual and functional features will not
negatively affect D EEPPRIOR .
C. RQ2: Textual Description Classiﬁcation
In the processing of the textual description, we classify
into two categories: bug description and reproduction step.
Different textual descriptions are considered as different report
features. To classify the textual descriptions, we segment
the textual descriptions into sentences. Then, we feed the
sentences into a TextCNN model to complete the task, and the
details are presented in Section III-A2. Also, to better train and
evaluate the network, we build a large-scale text classiﬁcation
dataset. The dataset contains 4,340 pieces of labeled textual
segments, including 2,252 pieces of bug descriptions and2,088 pieces of reproduction steps. The dataset is divided into
training set, validation set and test set at the ratio of 7:2:1.
TABLE III
TEXT CLASSIFICATION
precision recall F-Measure
Bug Description 98.46% 97.81% 98.13%
Reproduction Step 97.95% 98.53% 98.24%
Average 98.21% 98.17% 98.19%
The results on the test set can be seen from TABLE III,
and the overall accuracy of the model reaches 96.65%. More
speciﬁcally, we use the same measurements like the evalua-
tion in RQ1, including precision ,recall andF-Measure . The
average precision of 2 types of textual description reaches
98.21%, the average recall reaches 98.17%, and the he average
F-Measure reaches 98.19%. The result is quite promising,
and we also manually check the textual descriptions. We ﬁnd
that compared with reproduction steps, bug descriptions tend
to contain bug-related words, such as “crash”, “ﬂashback”,
“missing element”, “wrong”, “fail”, “no response”, etc.While
the reproduction steps contain just the operations, target wid-
gets and the corresponding responses.
Results for RQ2 : The overall accuracy of text classiﬁcation
reaches 96.65%, and the precision ,recall and F-Measure
are all over 98%. Such results show D EEPPRIOR ’s excellent
capability to analyze textual descriptions, which also lays a
solid foundation for the crowdsourced test report prioritization.
D. RQ3: Crowdsourced Test Report Prioritization
In this research question, we evaluate the test report prior-
itization effectiveness of D EEPPRIOR . The metric we use is
the APFD (Average Percentage of Fault Detected) metric [15],
which is also used by Feng et al. to prioritize crowdsourced
test reports [3]. In the formula, the Tfimeans the index of
the report that ﬁrst ﬁnds the bug i, thenis the total report
number, and the Mis the total number of revealed bugs.
APFD = 1 PM
i=1Tfi
nM+1
2n(4)
To better illustrate the advantage of DEEPPRIOR , we com-
pare DEEPPRIOR with the following prioritizing strategies:
IDEAL : This strategy is the best prioritization on theory,
which means that developers can review all the bugs
revealed by the reports in the shortest time.
IMAGE : This strategy uses only the results of deep image
understanding of DEEPPRIOR to rank the test reports
because deep image understanding is a signiﬁcant part of
our research.
BDD IV: This strategy refers to the algorithm in Feng et
al.’s work [3], which is also the state-of-the-art approach
for crowdsourced test report prioritization.
RANDOM : The R ANDOM strategy refers to the situation
without any prioritization strategy.
ForDEEPPRIOR andIMAGE strategy, we run once because
of the stability of our approach, and the trained model will
953TABLE IV
DEEPPRIOR REPORT PRIORITIZATION RESULT AND COMPARISON
App No. IDEAL DEEPPRIOR BDD IVDEEPPRIOR
vs.BDD IVOverhead
ComparisonIMAGEDEEPPRIOR
vs.IMAGERANDOMDEEPPRIOR
vs.RANDOM
A1 0.974 0.927 0.914 1.36% 68.75% 0.926 0.09% 0.805 15.15%
A2 0.931 0.839 0.822 2.10% 33.40% 0.805 4.29% 0.655 28.07%
A3 0.957 0.865 0.827 4.65% 35.49% 0.721 20.00% 0.692 25.00%
A4 0.980 0.933 0.941 -0.87% 83.29% 0.845 10.42% 0.794 17.51%
A5 0.967 0.898 0.894 0.43% 56.14% 0.892 0.64% 0.751 19.52%
A6 0.942 0.827 0.765 8.04% 41.89% 0.827 0.00% 0.619 33.54%
A7 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.00% 32.18% 1.000 0.00% 0.750 33.33%
A8 0.941 0.850 0.826 2.97% 34.38% 0.858 -0.86% 0.694 22.61%
A9 0.958 0.931 0.875 6.35% 23.97% 0.847 9.84% 0.681 36.73%
A10 0.938 0.863 0.763 13.11% 35.12% 0.854 0.98% 0.621 38.93%
Average 0.956 0.893 0.863 3.81% 44.46% 0.857 4.54% 0.706 27.04%
not produce different results for various attempts; for IDEAL
strategy, we manually calculate the APFD because for a ﬁxed
report cluster, it is a ﬁxed value; for BDD IVstrategy, we run
30 times and calculate the average value as the original paper
[3]; and for RANDOM strategy, we run 100 times to eliminate
the effect of the occasional circumstances.
First, we compare DEEPPRIOR with RANDOM strategy. As
shown in the TABLE IV, we ﬁnd DEEPPRIOR outperforms
RANDOM strategy much, ranging from 15.15% to 38.93%,
and the average improvement reaches 27.04%. This shows a
superiority of DEEPPRIOR .
Then we compare the results of DEEPPRIOR with the
single IMAGE strategy. The average improvement of DEEP-
PRIOR is 4.54%, and in 2 apps (A3 and A4), DEEPPRIOR
outperforms much. For A8, DEEPPRIOR is slightly weaker
than IMAGE strategy. We review the reports of A8 and ﬁnd
that the textual descriptions are not well written, and cannot
positively help the prioritization of the reports. Generally
speaking, the results prove the necessity of combining both
text analysis and deep image understanding, and a single
strategy will compensate each other’s drawbacks and improve
the prioritization accuracy.
Also, we make a comparison between DEEPPRIOR and
BDD IVstrategy, which is the state-of-the-art approach. Ac-
cording to the experiment results, DEEPPRIOR outperforms
BDD IVwith an average improvement of 3.81%. The im-
provements in some apps are especially obvious. Moreover,
we record the total time overhead from reading the report
cluster to the output of the prioritized reports. It shows that
DEEPPRIOR uses less than half of the time of BDD IV, which
shows great performance superiority.
Another advantage of DEEPPRIOR over BDD IVis that the
DEEPPRIOR can output stable results while BDD IV’s results
will ﬂoat. According to the detailed results of BDD IVstrategy
(in the online package), we ﬁnd that BDD IVis quite volatile.
The improvements over baseline strategies vary among
different apps, and some reasons account for this. First, the
“report/category” rate for each app is different, so in the
limited activity set of an app, the recurring of the same
activities become frequent. Second, different apps have various
contents. For example, A1 is a kids’ education app, and it
consists of a large number of pictures, videos, variant texts.Such a situation makes it much more complex to extract useful
text information and have a thorough understanding of the app
screenshot. As a result, the matric would decrease.
Results for RQ3 :DEEPPRIOR ’s capability of prioritizing
crowdsourced test reports is excellent, it outperforms the state-
of-the-art approach, BDD IV, with less than half the overhead.
Also, the speciﬁc experiment of the IMAGE strategy shows the
effectiveness of our deep screenshot understanding algorithm.
Compared with the state-of-the-art approach, DEEPPRIOR
performs much more stable.
E. Threats to Validity
The categories of the apps in this experiment are limited .
Our 15 experimental apps cover eight different categories
(according to app store taxonomy). The coverage is limited.
However, we want to emphasize that due to our deep screen-
shot understanding involves the layout characterization to the
app activity, the D EEPPRIOR is only suitable for analyzing
the apps with a grid layout or a list layout. We also limit our
claim within apps of such layouts.
The enrollment of the crowdworkers is also uncon-
trolled . The crowdworkers’ capability is uncontrolled, and
low-quality reports may occur. However, even if the quality
of some reports is low, D EEPPRIOR can identify the bug it is
describing if it actually contains one. If not, D EEPPRIOR will
categorize the report as a single category, and will not affect
the prioritization of other reports.
The datasets we construct are of Chinese language . The
language of the datasets may be another threat, but NLP
and OCR technologies are quite strong. If we replace the
text processing engine with that of another language, the text
processing will also be completed well, and will not have a
negative impact on D EEPPRIOR . Moreover, the maturity of
machine translation [16] also makes it robust to process cross-
language textual information.
V. R ELATED WORK
A. Crowdsourced Testing
Crowdsourced testing has been a mainstream testing strat-
egy. It is signiﬁcantly different from traditional testing. Testing
tasks are distributed to a large group of crowdworkers of
different locations and have widely varying abilities. The most
notable advantage of crowdsourced testing is the capability of
954simulating different using conditions and the relatively low
economic cost [17] [18]. However, the openness of crowd-
sourced testing leads to a large amount redundant reports. The
key problem is to improve the developers’ efﬁciency to review
the test reports. some researches start from selecting skillful
crowdworkers to complete the tasks [19] [20] [21]. Such a
strategy is effective, while it is still hard to control because
even skillful crowdworkers would loaf on the task. Therefore,
we think it is more important to process the test reports instead
of other factors in crowdsourced testing. Liu et al. [22] and Yu
[6] proposed approaches respectively to automatically generate
descriptions from screenshots for test reports based on the
consensus that app screenshots are easy to acquire while the
textual descriptions are hard to write for all the crowdworkers.
This idea inspired us to have a deep screenshot understanding
of to help better prioritize the test reports.
B. Crowdsourced Test Report Processing
Many researches have been done to process crowdsourced
test reports to better help developers review the reports and ﬁx
bugs. Basic strategies include report classiﬁcation, duplicate
detection, and report prioritization. In this section, we will
present the related works of different basic strategies.
Banerjee et al. proposed FactorLCS [23], utilizing the
common sequence matching, and the approach is effective on
open bug tracking repositories. They also proposed a method
[24] with a multi-label classiﬁer to ﬁnd the “primary” report
of a cluster of reports with high similarity. Similarly, Jiang
et al. proposed TERFUR [14], a tool that clusters the test
reports with NLP technologies, and they also ﬁlter out the
low-quality reports. Wang et al. [25] takes the features of
the crowdworkers into consideration as a feature of the test
reports, and then make the clustering. Wang et al. propose the
LOAF [26], which is the ﬁrst considering the operation steps
and result descriptions separately for report feature extraction.
More researches are done to detect the duplication of the
test reports. Sun et al. [27] use information retrieval models
to detect duplicate bug reports more accurately. Sureka et al.
[28] adopted a character n-gram based model to complete the
duplicate detection task. Prifti et al. [29] conducted a survey
on large-scale open-sourced project test reports and proposed a
method that can concentrate the search for duplicate reports on
speciﬁc portions of the whole repository. Sun et al. proposed
a retrieval function, REP [30], to measure the similarity, and
the function includes the similarity of non-textual ﬁelds like
component, version, etc.Nguyen et al. introduced DBTM [31],
a tool that utilizes both IR-based features and topic-based
features, and detects the duplications bug reports according to
technical issues. Alipour et al. [32] had a more comprehensive
analysis of the test report context and improved the detection
accuracy. Hindle [33] makes improvements by combining
contextual quality attributes, architecture terms, and system-
development topics to improve bug deduplicate detection.
The above approaches, including the report classiﬁcation
and the duplicate detection, choose part of the test reports to
represent all the test reports. However, we hold that all thereports contain valuable information even if duplicates exist.
Moreover, After duplicates are detected, developers still need
to review the reports to carry forward the bug processing.
Therefore, we think report prioritization is a better choice.
There are also many researches on report prioritization.
Zhou et al. introduced BugSim [34], considering both textual
and statistical features, to rank the test reports. DRONE,
proposed by Tian et al. [35], is a machine learning-based
approach to predict the priority of the test reports, considering
different factors of the test reports. Feng et al. proposed a
series of approaches, DivRisk [36] and BDDiv [3], to prioritize
the test reports, and they ﬁrst consider the screenshots of the
test reports. Subsequently, Wang et al. [2] work further and
explore a more sound approach to prioritize test reports with
much more attention paid to the screenshots.
Among all the above researches, only a few of them, like
[2] and [3], consider the app screenshots, which we think is
a valuable factor for extracting the features to process the
test reports. But such researches only treat the screenshots
as simple matrixes instead of meaningful content.
C. Deep Image Understanding
Image understanding is a hotspot issue in the Computer
Vision (CV) ﬁeld. In this section, we mainly focus on the
researches utilizing image understanding in software testing.
Lowe [10] proposed the SIFT algorithm, which is used to
match the feature points on the target images and calculate the
similarity, making use of a kind of new image local features,
which are invariant to image changing, including translation,
scaling, and rotation. Optical character recognition (OCR) is
a widely-used tool to recognize the texts, which is helpful
to better understand the images based on the rich textual
information. Nguyen et al. [37] proposed REMAUI, making
use of CV technologies to identify the widgets, texts, images,
and even containers of the app screenshot. Moran et al. [38]
proposed REDRAW based on REMAUI, which is more precise
to identify the widgets and can automatically generate codes
for the app UI. Similarly, Chen et al. [39] also proposed a
tool to generate GUI skeletons from app screenshots with
the combination of CV technologies and machine learning.
Yuet al. [1] proposed a tool named LIRAT to record and
replay mobile app test scripts among different platforms with
a thorough understanding of the app screenshot.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes a crowdsourced test report prioritiza-
tion approach, D EEPPRIOR , via deep screenshot understand-
ing. D EEPPRIOR transforms the app screenshots and textual
descriptions into four different features, including problem
widget, context widget, bug description, and reproduction
step. Then, the features are aggregated into D EEPFEATURE ,
including Bug Feature andContext Feature according to their
relativity to the bug. Afterwards, we calculate the D EEPSIM-
ILARITY based on the features. Finally, the reports are prior-
itized according to the D EEPSIMILARITY with a preset rule.
We also conducted an experiment to evaluate the proposed
955approach, and the results show that D EEPPRIOR outperforms
the state-of-the-art approach with less than half the overhead.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported partially by National Key R&D
Program of China (2018AAA0102302), National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (61802171, 61772014, 61690201),
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(14380021), and National Undergraduate Training Program for
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (202010284073Z).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Yu, C. Fang, Y . Feng, W. Zhao, and Z. Chen, “Lirat: Layout and image
recognition driving automated mobile testing of cross-platform,” in
2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1066–1069.
[2] J. Wang, M. Li, S. Wang, T. Menzies, and Q. Wang, “Images don’t lie:
Duplicate crowdtesting reports detection with screenshot information,”
Information and Software Technology , vol. 110, pp. 139–155, 2019.
[3] Y . Feng, J. A. Jones, Z. Chen, and C. Fang, “Multi-objective test report
prioritization using image understanding,” in 2016 31st IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 202–213.
[4] N. O’Mahony, S. Campbell, A. Carvalho, S. Harapanahalli, G. V .
Hernandez, L. Krpalkova, D. Riordan, and J. Walsh, “Deep learning vs.
traditional computer vision,” in Science and Information Conference .
Springer, 2019, pp. 128–144.
[5] X. Xiao, X. Wang, Z. Cao, H. Wang, and P. Gao, “Iconintent: automatic
identiﬁcation of sensitive ui widgets based on icon classiﬁcation for
android apps,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 257–268.
[6] S. Yu, “Crowdsourced report generation via bug screenshot understand-
ing,” in 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1277–1279.
[7] Y . Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882 , 2014.
[8] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composi-
tionality,” in Advances in neural information processing systems , 2013,
pp. 3111–3119.
[9] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected
applications in speech recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 77,
no. 2, pp. 257–286, 1989.
[10] D. G. Lowe et al. , “Object recognition from local scale-invariant
features.” in iccv, vol. 99, no. 2, 1999, pp. 1150–1157.
[11] M. Muja and D. G. Lowe, “Fast approximate nearest neighbors with
automatic algorithm conﬁguration.” VISAPP (1) , vol. 2, no. 331-340,
p. 2, 2009.
[12] D. F. Silva and G. E. Batista, “Speeding up all-pairwise dynamic
time warping matrix calculation,” in Proceedings of the 2016 SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining . SIAM, 2016, pp. 837–845.
[13] T. Y . Chen, F.-C. Kuo, R. G. Merkel, and T. Tse, “Adaptive random
testing: The art of test case diversity,” Journal of Systems and Software ,
vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 60–66, 2010.
[14] B. Jiang, Z. Zhang, W. K. Chan, and T. Tse, “Adaptive random test
case prioritization,” in 2009 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering . IEEE, 2009, pp. 233–244.
[15] G. Rothermel, R. H. Untch, C. Chu, and M. J. Harrold, “Prioritizing
test cases for regression testing,” IEEE Transactions on software engi-
neering , vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 929–948, 2001.
[16] S. Karimi, F. Scholer, and A. Turpin, “Machine transliteration survey,”
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1–46, 2011.
[17] R. Gao, Y . Wang, Y . Feng, Z. Chen, and W. E. Wong, “Successes,
challenges, and rethinking–an industrial investigation on crowdsourced
mobile application testing,” Empirical Software Engineering , vol. 24,
no. 2, pp. 537–561, 2019.
[18] K. Mao, L. Capra, M. Harman, and Y . Jia, “A survey of the use
of crowdsourcing in software engineering,” Journal of Systems and
Software , vol. 126, pp. 57–84, 2017.
[19] Q. Cui, S. Wang, J. Wang, Y . Hu, Q. Wang, and M. Li, “Multi-objective
crowd worker selection in crowdsourced testing.”[20] Q. Cui, J. Wang, G. Yang, M. Xie, Q. Wang, and M. Li, “Who should be
selected to perform a task in crowdsourced testing?” in 2017 IEEE 41st
Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) ,
vol. 1. IEEE, 2017, pp. 75–84.
[21] M. Xie, Q. Wang, G. Yang, and M. Li, “Cocoon: Crowdsourced
testing quality maximization under context coverage constraint,” in 2017
IEEE 28th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 316–327.
[22] D. Liu, X. Zhang, Y . Feng, and J. A. Jones, “Generating descriptions for
screenshots to assist crowdsourced testing,” in 2018 IEEE 25th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
(SANER) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 492–496.
[23] S. Banerjee, B. Cukic, and D. Adjeroh, “Automated duplicate bug report
classiﬁcation using subsequence matching,” in 2012 IEEE 14th Inter-
national Symposium on High-Assurance Systems Engineering . IEEE,
2012, pp. 74–81.
[24] S. Banerjee, Z. Syed, J. Helmick, and B. Cukic, “A fusion approach for
classifying duplicate problem reports,” in 2013 IEEE 24th International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) . IEEE, 2013,
pp. 208–217.
[25] J. Wang, Q. Cui, Q. Wang, and S. Wang, “Towards effectively test report
classiﬁcation to assist crowdsourced testing,” in Proceedings of the 10th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement , 2016, pp. 1–10.
[26] J. Wang, S. Wang, Q. Cui, and Q. Wang, “Local-based active classiﬁ-
cation of test report to assist crowdsourced testing,” in Proceedings of
the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering , 2016, pp. 190–201.
[27] C. Sun, D. Lo, X. Wang, J. Jiang, and S.-C. Khoo, “A discriminative
model approach for accurate duplicate bug report retrieval,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software
Engineering-Volume 1 , 2010, pp. 45–54.
[28] A. Sureka and P. Jalote, “Detecting duplicate bug report using character
n-gram-based features,” in 2010 Asia Paciﬁc Software Engineering
Conference . IEEE, 2010, pp. 366–374.
[29] T. Prifti, S. Banerjee, and B. Cukic, “Detecting bug duplicate reports
through local references,” in Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering , 2011.
[30] C. Sun, D. Lo, S.-C. Khoo, and J. Jiang, “Towards more accurate
retrieval of duplicate bug reports,” in 2011 26th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2011) . IEEE,
2011, pp. 253–262.
[31] A. T. Nguyen, T. T. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, D. Lo, and C. Sun,
“Duplicate bug report detection with a combination of information re-
trieval and topic modeling,” in 2012 Proceedings of the 27th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . IEEE,
2012, pp. 70–79.
[32] A. Alipour, A. Hindle, and E. Stroulia, “A contextual approach towards
more accurate duplicate bug report detection,” in 2013 10th Working
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) . IEEE, 2013, pp.
183–192.
[33] A. Hindle, A. Alipour, and E. Stroulia, “A contextual approach towards
more accurate duplicate bug report detection and ranking,” Empirical
Software Engineering , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 368–410, 2016.
[34] J. Zhou and H. Zhang, “Learning to rank duplicate bug reports,” in
Proceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management , 2012, pp. 852–861.
[35] Y . Tian, D. Lo, and C. Sun, “Drone: Predicting priority of reported
bugs by multi-factor analysis,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance . IEEE, 2013, pp. 200–209.
[36] Y . Feng, Z. Chen, J. A. Jones, C. Fang, and B. Xu, “Test report
prioritization to assist crowdsourced testing,” in Proceedings of the 2015
10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering , 2015, pp.
225–236.
[37] T. A. Nguyen and C. Csallner, “Reverse engineering mobile application
user interfaces with remaui (t),” in IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering , 2016.
[38] K. Moran, C. Bernal-C ´ardenas, M. Curcio, R. Bonett, and D. Poshy-
vanyk, “Machine learning-based prototyping of graphical user interfaces
for mobile apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02312 , 2018.
[39] C. Chen, T. Su, G. Meng, Z. Xing, and Y . Liu, “From ui design image
to gui skeleton: a neural machine translator to bootstrap mobile gui
implementation,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Software Engineering . ACM, 2018, pp. 665–676.
956