Singapor e Management Univ ersity Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity 
Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and 
Information Systems School of Computing and Information Systems 
11-2020 
A theor y of the engagement in open sour ce pr ojects via summer A theor y of the engagement in open sour ce pr ojects via summer 
of code pr ograms of code pr ograms 
Jefferson SIL VA 
Igor WIESE 
Daniel M. GERM AN 
Christ oph TREUDE 
Singapor e Management Univ ersity , ctreude@smu.edu.sg 
Marco A. GEROSA 
See next page for additional authors 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch 
 Part of the Softwar e Engineering Commons , and the Theor y and Algorithms Commons 
Citation Citation 
SILVA, Jeff erson; WIESE, Igor; GERM AN, Daniel M.; TREUDE, Christ oph; GEROSA, Mar co A.; and 
STEINM ACHER, Igor . A theor y of the engagement in open sour ce pr ojects via summer of code pr ograms. 
(2020). ESEC/FSE '20: Pr oceedings of the 28th A CM Joint E uropean Softwar e Engineering Conf erence 
and Symposium on the F oundations of Softwar e Engineering: Vir tual, No vember 8-13 . 421-431. 
Available at:Available at:  https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch/8894 
This Conf erence Pr oceeding Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the School of Computing and 
Information Systems at Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Resear ch Collection School Of Computing and Information Systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of 
Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity . For mor e information, please email 
cher ylds@smu.edu.sg . Author Author 
Jefferson SIL VA, Igor WIESE, Daniel M. GERM AN, Christ oph TREUDE, Mar co A. GEROSA, and Igor 
STEINM ACHER 
This conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is a vailable at Institutional K nowledge at Singapor e Management Univ ersity: 
https:/ /ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg/sis_r esear ch/8894 A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via
Summer of Code Programs
Jefferson Silva
silvajo@pucsp.br
Pontifical Catholic Univ. of São Paulo
Brazilian Network Information Center
São Paulo, SP, BrazilIgor Wiese
igor@utfpr.edu.br
Univ. Tecn. Federal do Paraná
Campo Mourão, PR, BrazilDaniel M. German
dmg@uvic.ca
University of Victoria
Victoria, BC, Canada
Christoph Treude
christoph.treude@adelaide.edu.au
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA, AustraliaMarco Aurélio Gerosa
Marco.Gerosa@nau.edu
Northern Arizona University
Flagstaff, AZ, USAIgor Steinmacher
igor.steinmacher@nau.edu
Northern Arizona University
Flagstaff, AZ, USA
ABSTRACT
Summer of code programs connect students to open source soft-
ware (OSS) projects, typically during the summer break from school.
Analyzing consolidated summer of code programs can reveal how
college students, who these programs usually target, can be moti-
vated to participate in OSS, and what onboarding strategies OSS
communities adopt to receive these students. In this paper, we study
the well-established Google Summer of Code (GSoC) and devise an
integrated engagement theory grounded in multiple data sources
to explain motivation and onboarding in this context. Our analysis
shows that OSS communities employ several strategies for plan-
ning and executing student participation, socially integrating the
students, and rewarding student’s contributions and achievements.
Students are motivated by a blend of rewards, which are moderated
by external factors. We presented these rewards and the motivation
theory to students who had never participated in a summer of code
program and collected their shift in motivation after learning about
the theory. New students can benefit from the former students’
experiences detailed in our results, and OSS stakeholders can lever-
age both the insight into students’ motivations for joining such
programs as well as the onboarding strategies we identify to devise
actions to attract and retain newcomers.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Open source model ;•Human-
centered computing →Open source software .
KEYWORDS
Motivation, Onboarding, Engagement, Mentoring, OSS, Process
Theory, Summer of Code
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7043-1/20/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409724ACM Reference Format:
Jefferson Silva, Igor Wiese, Daniel M. German, Christoph Treude, Marco
Aurélio Gerosa, and Igor Steinmacher. 2020. A Theory of the Engagement in
Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs. In Proceedings of the
28th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’20), November 8–
13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409724
1 INTRODUCTION
Motivation to contribute to OSS and onboarding of new developers
are often studied in the literature (e.g., [ 11,17,20,35,46]). However,
these studies focus on software developers in general. Analyzing
what motivates students to participate in OSS and how to onboard
them is underexplored in the literature. Fostering the participation
of students can increase the OSS workforce at the same time that it
can benefit students, since potential employers increasingly con-
sider online contributions when making hiring decisions [15, 34].
This paper aims to help understand why students participate
in an OSS community through a summer of code (SoC) program.
Summer of code programs provide a path towards joining open
source projects, connecting projects with new contributors, typi-
cally students [ 42,51]. Examples of such programs include Google
Summer of Code (GSoC),1Rails Girls Summer of Code,2Julia Sum-
mer of Code,3and Outreachy.4The programs offer a variety of
benefits, such as career building, an entry gateway to OSS projects,
peer recognition, mentorship, stipends, and intellectual stimula-
tion [ 43]. Previous work identified outcomes of summer of code pro-
grams [ 50,51] and student retention [ 38], usually in a few projects.
With this paper, we extend the existing literature by explaining on-
boarding strategies and motivations to participate in SoC programs.
We answer the following research questions:
RQ1 : How do OSS projects onboard students participating in
summer of code programs?
RQ2 : What motivates students to participate in a summer of code
program?
1https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/
2http://railsgirlssummerofcode.org/
3https://julialang.org/soc/archive.html
4https://www.outreachy.org/
421ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA J. Silva, I. Wiese, D. German, C. Treude, M. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher
To answer our RQs, we analyzed the well-established Google
Summer of Code program and built an integrated theory grounded
in multiple data sources: students’ and mentors’ answers to open-
ended questions, student interviews and survey responses, a lit-
erature review, and OSS projects’ applications to join GSoC. Our
engagement theory has two components. The first is a grounded
theory that explains the actions OSS projects perform in SoC pro-
grams to onboard students. This component can be considered a
process theory [ 32,33], since it explains how OSS projects adapt.
The second component of our engagement theory explains how
students are motivated to join and contribute to OSS projects via
SoC programs. We identify several aspects that influence students’
motivation, such as individual differences, external factors, and
participation rewards.
Our theory contributes to enriching the state-of-the-art in sev-
eral ways: (i) our engagement theory structures the existing knowl-
edge about the understudied phenomenon of engaging in SoC pro-
grams [ 16]; (ii) new students can benefit from the experiences of
former SoC participants to learn about motivations to join SoC
programs; (iii) OSS projects can leverage the understanding of how
the variety of rewards influence participants’ motivation and how
to onboard students in OSS to devise strategies to attract and re-
tain contributors; (iv) program organizers can better support the
involved communities; and (v) finally, our theory offers a founda-
tion for researchers interested in building a variance theory [32,54],
which could, for instance, predict the actions that OSS projects need
to take to retain students.
2 CONTEXT: GOOGLE SUMMER OF CODE
We study Google Summer of Code (GSoC), which is a worldwide
Google program that offers students a stipend to write code for
OSS projects for three months. We chose to study GSoC because (i)
it is best-known compared to other SoC programs, (ii) it has been
in operation for over a decade (since 2005), (iii) a large number of
globally-distributed students participate in it, and (iv) it provides
students with a comprehensive set of rewards, including participat-
ing in a well-known large company’s program, community bonding,
skill development, personal enjoyment, career advancement, peer
recognition, status, and a stipend [ 51]. Google opens an annual call
for proposals aimed at OSS projects interested in participating in
the program.
3 RESEARCH DESIGN
We built two separate but interrelated theories (one for each RQ)
grounded in multiple data sources, as discussed in the following.
3.1 Phase I: Building the Onboarding Theory
To understand how OSS projects onboard students in SoC programs
(RQ1), we searched for data that could show us the strategies that
OSS projects adopt to onboard students. OSS projects must submit
an application to join GSoC. We used the Google search engine to
find application forms that OSS projects made publicly available.
Using the questions from the application forms as a search query
(e.g., “How will you keep students involved with your community
after GSoC?” ), we were able to collect applications from 88 distinct
OSS projects. We analyzed 25 applications randomly selected beforereaching saturation of information. The complete list of projects
and the documents we analyzed are available in the replication
package5. We also analyzed the GSoC mentor guide [ 48], which
includes suggestions on how to engage students.
To analyze our data, we used coding, which consists of assigning
words or phrases to portions of unstructured data [ 37]. We followed
Charmaz’s constructivist approach [ 8] to divide the process into
three steps: ( i)initial coding , (ii)focused coding and categorizing ,
and ( iii)theory building . As a result, we obtained 34 concepts, 13
categories, and 2 major categories, which we organized to create
the onboarding theory (Figure 1), the first component of our en-
gagement theory.
3.2 Phase II: Building the Motivation Theory
To understand what motivates students to participate in a summer
of code program (RQ2), we investigated multiple empirical data
sources. First, we reanalyzed the data6that we collected in a pre-
vious work [ 43], with a focus on theory building. In this phase,
we also combined our previous empirical results with relevant
literature. We reviewed works that targeted SoC programs and
motivation [26, 39, 40, 42, 43, 50, 53, 55].
For all grounded theory procedures in this study, the first author
performed the open coding. The next steps involved two other
authors, who discussed until reaching mutual agreement.
3.3 Phase III: Perceptions about the Theory
In Phase III, we aimed to understand the effects of presenting our
theory to students who had no previous participation in SoC pro-
grams.
Data collection . In a questionnaire7, we asked students whether
they had heard of GSoC or similar programs. For the students
who had heard of such a program, we asked them to describe
it and tell us whether they had considered joining it. Next, we
asked students to read an explanation of GSoC (from the program
website).8After that, we asked them to list, in order of importance,
what SoC students gain by participating in GSoC.
Then, we instructed the students to watch a 7.5-minute explana-
tory video9that the authors prepared to summarize the theory. We
decided to use an explanatory video instead of text to facilitate the
students’ participation. Afterward, the students answered a final
questionnaire,10in which we asked what about their perception of
GSoC changed, what they had learned, whether our results would
influence their decision to participate, how GSoC contributes (or
not) to attracting new contributors to OSS projects, what could moti-
vate other people to contribute to OSS projects through SoCs, what
SoC students gain by participating in GSoC in order of importance,
and demographics.
Data analysis . To analyze students’ answers, we applied de-
scriptive statistics and grounded theory procedures [ 8]. In response
to the question of what students gain by participating in GSoC,
5https://figshare.com/s/f5a9f70a82d600b4c949
6The data is publicly available at https://figshare.com/s/e0fdcfa581b638bd3ded
7https://pt.surveymonkey.com/r/HX9H7FX
8See the What is Google Summer of Code? section: https://google.github.io/
gsocguides/student/
9https://figshare.com/s/88704bc89fac722ac073
10https://pt.surveymonkey.com/r/HN82XYJ
422A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
students provided a list of rewards. We classified the rewards ac-
cording to Silva et al.’s motivation scheme [ 43]. We discarded all
unclear rewards. For example, when a student listed “experience, ”
we opted to discard it because it was not clear whether it referred to
the experience in contributing to OSS projects or experience in the
CV (or both). Moreover, we discarded all rewards that could not be
classified according to Silva et al.’s motivation scheme [ 43], such as
“maturity, ” and“organization. ” Although we discarded rewards, we
maintained the rewards’ rank positions. For example, our analysis
of a possible answer that listed “1. Career building; 2. Maturity, and;
3. Stipends” would discard “Maturity, ” but would still rank “Career
building” and“Stipends” as first and third positions, respectively.
Thus, to obtain a score for each reward, for all students in our
sample (38), we applied the formula: 𝑠=log𝑏(Í38
1𝑏(𝑏−𝑟+1))×100,
where 𝑏is the number of possible categories in [ 43] (i.e., 𝑏=7),𝑟
is the rank of a reward in an answer, and 𝑠is the final score of a
reward.
Sampling . As the authors are professors, we invited our students
to participate in the survey. We emailed ≈130 survey invitations to
Brazilian and Chinese students. The Chinese students were enrolled
in an OSS class and received grade incentives to participate. No
incentives were offered to Brazilian students.
A total of 41 respondents completed all three steps (18 Brazilian
and 23 Chinese). After a preliminary analysis, we observed that
some Chinese respondents had already participated in GSoC (2) or
a similar program (1). We excluded these answers from our analysis.
Therefore, our working sample comprises 38 students (18 Brazilian
and 20 Chinese).
4 RESULTS
As previously described, our engagement theory is divided into two
interconnected components: onboarding and motivation theory. In
this section, we explain these theories, which comprise concepts,
categories, and major categories. A category is a group of concepts,
and a major category is a group of categories. We present concepts
insmall capitals , categories in italics , and major categories in
boldface .
4.1 The Onboarding Theory (RQ1)
To obtain empirical data on which strategies OSS projects employ
to onboard students in SoCs, we analyzed the OSS projects’ appli-
cations for GSoC. We found a significant number of strategies that
OSS projects propose to engage students (Figure 1). OSS projects’
strategies were grouped into four categories. While planning and
execution follow the GSoC timeline, integration andrewarding can
be performed before, during, or after the program.
Planning . As GSoC is competitive, OSS projects are required to
carefully plan their participation in the program to increase their
odds of selection. Thus, we grouped into this major category the
actions that OSS projects do before GSoC kickoff (Figure 1). Al-
though GSoC program administrators advise that the program “is
about building the student’s experience” and that “getting code in
[the] project is a nice side effect” [48], OSS projects work to establish
a contribution context that encourages students toward becoming
contributors. As an example, Apache Software Foundation lever-
ages the program to “draw attention and new talent to many ofits projects,” which “benefit from contributions and galvanize new
community members by mentoring students. ”11
When applying to GSoC, OSS projects typically start by col-
lectively formulating an ideas list, which can also be used to
assess the project’s strengths and weaknesses and help the com-
munity decide to apply for the Summer of Code, as in the case of
Debian.
Accepted OSS projects worry about fairness in ranking students’
proposals, which leads them to devise and employ applicants’ pro-
posal acceptance criteria , such as only accepting proposals that were
checked by mentors or that contained solutions that could
be refined later by other members. Complementarily, some OSS
projects employ students’ selection criteria , deciding to only accept
applicants with good relationships with potential mentors
andwith previous contributions to codebase . One problem
with this strategy is that it can potentially harm underrepresented
groups [59].
In several applications, good communication was described as
key to successful participation, and several projects define a com-
munication policy . We observed three types of communications:
student-community, mentor-mentor, and mentor-student. The OSS
projects’ preferred way of communicating to students is to employ
thesame channel used by other members . In some cases, men-
tors use dedicated mentors’ communication channels to talk to
more experienced members. GSoC program administrators advise
mentors to employ multiple methods in the students’ communi-
cation channels [48]. Also, a communication policy defines the
freqency of updates students should provide, which was used
to not only manage the OSS projects’ expectations towards the
project’s completion, but also to identify student drop-outs [48].
OSS projects employ mentors’ selection criteria to identify men-
tors with a good fit for the students. OSS projects define that men-
toring should be performed in pairs only , with inexperienced
mentors paired with experienced ones , ideally with previous
experience in GSoC , and performed by known members of the
community.
OSS projects may face difficulties in deciding when to accept
students’ work [ 48]. GSoC program administrators recommend
that OSS projects define work acceptance criteria upfront. Some OSS
projects define criteria such as accepting code that was merged
into the codebase only . Additionally, to keep track of students’
work, some OSS projects establish monitoring tools , and a review
process of students’ work such as code inspection .
Execution . We grouped into this category the OSS projects’ strate-
gies intended to coordinate and mentor students during GSoC.
The mentoring actions consisted of reviewing/testing code ; fre-
quently giving feedback ;encouraging students when they are
demotivated; identifying barriers to work completion such
as checking that students have appropriate working conditions or
whether students have enough time to complete the tasks; man-
aging the OSS projects’ expectations , such as when students
should complete the development of a feature; finding alter-
native solutions to problems , especially when primary goals
cannot be reached, and; inviting students to team meetings .
Moreover, several OSS projects institute progress monitoring actions
11https://blogs.apache.org/foundation/entry/success-at-apache-google-summer
423ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA J. Silva, I. Wiese, D. German, C. Treude, M. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher
Managing activities
EXECUTIONmentors’ selection criteriastudents’ selection criteriaapplicants’ proposal acceptance criteriacommunication policywork acceptance criteriaWITHPREVIOUSGSOC EXPERIENCEONLYKNOWNMEMBERSONLYWITHGOODRELATIONSHIPWITHPOTENTIALMENTORSONLYCHECKEDBYMENTORSONLYUSETHESAMECHANNELSASOTHERMEMBERSDEDICATEDCHANNELSTOMENTORSFREQUENCYOFUPDATESMERGEDINTOCODEBASEONLYWITHPREVIOUSCONTRIBUTIONSTOCODEBASEONLYmentoring
mentoring coordinationprogress monitoring MONITORPROGRESSTHROUGHSTUDENTS’ BLOGMONITORPROGRESSTHROUGHMEETINGS
REVIEW/TESTTHECODEGIVEFEEDBACKFINDALTERNATIVESOLUTIONSTOPROBLEMS
ENCOURAGEDELIBERATEREFLECTIONABOUTPROGRESSENCOURAGETHESTUDENTintegrationmonitoring toolsprocess of review of students’ work
IDENTIFYMENACESTOWORKCOMPLETION
REFINABLESOLUTIONSONLY
MONITORMENTORS’ ACTIVITIESPAIRINEXPERIENCEDMENTORSWITHEXPERIENCEDONES
INVITETOTEAMMEETINGSWELCOMESTUDENTSKEEPCONTACTPERSONALENCOURAGEOPINIONSINCOMMUNITYDISCUSSIONSOFFERSUPPORTINTHESISRELATEDTOOSSPROJECTSOFFERSUGGESTIONSONHOWTOKEEPINVOLVEDWITHTHECOMMUNITYMANAGEOSS COMMUNITYEXPECTATIONS
PLANNINGrewardingOFFERANEWMENTORINGPROGRAMABOUTBECOMINGFULLCOMMITTERSMENTIONSTUDENTS’ NAMEONTEAMPAGECOVERTRAVELEXPENSESTOTEAMMEETINGSOFFERTEAMMEMBERSHIPRECOGNIZECONTRIBUTIONPUBLICLYINPAIRSONLYformulating ideas listOSS community/mentorsDEFINESTUDENTS’ COMMUNICATIONCHANNELS
MAJOR CATEGORYcategoryCONCEPTIDENTIFY BARRIERS TO WORK COMPLETION
Figure 1: The onboarding theory
such as monitoring students’ progress through meetings and
monitoring progress through students’ blog posts. Further-
more, mentors can face problems during mentoring. Thus, some
OSS projects adopt mentoring coordination actions such as moni-
toring mentors’ activities as a strategy to reduce the odds of
failure.
An interesting approach for keeping students involved in the
project during GSoC is to encourage deliberate reflection
about progress . The strategy consists of encouraging students
to ponder: “what is the plan for this day?” ;“was the plan accom-
plished?” ; and “what is the plan for tomorrow?. ”
Integration . When applying for GSoC, OSS projects are required to
detail their plans to keep students involved during and after the
program. Often, the actions OSS projects take aim at integrating
students into their social structure. An integration motif present
among OSS projects (13) was to welcome the students to break
the ice. As an OSS project explained: “(. . . ) we embrace you [the
student] warmly and without condition. ” Actions to keep the students
involved after the program included keeping personal contact ,
offering students suggestions on how to stay involved with
the project , and offering support in student theses related
to the OSS project .
We acknowledge that there may not be a consensus on how to
effectively socially integrate students. Furthermore, there may be a
classification overlap between the actions in this category and oth-
ers. For example, during planning, OSS projects may decide to use
mentors with excellent social skills. OSS projects may also support
students in experiencing what project members regularly do, such
asencouraging omitting opinions in discussions , which wouldoccur during mentoring. Such overlap organically happens due to
the cross-cutting nature of integration strategies. Although any
action can ultimately be considered an act to integrate students, we
grouped the ones that directly aim at diminishing social distance
among members. As described in the mentor guide: successful par-
ticipation in SoC programs depends mainly on the social bonding
students create with the community [48].
Rewarding . We grouped into this category the OSS projects’ strate-
gies that acknowledge the merit of students’ contributions. For
example, an OSS project stressed the importance of recognizing
students’ contributions publicly , especially to other members.
Another strategy consists of mentioning students’ names on
the team page to increase their exposure, both internally and
externally, especially to support their careers. Some OSS projects
cover travel expenses to team meetings , which aims not only at
deepening ties with other members, but also at providing students
a chance to network. For students who perform well, OSS projects
offer team membership . Moreover, an OSS project offers a specific
mentoring program about becoming a full committer to high
achieving students.
Answer for RQ1 : To onboard students, OSS projects propose a
variety of strategies that go well beyond providing the students
with the practical knowledge necessary for contributing to OSS
projects. Although strategies differ from project to project, they
converged towards planning and executing their participation,
socially integrating the students, and rewarding contributions
and achievements.
424A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
4.2 The Motivation Theory (RQ2)
As aforementioned, we started building the motivation theory based
on data that we collected in a previous work [ 43]. Figure 2 shows
the intersection between the motivational theory and the onboard-
ing theory ( OSS community actions to plan, execute, integrate, and
reward ). These boxes condense the actions shown in the onboarding
theory (Figure 1).
The motivation theory, depicted in Figure 2, describes how a set
of participation rewards influences students’ interest in contribut-
ing to OSS projects via SoC programs. We adopted the construct
reward because it is frequently used in the psychology literature to
refer to what individuals expect to receive in exchange for carrying
out a certain behavior [ 9]. Here, participation rewards refer to what
students expected to receive when they participated in GSoC for
the first time.
We found that some participation rewards refer to motives re-
lated to the feelings that their contribution to OSS projects evoked
in students such as enjoyment andfun. Some students reported
participating in GSoC for intellectual stimulation . In other
cases, the rewards concerned the effect that participation would
have on students’ careers such as CV building and on learning ,
which was often linked to the increase of job prospects. We also
found that some students consider developing useful project code
a reward. Several students were interested in rewards typically
linked to traditional OSS developers’ motives, such as having a
contributing-to-OSS experience ,peer recognition ,ideology
achievement , and developing interpersonal relations . Students
also participate in GSoC for academic accomplishments . Further-
more, students indicated different reasons for their interest in the
stipend , such as paying tuition, living expenses, or simply financial
gain [43].
Typically, each student is interested in a different set of re-
wards. For example, while some students are mostly interested in
rewards related to participating in OSS projects, such as acquiring
contributing-to-OSS-experience , others are mostly interested in
career portfolio building , such as participating in a Google pro-
gram and contributing to a well-known OSS project. Additionally,
while virtually every student considered the practical learning
essential for participating in GSoC, few students considered peer
recognition as critical. This finding suggests that participation
rewards influence students’ interests to different degrees. We used
the generic verb influence to indicate how the students’ interest
and contributions are affected by external factors, because more
research is needed to understand the specific type of influence re-
wards have on the students. Understanding the precise nature of the
influence of external factors on students’ interests and contributions
comprises a gap that future research can explore.
While participation rewards seem to increase students’ interest,
their level of knowledge andskills seem to moderate their interest
in contributing to OSS projects, at least in the case of students with
more development experience [ 43]. For example, students with
2-3 years of experience in software development reported being
more interested in participating in summer of code programs and
becoming frequent contributors than students with ten years or
more. Our data also suggests that deadlines have a moderation
effect, with several students (9) reporting that without them theywould have contributed to the projects at a slower pace, explaining
that the stipends prompted them to meet agreed timelines. In
some cases, family, friends, and acquaintances influenced students’
interest to join GSoC.
As aforementioned, we also searched for relevant literature to in-
tegrate in our theory. Although understudied, some studies targeted
different aspects of engagement in SoC programs . Trainer et al. [ 50]
conducted a case study to investigate the outcomes of GSoC for one
OSS project. Through interviews, the authors identified that some
GSoC contributions were merged in the projects’ codebases, the
students gained new software engineering skills , and the stu-
dents leveraged their participation for career advancement . The
authors also found that mentors faced several challenges, including
helping a large number of applicants write proposals during
the application process and maintaining availability , since men-
tors are often volunteers working in their spare time. Trainer et
al. [51] also analyzed 22 GSoC projects in the scientific domain to
understand GSoC outcomes and the underlying practices that lead
to them . They found that GSoC facilitated the creation of strong
ties between mentors and students, reporting that some students
became mentors in subsequent years.
Schilling et al. [ 39] focused on the applicants’ fit to the job and
with the team. The authors used the concepts of Person-Job (i.e.,
the congruence between an applicant’s desire and job provides)
and Person-Team (i.e., the applicant’s interpersonal compatibility
with the existing team) from the recruitment literature to derive
objective measures to predict the retention of 80 former GSoC
students in the KDE project. Using a classification schema of prior
contributions to this project, they found that intermediate (4-94)
and high ( >94) numbers of commits were strongly associated with
retention . Aligned with these results, Silva et. al [ 42] found that 82%
of OSS projects in their sample merged at least one commit from
GSoC participants into the codebase. The authors found that the
number of commits and code of the students with GSoC experience
strongly correlated with how much code they produced and how
long they remained.
Silva et al. [ 43] focused on studying the students’ motivations
to enter GSoC , combining surveys (students and mentors) and in-
terviews (students). They found that, while the stipends are an
important motivator, students participate in GSoC for the practical
knowledge and the ability to attach the name of organizations (e.g.,
Google) to their resumés.
Motivation : In relation to works that focus on motivation, self-
determination theory [ 40] is often used to explain the nature of moti-
vation of volunteer contributors (see [ 55] for a summary). Typically,
motivation is organized into intrinsic, extrinsic, and internalized-
extrinsic components. Intrinsic motivation refers to performing
an activity to satisfy psychological needs for autonomy, compe-
tence, and relatedness [ 40]. Intrinsically motivated behaviors are
performed out of interest, requiring no reward other than the enjoy-
ment of performing them [ 40]. Extrinsically motivated behaviors
are instrumental in obtaining external rewards [ 40]. It is also possi-
ble for individuals to internalize extrinsic motivations, which means
that although individuals act towards obtaining external rewards
(external regulation), their behaviors are driven by internal forces
(i.e., self-regulated) [40].
425ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA J. Silva, I. Wiese, D. German, C. Treude, M. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher
We changed the term interest , grounded in the questionnaires, to
motivation , which is the construct typically used in the literature as
the psychological state that antecedes a certain behavior [ 35,36,40].
The literature reports intrinsic motivation for OSS developers to
contribute as volunteers to OSS (e.g., [ 6,20]), and the students’
motivation for entering the program includes enjoyment and fun.
Moreover, the literature documents several extrinsically motivated
behaviors of OSS developers (e.g., [ 49]). Most of the rewards in our
theory can be considered extrinsically motivated components of
participating in the program. Finally, by planning a unique and rich
contributing experience, OSS projects strive to convert students into
members. We understand this effort as an attempt to make students
internalize OSS projects’ culture and values. As one project put
it:“The more they [the students] practice, the more it [OSS project’s
philosophy] becomes part of their philosophy and way of thinking. ”
Engagement : Typically, the term engagement is not used pre-
cisely or consistently, even in the psychology literature [ 53]. En-
gagement is a broad construct that researchers study in three do-
mains: cognitive, emotional, and behavioral engagement [ 26]. In
this study, we focus on students’ behavioral engagement, which
refers to their participation concerning task accomplishments, fol-
lowing norms, and obeying rules [ 26]. We refer to the behaviors that
show the students’ positive involvement with tasks as engaging .
Outcomes and Stimuli . We used the term outcomes in the mo-
tivational theory instead of participation rewards . While the termparticipation rewards refers to positive outputs students expect to
receive, the term outcomes allows for positive, neutral, or negative
results that may or may not be expected by students. In addition,
we split outcomes into intrinsic outcomes andextrinsic outcomes .
Intrinsic outcomes refer to the outcomes of contribution to OSS
projects that become internal stimuli to the feelings of autonomy,
competence, and relatedness of students’ intrinsic motivation [ 40].
For example, a contribution to OSS projects that does not lower
contribution barriers [45] may negatively affect students’ feelings
of autonomy and competence, diminishing their intrinsic motiva-
tion. On the other hand, extrinsic outcomes refer to outcomes that
can become external stimuli to students’ extrinsic motivation [ 40].
For example, we considered the stipend an external outcome be-
cause it is external to the action of contributing to OSS projects in
the context of SoC programs. Students can interpret an outcome
in different ways. For example, while some students negatively
interpreted the stipends , others more constructively framed the
reward [ 43]. We employ the term functional significance [9] to refer
to the interpretation that students assign to outcomes and external
factors.
Knowledge and skills . The literature on contribution to OSS
projects considers knowledge and skills among the main drivers
of participation [ 20]. It is one’s set of motivations, combined with
THEORY OF CONTRIBUTION TO OSS PROJECTS THROUGH SUMMER OF CODE PROGRAMS
actionsoutcomedimension of selfstimulusexternal factorexternal stimuliknowledge and skillsoutcomesinternal stimulistrength of feelings
extrinsicoutcomes rewards still available?intrinsicoutcomes 
influenceOSS community actions to plan, execute, integrate, and rewardcontribution to OSS projectsinfluencetriggersleads tomotivationfunctional significanceinterpersonal relationsintellectual stimulationenjoyment and fun
stipendslearningcontributing-to-OSS experiencecareer portfolio buildingacademic accomplishmentspeer recognitionideology achievement
project codecontribution barriersfamily, friends, and acquaintances suggestiondeadlines
Figure 2: How Summer of Code programs motivate students to contribute to OSS projects (Motivational Theory)
426A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
knowledge and skills that trigger one’s behavior [ 24]. In this re-
search, several students and mentors equated participating in GSoC
with the pursuit of knowledge and skills.
Answer for RQ2 : A summer of code program stimulates stu-
dents’ motivation in three ways. First, it enhances students’ sense
of competence, autonomy, and relatedness (i.e., intrinsic moti-
vation). Second, it drives engagement, which is instrumental in
achieving students’ goals. Finally, when students internalize OSS
projects’ culture and values, they may be more likely to voluntar-
ily contribute after the program.
4.3 The Perception of Potential Participants
We analyzed the motivational theory in light of the perceptions of
college students who had never participated in SoC programs. Most
students in our sample were between 18-25 years old (Figure 3(a)).
While in Brazil, 50% of our respondents declared themselves as fe-
males; in China, only 5% of the respondents self-declared as females
(Figure 3(b)). No one self-declared as other.
As can be seen in Figure 3(c), most students had not heard of
GSoC before participating in the study (Chinese: ≈95%; Brazilian:
≈70%). The only Chinese student that had heard of the program
before described it accurately, claiming that his knowledge came
from his efforts to join the program. On the other hand, the Brazil-
ian students’ descriptions (2) of GSoC were at best simplistic or
inaccurate.
We showed the GSoC description to the students and asked them
to rank the participation rewards listed in Silva et al. [ 43] (Figure 4).
Most students (20) ranked learning as the most important reward,
and several others (8) ranked it second. Similarly, several students
(10) ranked contribution to OSS first, some (5) ranked it second,
and a few (2) ranked it third.
After watching an explanatory video about the theory, most stu-
dents reported changes in their perception of GSoC. For instance,
P10 was surprised by “being able to develop projects [with] values that
I [she] believe[s]. ” Encouragingly, several students learned aboutOSS. As P38 said: “Participants gain invaluable experience work-
ing directly with mentors on OSS projects, and earn a stipend upon
successful completion of their project. ”
Figure 4 shows the changes in students’ perceptions about the
importance of the rewards. Except for learning andcontribution
to OSS , which remained stable, the other rewards varied greatly.
For example, we noticed that the Chinese students did not consider
GSoC for career building (R3), academic (R4) concerns, earning
stipends (R5), peer recognition (R6), or intellectual stimula-
tion (R7) (Figure 4c). Similarly, Brazilian students did not consider
GSoC for some rewards (R6 and R7) (Figure 4b).
Even when students considered the rewards, Figure 4 shows
that after being presented with the theory, their perception of the
importance of most rewards increased. Figure 4 also shows that
the students reprioritized the importance of several rewards. When
we observe all participants’ rankings, we can see that academic
concerns ranked last despite their increase in score (Figure 4a).
Nevertheless, Figure 4b and Figure 4c suggest that there may be
differences among countries that should be further explored. For
example, while for Brazilian students, career building (R3) seems
to be more important than stipends (R5), Chinese students seem
to think otherwise.
In addition, several students (22) answered that our results in-
fluenced their decision to engage in GSoC. However, we noticed
that in several cases, students did not feel confident enough in their
programming skills to participate in an SoC despite their will to
do it. We noticed a pool of potential contributors who need proper
encouragement and further guidance to contribute to OSS projects
beyond the existing means. Future research could investigate other
ways of matching OSS projects with students with low confidence
in their programming skills.
Summary of Phase III : By analyzing the students’ perceptions,
we could observe that the motivational theory broadened their
understanding of GSoC and how such a program could assist
them in achieving their goals, especially related to their career,
inspiring them to engage in such programs in the future.
11313018
0205101520
never contributedto OSS projectscontributed toOSS projectsmostly as part ofa school projectcontributed toOSS projectsmostly due toprofessional workcontributed toOSS projectsmostly due topersonalpreferenceConcerningyourcontributiontoOSSprojects,youcanstatethatyou...
BrazilChina0213210015500005101520
Lessthan 1818-2021-2526-3031-40Morethan 40Age
BrazilChina99019
1005101520
MaleFe maleOtherGender
BrazilChina(a)(b)(c)
Figure 3: Phase III - Student demographics
427ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA J. Silva, I. Wiese, D. German, C. Treude, M. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher
PHASE 1 (BEF.  VIDEO)PHASE 3 (AFT. VIDEO)Allnon-participants
Learning (R1)Contribut ion to OSS (R2)Career building (R3)Academic (R4)Stipends (R5)Peer recognition (R6)Intellect. stimulation (R7)PHASE 1 (BEF. VIDEO)PHASE 3 (AFT. VIDEO)Braziliannon-participants
Learning (R1)Contribut ion to OSS (R2)Career building (R3)Academic (R4)Stipends (R5)Peer recognition (R6)Intellect. stimulation (R7)PHASE 1 (BEF. VIDEO)PHASE 3 (AFT. VIDEO)Chinesenon-participants
Learning (R1)Contribut ion to OSS (R2)Career building (R3)Academic (R4)Stipends (R5)Peer recognition (R6)Intellect. stimulation (R7)0400500708821857860799768759740707561R6, R7R5R4R3R2R1
7th5th4th3rd2nd1st
6th7th5th4th3rd2nd1st
6th8107647577087077065130400500708783819
R6, R7R5R4R3R2R1R3-R7R2R1
7th5th4th3rd2nd1st
6th0787823835762736700684536107
(a)(b)(c)All participantsBrazilian participantsChinese participants
Figure 4: Change in students’ perceptions of the importance of rewards
5 DISCUSSION
Our study proposes an integrated theory. The onboarding theory
(Figure 1) describes strategies proposed by projects, which converge
towards planning and executing, socially integrating students, and
rewarding students’ contributions and achievements. We noticed
that onboarding is labor-intensive and time-consuming and OSS
projects should have an adequate structure to provide support for
onboarding students. This may be particularly problematic for small
communities. Future research can develop onboarding tools specific
for students, which could be deployed as software bots [ 58], for
example. Future research can also investigate the effectiveness of
each strategy and the context in which they should be employed.
We also noticed the absence of strategies focused specifically on
promoting diversity and inclusion of underrepresented populations,
such as women. This is an important point to revisit given that
previous research has shown that current tools and platforms in
OSS are gender-biased [27].
In the motivational theory, we show that students’ motivation
is influenced by the outcomes of engaging in SoCs—which include
participation rewards. Outcomes can influence students’ motiva-
tion differently. Even if students enter an SoC interested in the
same rewards, the outcomes will undoubtedly differ because each
experience is unique due to individual differences. For example, if
two students entered GSoC equally interested in the stipends , their
response to having to meet deadlines may differ. While the deadlines
negatively influenced some students [ 43], others framed it more
constructively [25].Following Ralph’s advice [ 33], we also compare the explanatory
power of our theory to others. In general, the Legitimate Periph-
eral Participation (LPP) theory is used to explain how newcomers
engage in OSS projects [ 22] and become contributors [ 41,46]. New-
comers begin their involvement by observing experienced project
members and, after a while, they become in charge of straight-
forward but valuable tasks. In time, newcomers become familiar
with contribution norms and take on more important tasks. This
process culminates in the emergence of frequent contributors [ 22].
However, LPP does not describe precisely the engagement that
occurs through SoC programs. Students usually do not start at the
margin by observing experienced members. Instead, they are in-
dividually guided—and sponsored—to become contributors. The
student-project relationship in an SoC context is mediated by a con-
tract that binds students and mentors for three months. Therefore,
our findings indicate that more research is necessary to understand
how students can be legitimized as full project members in an SoC
context.
In general, the results presented here help explain why new
contributors participate in OSS communities, considering the com-
prehensive set of rewards offered by these programs. In Phase III,
we observed that the motivational theory helped students change
their perception about the rewards from joining SoC programs and
that they became inspired to engage in such programs and OSS.
Therefore, this may also help OSS projects to devise strategies to
attract and retain students. Those involved in running these com-
munities can increase their ability to attract developers, mentors,
and ultimately retain participants (in some cases being hired to do
the work they started as volunteers).
428A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
6 IMPLICATIONS
Research : Our theory provides an understanding of newcomer
engagement in OSS projects through a corporate sponsored SoC
program. As Ralph explained [ 33], process theories offer a founda-
tion for the development of engagement methods. While process
theories are concerned with how entities (i.e., motivation) change,
methods “prescribe practices, techniques, tools, or sequences that are
ostensibly better than their alternatives” [33, p. 20]. Researchers
could extend our results by studying methods and models, taking
into account OSS projects’ peculiarities. Moreover, while this re-
search is specific to open source communities, we believe that the
results go beyond them, such as the motivations for students to
build their résumés and to seek out challenging work as part of their
early development. We also acknowledge the body of knowledge
about onboarding online communities in general [ 18]. A future
work would involve comparing and extending our theory based on
this literature.
OSS projects : Understanding how to onboard students in OSS
and how the variety of rewards influence students’ motivation
can help OSS projects to devise strategies to attract and retain
students. Moreover, OSS projects can use our results to make a
well-informed decision about their participation in SoC programs.
While OSS projects that already participate in such programs can
revise their action plans in light of our results, projects that have
never applied can use them as a guide.
Students : Our theory can transfer the experiences of former
participants to students who have not yet participated in an SoC
program. In this way, our theory can broaden new students’ per-
spectives, not only giving them a better understanding of SoC
programs in general, but also communicating participation rewards
that motivated former students. Although students generally see
the benefits of getting involved in OSS projects [ 30], the theory
may help to show the advantages of SoC programs.
Program organizers : Those running SoC programs (including
many large software organizations) can leverage our results to
devise guidelines for the participating projects, including how to
select proposals and engage students.
7 LIMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY
As any empirical research, our study has some limitations and
potential threats to validity. We discuss them in this section.
Transferability of the results : Our results are grounded in
data from GSoC. Hence, our theory may not necessarily transfer to
other SoC programs. Nevertheless, we believe that GSoC motivators
and the onboarding strategies can be replicated in other contexts
in which engaging students is important.
Data Representativeness : Although we collected data from
multiple sources for a variety of OSS projects, we likely did not
find all onboarding strategies or consider all factors that motivate
students to contribute. Each OSS project has its singularities, and
the actions for engaging in SoC programs can differ. With more
data, perhaps we could find different ways of categorizing con-
cepts, which could increase explanatory power. Further studies are
necessary to broaden the scope of our analysis.
Subjectivity of the data analysis : Another threat to the valid-
ity of our results is the data classification’s subjectivity. To alleviatethis threat, we employed grounded theory procedures [ 8], which
require the complete analysis to be grounded in collected data.
However, when applying grounded theory, there is always an “ un-
codifiable step ,” which relies on researchers’ interpretations [ 3,21].
Limitations from using project applications as a data source
(RQ1) : We are aware that OSS projects have limited space for reveal-
ing their action plans when they apply for GSoC, which potentially
makes them report the actions that increase their odds of accep-
tance in the program. Moreover, the applications describe the plan
that the projects have and not their actual onboarding process. In
this way, underreporting might occlude actions that are relevant
for the OSS projects’ decision process of engaging in SoC programs.
On the other hand, projects submit, and probably refine, these appli-
cations yearly, increasing their accuracy and completeness. Future
work can gain understanding of the effectiveness of the actions by
interviewing or surveying project members, mentors, and students
or conducting ethnographic studies in the actual projects.
Survivability bias (RQ2) : Since we could not contact applicants
who were rejected from the program, the primary data that we used
to build our motivation theory is from students that were accepted,
and thus our theory is biased towards those accepted applicants.
Future research can devise methods to reach rejected applicants.
Having both types of applicants would help the theory to explain
successful and unsuccessful engagement cases, thereby increasing
its explanatory power.
Evaluation with students (Phase III) : The students we sur-
veyed are not necessarily representative of the intended target of
the theory and do not necessarily match the actual participants
of OSS or GSoC. Moreover, the sample size is small and was col-
lected from only two countries, leveraging the authors’ personal
networks. The results are promising, and a large-scale study is
deemed necessary. Differences among countries and other personal
characteristics could also be explored in such a large-scale study.
Another threat related to the evaluation is the confirmation bias.
However, the changes in the ranking are less susceptible to this
kind of bias and may reveal motivators of which the students are
not normally aware.
8 RELATED WORK
We have already discussed more specific related work in Section 4.2.
In the following, we summarize broader literature on onboarding
and motivation to contribute to OSS.
8.1 Onboarding in OSS
Many studies focus on newcomers onboarding to OSS projects [ 29,
56,57]. Mentoring was also explored as a way to support new-
comers, and it is particularly relevant to SoC programs. In fact,
the importance of mentorship as part of the knowledge acquisi-
tion process for novices is evidenced in the theory of software
development expertise developed by Baltes and Diehl [3]. In closed
source settings, it is common practice to offer formal mentorship
to newcomers to support their first steps [ 5]. In the OSS domain,
researchers proposed approaches to recommend mentors to new-
comers [ 7,23,28,47]. Fagerholm et al . [10] conducted a case study
to assess the impact of mentoring support on developers and found
that it significantly improves newcomer onboarding. Schilling et al .
429ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA J. Silva, I. Wiese, D. German, C. Treude, M. Gerosa, I. Steinmacher
[38] studied the impact of mentoring on developers’ training and
retention in OSS projects. In contrast, Labuschagne and Holmes
[19], who studied Mozilla, evidenced that onboarding programs
may not result in long-term contributors, even though mentored
newcomers considered the mentorship program valuable. Balali
et al. [2] analyzed challenges mentors face when onboarding new-
comers as well as how they recommend tasks to newcomers [ 1].
To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has focused on
mentoring strategies in the context of SoC programs.
8.2 Motivation to contribute to OSS
Motivation can be defined as the conscientious governance process
for decisions considering the existing possible forms of volunteer
action [ 12]. Motivation is internal to the individual, can vary ac-
cording to goals, has fervor and duration, and regulates human
behavior [ 13]. Motivation is studied in a variety of areas, includ-
ing software engineering. In 2006, Beecham et al . [4] conducted a
systematic literature review and found 92 relevant papers about
motivation in this area. This systematic literature review was later
updated by França et al . [14] , who analyzed the period from 2006 to
2010 and found 54 relevant studies. Specifically to OSS, Von Krogh
et al. [55] reviewed the literature in 2009 and found 40 relevant
studies. As aforementioned, none of these studies focus on stu-
dents, which are the focus of this work. We also consider as related
work studies that investigate motivation to participate in short term
coding activities, such as Hackathons (e.g., [31, 44]).
9 CONCLUSION
Attracting and retaining new contributors are vital to the sus-
tainability of OSS projects that depend on a volunteer workforce.
Some OSS projects participate in summer of code programs ex-
pecting to onboard new contributors. In this study, we developed
an engagement theory that explains how to onboard students
and how students become motivated to participate. Our theory is
grounded in multiple data sources, such as the guides provided by
program administrators [ 48], OSS projects’ applications for GSoC,
surveys involving students and mentors [ 43], interviews with stu-
dents [ 43], quantitative studies [ 42], and the literature (e.g., [ 38,50–
52]). We employed grounded theory procedures to merge previous
research findings with our results and to explain contributions to
OSS projects through SoC programs. We claim that the development
of our engagement theory is a first step towards building a variance
theory that can explain in greater detail why and when students
meaningfully contribute to OSS projects. A variance theory could
ultimately predict the students who are more likely to continue
contributing to OSS projects after participation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all the participants of this study who volunteered to
support our research. This work was partially supported by the
CNPq (430642/2016-4), FAPESP (2015/24527-3), and the National
Science Foundation (grants 1815503 and 1900903). This work was
conducted as part of a Ph.D. dissertation in the Computer Science
Department at the University of São Paulo (USP).REFERENCES
[1]Sogol Balali, Umayal Annamalai, Susmita Padala, Bianca Trinkenreich, Marco
Gerosa, Igor Steinmacher, and Anita Sarma. 2020. Recommending Tasks to
Newcomers in OSS Projects: How Do Mentors Handle It?. In 16th International
Symposium on Open Collaboration (OpenSym 2020) . ACM, 14.
[2]Sogol Balali, Igor Steinmacher, Umayal Annamalai, Anita Sarma, and Marco Au-
relio Gerosa. 2018. Newcomers’ Barriers. . . Is That All? An Analysis of Mentors’
and Newcomers’ Barriers in OSS Projects. Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) 27, 3 (01 Dec 2018), 679–714. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-018-9310-8
[3]Sebastian Baltes and Stephan Diehl. 2018. Towards a Theory of Software De-
velopment Expertise. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’18) . ACM, Lake Buena Vista, FL, 14.
[4]Sarah Beecham, Nathan Baddoo, Tracy Hall, Hugh Robinson, and Helen Sharp.
2008. Motivation in Software Engineering: A systematic literature review. Infor-
mation and software technology 50, 9-10 (2008), 860–878.
[5]Andrew Begel and Beth Simon. 2008. Novice Software Developers, All over Again.
InProceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Computing Education
Research (ICER ’08) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1404520.1404522
[6]Jürgen Bitzer, Wolfram Schrettl, and Philipp JH Schröder. 2007. Intrinsic motiva-
tion in open source software development. Journal of Comparative Economics 35,
1 (2007), 160–169.
[7]Gerardo Canfora, Massimiliano Di Penta, Rocco Oliveto, and Sebastiano
Panichella. 2012. Who is Going to Mentor Newcomers in Open Source Projects?.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foun-
dations of Software Engineering (FSE ’12) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 44,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2393596.2393647
[8]Kathy Charmaz. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory . SAGE Publications, London,
UK. 224 pages.
[9]Edward L Deci, Richard Koestner, and Richard M Ryan. 1999. A meta-analytic
review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic
motivation. Psychological Bulletin 125, 6 (1999), 627–668.
[10] Fabian Fagerholm, Alejandro S. Guinea, Jürgen Münch, and Jay Borenstein. 2014.
The Role of Mentoring and Project Characteristics for Onboarding in Open
Source Software Projects. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM ’14) . ACM, 55:1–55:10. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2652524.2652540
[11] Fabian Fagerholm, Alejandro Sanchez Guinea, Jay Borenstein, and Jurgen Munch.
2014. Onboarding in Open Source Projects. IEEE Software 31, 6 (2014), 54–61.
[12] César França and Fabio QB da Silva. 2010. Designing motivation strategies for
software engineering teams: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the 2010 ICSE
Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering . 84–91.
[13] César França, Fabio QB Da Silva, and Helen Sharp. 2018. Motivation and satis-
faction of software engineers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2018).
[14] César França, Tatiana Gouveia, Pedro Santos, Celio Santana, and Fabio QB da
Silva. 2011. Motivation in software engineering: A systematic review update.
In15th Annual Conference on Evaluation & Assessment in Software Engineering
(EASE 2011) . IET, 154–163.
[15] Gillian J Greene and Bernd Fischer. 2016. Cvexplorer: Identifying candidate de-
velopers by mining and exploring their open source contributions. In Proceedings
of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering .
804–809.
[16] Jo E. Hannay, Dag I. K. Sjoberg, and Tore Dyba. 2007. A systematic review of
theory use in software engineering experiments. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 33, 2 (2007), 87–107.
[17] Guido Hertel, Sven Niedner, and Stefanie Herrmann. 2013. Motivation of Software
Developers in Open Source Projects : An Internet-Based Survey of Contributors
to the Linux Kernel. Research Policy 32, 7 (2013), 1159–1177.
[18] Robert E Kraut and Paul Resnick. 2012. Building successful online communities:
Evidence-based social design . Mit Press.
[19] Adriaan Labuschagne and Reid Holmes. 2015. Do Onboarding Programs Work?.
InProceedings of the 12th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
(MSR ’15) . IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 381–385. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MSR.2015.45
[20] Karim R. Lakhani and Robert G. Wolf. 2005. Why Hackers Do What They Do:
Understanding Motivation and Effort in Free/Open Source Software Projects. In
Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software . The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
Chapter Chapter 1, 570.
[21] Ann Langley. 1999. Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of
management review 24, 4 (1999), 691–710.
[22] Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. 1991. Situated learning: Legitimate Peripheral
Participation . Cambridge University Press, UK. 138 pages.
[23] Yuri Malheiros, Alan Moraes, Cleyton Trindade, and Silvio Meira. 2012. A Source
Code Recommender System to Support Newcomers. In Proceedings of the IEEE
36th Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC ’12) . IEEE,
Los Alamitos, California, USA, 19–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2012.11
430A Theory of the Engagement in Open Source Projects via Summer of Code Programs ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
[24] Terence R. Mitchell and Denise Daniels. 2003. Motivation. In Handbook of
Psychology . John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA. https://doi.org/10.1002/
0471264385.wei1210
[25] Ivange Larry Ndumbe. 2016. GSoC 2016 Final Evaluation. https://ivange94blog.
wordpress.com/2016/08/20/gsoc-2016-final-evaluation/
[26] Tuan Dinh Nguyen, Marisa Cannata, and Jason Miller. 2018. Understanding
student behavioral engagement : Importance of student interaction with peers
and teachers. The Journal of Educational Research 111, 2 (2018), 163–174.
[27] Susmita Hema Padala, Christopher John Mendez, Luiz Felipe Dias, Igor Stein-
macher, Zoe Steine Hanson, Claudia Hilderbrand, Amber Horvath, Charles Hill,
Logan Dale Simpson, Margaret Burnett, et al .2020. How Gender-biased Tools
Shape Newcomer Experiences in OSS Projects. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering (2020).
[28] Sebastiano Panichella. 2015. Supporting newcomers in software development
projects. In IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
(ICSME 2015) . IEEE, 586–589. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2015.7332519
[29] Yunrim Park and Carlos Jensen. 2009. Beyond pretty pictures: Examining the
benefits of code visualization for open source newcomers. In 2009 5th IEEE
International Workshop on Visualizing Software for Understanding and Analysis .
IEEE, 3–10.
[30] Gustavo Pinto, Clarice Ferreira, Cleice Souza, Igor Steinmacher, and Paulo
Meirelles. 2019. Training Software Engineers Using Open-Source Software:
The Students’ Perspective. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education and Training (ICSE-SEET
’19). IEEE Press, 147–157. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-SEET.2019.00024
[31] Arie Purwanto, Anneke Zuiderwijk, and Marijn Janssen. 2019. Citizens’ moti-
vations for engaging in open data hackathons. In International Conference on
Electronic Participation . Springer, 130–141.
[32] Paul Ralph. 2015. Developing and Evaluating Software Engineering Process Theo-
ries. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering .
IEEE, Florence, Italy, 20–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2015.25
[33] Paul Ralph. 2019. Toward methodological guidelines for process theories and
taxonomies in software engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
45, 7 (2019), 712–735.
[34] Dirk Riehle. 2015. How Open Source Is Changing the Software Developer’s
Career. IEEE Computer 48, 5 (2015), 51–57.
[35] Jeffrey Roberts, Il-Horn Hann, and Sandra Slaughter. 2006. Understanding the
Motivations, Participation, and Performance of Open Source Software Developers:
A Longitudinal Study of the Apache Projects. Management Science 52, 7 (2006),
984–999.
[36] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. 2000. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations:
Classic Definitions and New Directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology
25, 1 (2000), 54–67.
[37] Johnny Saldana. 2015. The coding manual for qualitative researchers . SAGE
Publications, Inc, London, UK.
[38] Andreas Schilling, Sven Laumer, and Tim Weitzel. 2012. Who Will Remain?
An Evaluation of Actual Person-Job and Person-Team Fit to Predict Developer
Retention in FLOSS Projects. In Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS) . IEEE, Maui, HI, 3446–3455.
[39] Andreas Schilling, Sven Laumer, and Tim Weitzel. 2014. Stars matter: how FLOSS
developers’ reputation affects the attraction of new developers. In Proceedings of
the 52nd ACM conference on Computers and people research - SIGSIM-CPR ’14 . ACM
Press, New York, New York, USA, 5–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/2599990.2599991
[40] C. Scott Rigby, Edward L. Deci, Brian C. Patrick, and Richard M. Ryan. 1992.
Beyond the intrinsic-extrinsic dichotomy: Self-determination in motivation and
learning. Motivation and Emotion 16, 3 (1992), 165–185. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00991650
[41] Dan Sholler, Igor Steinmacher, Denae Ford, Mara Averick, Mike Hoye, and Greg
Wilson. 2019. Ten simple rules for helping newcomers become contributors
to open projects. PLOS Computational Biology 15, 9 (09 2019), 1–10. https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007296[42] Jefferson O. Silva, Igor Wiese, Daniel German, Igor Steinmacher, and Marco A
Gerosa. 2017. How Long and How Much : What to Expect from Summer of
Code Participants?. In Proceedings of 33rd International Conference on Software
Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, Shanghai, China, 10.
[43] Jefferson O Silva, Igor Wiese, Daniel M German, Christoph Treude, Marco A
Gerosa, and Igor Steinmacher. 2020. Google summer of code: Student motivations
and contributions. Journal of Systems and Software 162 (2020), 110487.
[44] Anthony Simonofski, Victor Amaral de Sousa, Antoine Clarinval, and Benoıt
Vanderose. 2020. Participation in Hackathons: A Multi-Methods View on Moti-
vators, Demotivators and Citizen Participation. In International Conference on
Research Challenges in Information Science .
[45] Igor Steinmacher, Tayana Conte, Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and David F. Redmiles.
2015. Social Barriers Faced by Newcomers Placing Their First Contribution
in Open Source Software Projects. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW) . ACM,
Vancouver, BC, 1379–1392.
[46] Igor Steinmacher, Marco Gerosa, Tayana U. Conte, and David F. Redmiles. 2019.
Overcoming Social Barriers When Contributing to Open Source Software Projects.
Comput. Supported Coop. Work 28, 1–2 (April 2019), 247–290. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10606-018-9335-z
[47] Igor Steinmacher, Igor Scaliante Wiese, and Marco Aurélio Gerosa. 2012. Rec-
ommending mentors to software project newcomers. In 2012 Third International
Workshop on Recommendation Systems for Software Engineering (RSSE) . IEEE,
63–67.
[48] The Google Summer of Code Guides Authors. 2018. Google Summer of Code
Mentor Guide. https://google.github.io/gsocguides/mentor/index
[49] Jean Tirole and Josh Lerner. 2002. Some Simple Economics of Open Source. The
Journal of Industrial Economics 50, 2 (2002), 197–234.
[50] Erik H Trainer, Chalalai Chaihirunkarn, and James D Herbsleb. 2014. The Big
Effects of Short-term Efforts: Mentorship and Code Integration in Open Source
Scientific Software. Journal of Open Research Software 2, 1 (jul 2014), e18.
[51] Erik H. Trainer, Chalalai Chaihirunkarn, Arun Kalyanasundaram, and James D.
Herbsleb. 2014. Community Code Engagements: Summer of Code & Hackathons
for Community Building in Scientific Software. In Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP) . ACM, Sanibel Island,
Florida, 111–121.
[52] Erik H Trainer, Arun Kalyanasundaram, Chalalai Chaihirunkarn, and James D
Herbsleb. 2016. How to Hackathon: Socio-technical Tradeoffs in Brief, Intensive
Collocation. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’16 . ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1116–1128.
[53] Catherine Truss, Kerstin Alfes, Rick Delbridge, Amanda Shantz, and Emma Soane.
2013. Employee engagement in theory and practice . Routledge.
[54] Leona E. Tyler. 1947. The psychology of human differences . D Appleton-Century
Company, New York, NY.
[55] Georg Von Krogh, Stefan Haefliger, Sebastian Spaeth, and Martin W Wallin. 2012.
Carrots and rainbows: Motivation and social practice in open source software
development. MIS Quarterly 36, 2 (2012), 649–676.
[56] Georg Von Krogh, Sebastian Spaeth, and Karim R. Lakhani. 2003. Community,
joining, and specialization in open source software innovation: A case study.
Research Policy 32, 7 (2003), 1217–1241.
[57] Jianguo Wang and Anita Sarma. 2011. Which bug should I fix: helping new
developers onboard a new project. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop
on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering . 76–79.
[58] Mairieli Wessel, Bruno Mendes De Souza, Igor Steinmacher, Igor S Wiese, Ivanil-
ton Polato, Ana Paula Chaves, and Marco A Gerosa. 2018. The power of bots:
Characterizing and understanding bots in oss projects. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–19.
[59] Frances Zlotnick. 2017. GitHub Open Source Survey 2017. https://doi.org/10.
17605/OSF.IO/ENRQ5
431