Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse
Software Engineering Teams: A Study at Google
Ella Dagan
epeled@google.com
Google
USAAnita Sarma∗
anita.sarma@oregonstate.edu
Oregon State University
USAAlison Chang
alisonchang@google.com
Google
USA
Sarah D’Angelo
sdangelo@google.com
Google
USAJill Dicker
jdicker@google.com
Google
USAEmerson Murphy-Hill
emersonm@google.com
Google
USA
ABSTRACT
Teams that build software are largely demographically homoge-
neous. Without diversity, homogeneous perspectives dominate how,
why, and for whom software is designed. To understand how teams
can successfully build and sustain diversity, we interviewed 11 en-
gineers and 9 managers from some of the most gender and racially
diverse teams at Google, a large software company. Qualitatively
analyzing the interviews, we found shared approaches to recruiting,
hiring, and promoting an inclusive environment, all of which create
a positive feedback loop. Our findings produce actionable practices
that every member of the team can take to increase diversity by
fostering a more inclusive software engineering environment.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Computer supported coop-
erative work ;Empirical studies in collaborative and social
computing ;•Software and its engineering →Collaboration
in software development ;•Social and professional topics →
Employment issues .
KEYWORDS
software engineering, teams, diversity, inclusion
ACM Reference Format:
Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emer-
son Murphy-Hill. 2023. Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and
Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams: A Study at Google. In Pro-
ceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’23),
December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616273
∗Anita Sarma was a Visiting Research Scientist at Google when this work was done.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0327-0/23/12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.36162731 INTRODUCTION
While the evidence for the benefits of team diversity are mixed [ 2],
in collaborative software engineering settings, research has shown
that diverse teams can have significant benefits over homogeneous
teams. For instance, Pretorius and colleagues found that diverse cog-
nitive styles helped increase novelty of features during software de-
sign [ 42]. Vasilescu and colleagues found that gender and tenure di-
versity were positive and significant predictors of productivity [ 52].
Likewise, Catolino and colleagues found that the presence of women
on software engineering teams generally reduced the amount of
‘community smells’, i.e., “sub-optimal circumstances and patterns
across the software organizational structure” [ 10]. Wang and Zhang
found that software engineering teams with higher gender diversity
tended to reduce team members’ gender biases [53].
Accordingly, many software companies have publicly committed
to improving their workforce diversity by increasing representation
of traditionally underrepresented groups (URGs).1For instance, Mi-
crosoft has committed to “double the number of Black and African
American and Hispanic and Latinx people managers, senior individ-
ual contributors, and senior leaders in the US” [ 34]. Google intends
to improve “leadership representation of underrepresented groups
in the U.S. by 30%” [ 17]. Meta aims to “raise the number of under-
represented people to at least 50% of [its] global workforce” [15].
Unfortunately, there exists few studies about what practices
could yield the diversity that these companies strive for, as we
detail in Section 2. Instead, “[best] practices in a field are often
derived through systematic and careful reflection on hard-won
practical experience... [relying] on brief case studies or anecdotal
stories to support the authors’ assertions” [ 30]. Thus, there exists a
gap between diversity commitments and evidence-backed diversity
practices.
To fill this gap, in this paper we seek to understand software
engineering team diversity, along the dimensions of race, ethnicity,
and gender. Our insight is that whatever exceptionally diverse teams
have done to build and sustain their diversity can presumably be
used by other team builders that wish to do the same. We took a
qualitative approach to learn from engineering teams about the
challenges they faced in creating and sustaining highly diverse
1While there is no perfect way to refer to a group of people without reducing their
experiences to limited facets of them as beings [ 54], the term ‘underrepresented’ seems
most apt here because representation is central to this research.
631
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
teams, and how their attitudes and behaviors help overcome these
challenges. Throughout this research, we center:
•The experience of underrepresented developers . Representation
is a challenge across the industry, but it is especially acute
in technical roles like software engineering [3, 15, 17, 34].
•Contrasting cases . Many of our informants had experiences
on teams with high diversity and on teams with low diversity,
enabling them to contrast the two cases.
•Practices from direct experience. We examine what practition-
ers have used to build diverse engineering teams.
To collect rich in-depth understanding, we conducted 20 interviews
with members of highly diverse software engineering teams (11
engineers from URGs and 9 managers), analyzed the data themati-
cally [ 18], and validated our findings through member-checking [ 9].
Interviewees were engineers at Google, a large (100K+ employees)
US-based software company founded in 1998.
The contribution of this paper is the first study of the practices
used to build and sustain highly diverse software engineering teams.
We present two main themes: first, recruiting and hiring practices,
and second, building an inclusive culture by developing technical
allyship , a newly identified concept that refines the more general
concept of allyship [ 29,35]. From these findings, we identified
actionable implications for software engineering members across
levels (from individual contributors to management) who wish to
improve diversity on their teams.
2 RELATED WORK
A rich literature empirically explores diversity in software engi-
neering and beyond. Our work can broadly be characterized as
contributing to the area of diversity management , which “refers
to the systematic and planned commitment by organizations to
recruit, retain, reward, and promote a heterogeneous mix of em-
ployees” [26]
Yadav and Lenka’s recent literature review of diversity man-
agement finds that most research in the area focuses on conse-
quences of diversity [ 56], that is, what benefits and drawbacks arise
when diversity is present. In software engineering, researchers
have demonstrated several consequences of increased diversity,
including increasing innovation and productivity [ 49,57], reduc-
ing turnover and conflict [ 52], and producing more user-friendly
software [22].
Rather than focusing on consequences, the present paper focuses
onantecedents to diversity; that is, practices that lead to diversity.
For a summary of antecedents in the diversity management liter-
ature, a “comprehensive literature review, a detailed analysis of
the writings of five diversity experts, and interviews with an ad-
ditional 14 experts” [ 30] synthesizes nine diversity management
practices, including linking diversity to performance and diversity
training [ 40]. We contextualize our findings in these broad diver-
sity management practices in Section 4 in order to explain how
our findings relate to prior work beyond the software engineering
literature.
Related to diversity antecedents, significant prior work in soft-
ware engineering investigated challenges faced by software develop-
ers from URGs [ 44], including explicit bias [ 7], implicit bias [ 53], dis-
crimination [ 13,48], isolation [ 45,48], impostor syndrome [ 11,50],lack of recognition [ 50], devaluation of feminine attributes or quali-
ties [ 16,20], and lower acceptance rate of contributions [ 37,38,47],
as well as stereotypes embedded in tools [ 4,23,32,33], documen-
tation [ 19,43], and job advertising [ 28]. Although not evaluated
directly in this prior work, solving these problems could improve
representation and increase diversity in software teams.
Finally, in perhaps the most related work to ours, Qiu and col-
leagues interviewed six women and nine men about five hypotheti-
cal choices to join several real open source projects, finding that
participants’ joining decisions were negatively influenced by some
projects’ lack of gender balance and use of gendered language [ 43].
Our study builds on Qiu and colleagues’s findings by focusing on
lived experiences encountered by software engineers from URGs
on diverse teams, as well as on the managers of those teams.
3 METHOD
We used a qualitative approach to examine the open research ques-
tion “what leads to diversity in software engineering teams?” Our
research stance is constructivist, meaning that our findings are
inseparable from the human context in which they occur [14].
We interviewed US-based engineers and team managers from
diverse teams at Google to learn about and compare their diversity-
related practices, perspectives, and experiences in the workplace.
We chose to interview managers because their goals and actions
have been shown to influence team diversity and culture [ 24,25,36].
We chose to interview engineers because their experiences on teams
may inform their choices about what teams to join or leave and,
therefore, could have direct implications for team diversity. We
used semi-structured interviews to allow for consistency across
interviews while allowing for important, but unanticipated themes
to emerge.
The proposal for this research was reviewed by the company’s
employee privacy working group, which is somewhat similar to an
Institutional Review Board.
3.1 Matching Engineers with Teams
At Google, at the time of this study, engineering teams could hire
either external job candidates or existing employees from other
teams:
•External candidates could apply through a role-based job
posting, such as for software engineering. Once candidates
passed a screening and interview process, they proceeded to
a team matching process, where candidates were matched
with open roles on specific teams. Hiring managers some-
times had multiple candidates to choose from simultaneously,
and candidates sometimes had multiple hiring managers to
choose from.
•Existing employees could also choose to transfer teams within
Google, by browsing job listings on an internal site and ap-
plying to open roles on specific teams directly; internal trans-
fers could often browse some information about the hiring
managers (and team members) before they applied, such as
internal company profiles or some recent code changes and
docs.
632Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
3.2 Team Selection
We aimed to select interviewees from diverse teams who could
speak to how diversity is successfully nurtured. We defined teams
as groups of engineers who reported directly to a manager. To
improve the odds that we selected meaningfully diverse teams, we
used the following criteria to refine our list of candidate teams:
(1)We selected teams where the number of engineers ranged
from 5 to 15. The lower bound helped to exclude very small
teams where a measure of diversity would be unreliable. The
upper bound helped to exclude very large teams where the
manager-report relationship may be tenuous or superficial;
such teams are also very rare at Google.
(2)We selected team managers who have been managing for
more than four years, to ensure that managers had significant
management experience spanning before, during, and after
Covid-19 work from home policies.
(3)We selected teams with diversity in terms of race/ethnicity
and gender. We used these dimensions of identity because
this pre-existing, self-reported data is complete for most
US-based employees at the company. We only used data
for US employees because the US has the most employ-
ees of any country and also because some other countries
use incomparable race/ethnicity categories or do not collect
race/ethnicity data at all. Using this data, we determined that
a team is sufficiently diverse for interviewing when both of
the following two conditions were met:
•Race/Ethnicity: at least four race/ethnicities on the team,
a metric sometimes referred to as richness [ 1]. Available
categories were: White; Asian; Hispanic or Latinx; Black
or African American; and Native American, Hawaiian,
or Pacific Islander. Employees could choose one or more
race/ethnicity categories. We used a high richness thresh-
old here to increase the odds that the selected teams were
intentionally, rather than incidentally, diverse.
•Gender representation: We measured gender diversity
using the Gini-Simpson index, sometimes called the Blau
index, defined as the probability of sampling two team
members of different genders, with replacement [ 1]. The
maximum value of this index was 0.5, since the pre-existing
demographic data we used only represented gender as a
binary (Male and Female). In our sampling, we selected
teams with a Gini-Simpson index greater than 0.4. We
used a high diversity index threshold for the same reason
we used a high race/ethnicity richness threshold.
(4)At least one engineer from an URG had been on the team for
more than two years and was promoted during this time. By
a person from an URG, we mean someone who identified as
a woman and/or someone who identified as a race/ethnicity
other than White or Asian. We used the minimum two-year
reporting threshold as a signal that the team was not only
able to recruit but also retain underrepresented talent. We
used the promotion criteria as a signal that underrepresented
talent could grow on the selected team.3.3 Interviewee Selection
After applying the list of stringent criteria above, we produced a
list of highly diverse candidate teams. From this list, we aimed to
interview team members from two different perspectives: managers
and software engineers.
Managers: looking at the list of candidate teams, we prioritized
managers who had longer tenure at the company, as they would be
more likely to have previously managed other teams and therefore
be able to contrast their experiences.
Software engineers: we used the following criteria for priori-
tizing engineer interviewees from candidate teams:
•Identify as belonging to one or more URGs.
•Work on a different team from other engineer interviewees;
for transferrability, we chose to favor breadth across teams
over focusing on individual teams.
•Work on the team for longer periods of time and had longer
tenure at the company (for the same reason stated for man-
agers).
•To increase credibility, we aimed to create a sample of engi-
neers that is diverse in its representation of race/ethnicity
and gender.
Using these criteria, we selected eight software engineers from
URGs as invitees to be interviewed.
However, we noted two main shortcomings in the process de-
scribed above. First, because our demographic data source repre-
sented gender as binary, we would miss the perspective of non-
binary engineers as well. To correct this, we used an internal com-
pany list, visible to all employees, of people whose gender expres-
sion is non-conforming or transgender. People on this list self-select
to make themselves available to answer questions about their ex-
periences. We systematically searched the list to find software en-
gineers who work on teams that met as many of the criteria we
defined for diverse teams. We identified two additional engineers
to interview this way.
Second, our sample was also missing an engineer who identified
as Native American, Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander. Therefore, to
ensure we learn from engineers who share this perspective as well,
we used the same internal company demographic data. However,
we had to relax the previously used team selection criteria to find
them since their representation amongst employees is substantially
lower than for other groups [ 17]. We sampled one such engineer
who met partial criteria.
We conducted pilot interviews with two engineers from URGs
and three managers whose teams shared some of our selection cri-
teria. One pilot participant described particularly rich experiences
with what worked and did not work in improving diversity on the
teams she was on, so we included her data in our analysis after
receiving her consent to participate in the study.
After piloting, we sent email invitations to 22 potential partici-
pants (11 engineers from URGs and 11 managers) with the subject
line: “Research about building diverse and inclusive teams”. All
were interested in participating with a response rate of 100%. Due
to scheduling conflicts, we scheduled nine interviews with man-
agers, and ten interviews with engineers.
When reporting our findings, we use pseudonymized participant
identifiers to help improve traceability, using the prefix ‘M’ to
633ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
denote a participating manager (e.g. M12) and the prefix ‘E’ to
denote a participating engineer (e.g. E2). In practice, a few of the
software engineer participants were managers as well.
While we do not provide individual paticipants’ demographics to
protect their privacy, we summarize their demographics as follows:
•Engineer interviewees represented a variety of race/ethnicity
and genders. Four engineers identified as White+ (the ‘+’ indi-
cates that employees can identify as multiple races/ethnicities),
one as Asian+, two as Hispanic or Latinx+, three as Black
or African American+, and one as Native American, Hawai-
ian, or Pacific Islander+. Three engineers identified as men,
seven as women, and one as non-binary. Two identified as
transgender. Five engineers identified as belonging to two
or more URGs.
•Managers were largely men and White or Asian, except two
women and one manager who identified as Black or African
American.
All interviewees were working in the US.
3.4 Interviews
The first author completed all semi-structured interviews via tele-
conference. Each interview took approximately 60 minutes to com-
plete, except one 30 minute interview.
The interview questions were refined over multiple cycles. First,
we generated a list of questions about hiring and recruiting practices
from the perspective of how diversity can be improved. Then, the
researchers’ colleagues suggested changes and additional questions.
In the next round of iterations, the first author added questions
that relate to practices of “great” engineering managers [ 27], as
we anticipated there may be overlaps between those and inclusive
practices. The first author conducted five pilot interviews with
managers and engineers to evaluate the list of questions, structure,
and time frame of the interview guides. Finally, based on the pilot
interviewees’ reflections and suggestions, we finalized the interview
guides.
The semi-structured interview protocol included an introduc-
tion to the project, asking for permission to record the interview,
and describing how interviewees’ identities will be protected. We
purposefully asked interviewees open-ended questions, rather than
asking about specific practices described in the diversity and in-
clusion (D&I) literature (such as diversity training [ 40]), to avoid
priming participants with socially desirable answers. We developed
two interview guides, one for Managers and one for Engineers,
available in full in the appendix.
Manager interview guide: We asked about their current team
and teams they managed or were part of in the past. The questions
started with high-level reflections on diversity on their teams and
their goals/principles to build a diverse team. Then we asked about
specific actions they take when recruiting and hiring engineers (e.g.,
What’s the most effective thing you’ve done to increase diversity on
the team(s) you’ve led? ). Finally, we asked general questions about
communication with reports and the team’s culture (e.g., What do
you do to make your team members feel that you trust and support
their decisions? )
Engineer interview guide: We asked about interviewees’ cur-
rent and previous teams with regards to their experiences anddiversity (e.g., If you’ve been in less diverse teams in the past, than
the team you’re on now – can you reflect on the differences between
more diverse teams and less diverse teams? ). We asked them about
their reasons for joining or leaving a team and what makes them
feel like they belong to a team (e.g. Which relationship in your team
makes you feel most comfortable or well supported? What do they do
to support you? ).
3.5 Data Analysis
Following established practices [ 18], we thematically analyzed the
data from 20 semi-structured interviews. The first author tran-
scribed the recordings with an automated tool and manually treated
transcriptions to remove details that could reveal interviewees’ iden-
tities. The first author performed inductive open coding through
several rounds to develop the codebook, i.e. a compilation of a
number of codes [ 18]. As more data was collected, codes were re-
fined and sometimes merged. Five researchers met multiple times
to discuss the codes as the codebook was being developed. The
first author continued to iterate and rearrange the codes leading to
the core insights. The researchers met to discuss these insights to
identify the main themes. After multiple rounds, no further codes
emerged and our understanding of them stabilized, and both code
and meaning saturation [21] was reached.
To establish resonance in our findings, we shared the interme-
diate, summarized results with interviewees to perform member-
checking [ 9]. We created private copies for interviewees to com-
ment, reword or suggest edits if they thought something was mis-
interpreted in their own responses. We also asked them to add
“+1” in a comment if they found things from others’ responses
that resonated with them, and welcomed them to add comments
if they wanted to share any similar experiences. Seven out of the
11 engineers and four of the nine managers responded. After gath-
ering their feedback, we added the interviewees’ identifiers who
noted resonance on findings to the relevant paragraphs; we re-
worded three quotes to match interviewees’ comments; added two
examples (vignettes), and corrected minor mistakes in interviewees’
quotes (e.g., typos due to transcription errors).
3.6 Self-Disclosure
Finally, congruent with Bardzell and Bardzell’s feminist HCI method-
ology [ 6], our position (the authors) in the world should be disclosed.
Specifically, at the time of the study, all authors were employees of
the same company from which research participants were sampled.
Although we believe we had sufficient autonomy to perform this
research in a relatively unbiased way, our ability to perform and
publish this research is necessarily dependent on our ability to main-
tain good relations with the company’s employees and leadership.
Thus, our research findings are likely shaped by our employment
context, even if implicitly and unintentionally.
4 FINDINGS
Through semi-structured interviews, we heard from managers
about effective practices to grow and sustain diversity on their
teams. Engineers also shared their perspectives on diversity on
engineering teams and surfaced the challenges they experience, as
634Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
well as what others—engineers and managers—do to create a more
inclusive environment for them.
Tables 1 and 2 summarize our findings, including each practice,
a supporting example, and links to prior work. In particular, for a
high-level perspective, we link our practices to general diversity
management practices [ 40], distilled from “a comprehensive liter-
ature review, a detailed analysis of the writings of five diversity
experts, and interviews with an additional 14 experts” [ 30]. For
a lower-level perspective, we link our practices to Kalliamvakou
and colleagues’s findings about what makes a great software engi-
neering manager, drawn from 37 interviews and 123 surveys with
Microsoft engineers and engineering managers [27].
We organize the findings into two subsections that mirror the
two tables. In Section 4.1 and Table 1, we describe recruiting and hir-
ing practices. Then in Section 4.2 and Table 2, under an overarching
theme of developing technical allyship , we describe inclusive prac-
tices that impact the experiences of engineers from URGs, which
can contribute to these engineers choosing to join or stay on a team.
In each subsection and table, we enumerate the practices, illustrated
with example vignettes from the interviews. Each vignette is linked
to a code in our codebook. For example, the first row of Table 1
summarizes the practice of “Self-Empowering Hiring Managers”,
and illustrates the practice with a vignette about M20, which is
linked to a code called “Manager’s Impact”.
4.1 Recruiting and Hiring
In this section, we describe how individual managers improved team
diversity by empowering themselves as agents of change, growing
the pool of candidates while pruning back their own assumptions,
showing their commitment to diversity, and establishing guidelines
and accountability.
4.1.1 Self-Empowering Hiring Managers. While it may be easy to
blame diversity issues on the leaky pipeline [ 12,51,55] there are
concrete ways managers acted to grow diversity on their teams.
One engineer who also has experience in hiring explained that it
starts with developing a mindset of “I can do this. The odds may
be stacked against me, but I can do this” (E11). Managers grew
aware of the lack of diversity on engineering teams and self exam-
ined their own practices and their teams’ demographic makeup.
Recognizing there is a gap was their first step. Then, changing
their perspective—realizing that they themselves could take actions
to influence the representation on their teams–allowed them to
successfully cultivate diversity on their teams (M15, M19, M20).
4.1.2 Growing the Pool and Pruning Back Assumptions. Managers
(E11, M12, M13, M15, M16, M19, M20) mentioned they proactively
learned about and followed practices for improving diversity, in-
cluding growing the pool of available job candidates and checking
their own assumptions about the qualifications for success for an
engineer on their team.
Managers mentioned how they work with engineers from URGs
on their team by asking them to reach out to their external net-
works (M15) or how they advertise to mailing lists “to get the word
out” (M17). Other managers mentioned long term strategies like
connecting with external candidates via involvement with mentor-
ship programs (M13, M19). More narrowly, prior work notes thatformal relationships with a wide range of educational institutions
helps broaden the recruitment pipeline [40].
Many of the managers (E11, M13, M15, M17, M19, M20) took
the time needed during the hiring process to help the recruiting
message reach candidates from a wider range of backgrounds (e.g.
“post the role for a certain amount of time, and take the time to
gather those candidates” (M17)) and provided ample time for them
to apply. While it took more time to find “the best fit” instead of set-
tling for “first fit”, managers found the additional effort worthwhile.
During this process, managers also checked on their own assump-
tions, such as about what skills are truly necessary to succeed in
an open role (M19).
4.1.3 Ongoing Commitment to Diverse Candidates. Interviewees
explained that hiring managers can demonstrate an ongoing com-
mitment that goes beyond lip service (E4, E5, E7, E11, M13, M15,
M19, M20). One way is by investing in existing resources like
early career training programs where engineers from URGs or
non-traditional backgrounds participate in rotations on different
teams. Managers who host engineer-trainees on their teams could
help with their training and then hire those engineers when they
graduate from these programs (M15). Another way is by actively
learning about experiences of engineers from URGs, for example
through events and conversations with ally groups. Managers can
mention to candidates how they take concrete action to foster in-
clusive environments for the engineers on their teams. If their team
is not yet very diverse, managers can at least acknowledge how
they are trying to improve it. Here are vignettes of this practice
from the interviews:
E1 checked managers’ publicly-viewable calendars to see if
they had allyship or diversity and inclusion (D&I)-related
events scheduled. She explained this gives her a signal about
how “open-minded” and “aware” the manager is.
E5 said her manager made it “really easy to see how [she]
could succeed [on the team]” when he brought up another
engineer from an URG in their conversation and explained
how he was supporting her career growth on his team. When
there are no engineers from URGs, E5 suggested managers
should acknowledge the problem and demonstrate they are
“actively trying to fix” diversity on their teams.
Over time, hiring managers successfully fostered a diverse team
makeup and an inclusive culture (E11, M13, M14, M15, M17, M19,
M20). Then, prospective engineers from URGs took notice and
became interested in joining those teams – more diversity was seen
as a positive signal. This created a virtuous circle.
E7 looks at signals for a potentially inclusive environment.
They said: “I definitely do look at diversity and [...] if there
are more women on the team, or if the manager is not a white
man I consider it a positive signal.”
Interviewees appreciated it when their organization had diversity
goals but wished that it would not end at merely setting intentions
(E4, M17). Prioritizing D&I is the first step, but managers should
635ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
Table 1: A summary of Recruiting and Hiring practices, example supporting evidence, and related practices from the great
managers [27] and diversity management [40] literature.
Practices Example Evidence as Vignettes Related Practices from [27] and [40]
Self-Empowering Hiring Managers
(Section 4.1.1). Recognize there is a gap;
Realize managers can take action to influ-
ence the representation on their teams.M20 used to think that individual managers did not have much
power to impact diversity, but once he changed his perspective
and became proactive, he successfully grew representation on
his team over five years. He recommends that managers start
by reflecting on what incentives and biases led them to create
homogeneous teams in the first place, followed by creating a
plan to improve diversity.Employee involvement —"employee’s contributions in driving di-
versity throughout an organization" [40].
Growing the Pool and Pruning Back
Assumptions (Section 4.1.2). Work with
teammates from URGs to reach out to
their external networks; Connect with
external candidates via mentorship pro-
grams; Ensure the recruiting message
reaches candidates from a range of back-
grounds.M19 had an open role to fill, so he asked himself, “What are the
real requirements?”. He then included only core skills needed in
the job posting. When interviewing 20-30 people, he tried “to be
very picky” when making a selection. Rather than trying to fill
the role as quickly as possible, he took the time to intentionally
check his own assumptions to understand what his mental image
of an engineer is. He reflected that “the person that [he] might
think is the best may not [match the] mental image [he has] of
that person.”Recognizes individuality —"to understand each engineer’s
strengths and weaknesses, value diverse perspectives in the
team, and fine tune the definition of success to each individual’s
talent and interests. " [ 27];Recruitment —"the process of attracting
a supply of qualified, diverse applicants for employment." [40]
Ongoing Commitment to Diverse
Candidates (Section 4.1.3). Invest in re-
sources like early career training pro-
grams; Actively learn about experiences
of engineers from URGs; Mention to can-
didates how you foster an inclusive team
environment for engineers.M15 deliberately created a diverse and inclusive team. Reflecting
on his process he said: “[once] we had two women and one
man.. .folks on the team also encouraged me to make sure that
we were hiring from a diverse pool...Once we got to the team
size of maybe five, [engineers from URGs] started coming to me
saying, ‘Hey, I’d like to work on your team’.”Grows Talent —"to provide opportunities for challenging work,
suggest training for the engineer to gain industry relevant skills,
and provide actionable feedback to improve engineer perfor-
mance" [27].
Establish Guidelines and Account-
ability (Section 4.1.4). Leadership insti-
tutes top-down accountability measures
for the hiring process, emphasizing the
importance of diversity.In E11’s organization, leadership made it mandatory for every
hiring manager to go through a specific process when hiring
for every level. Hiring across the team was managed tightly,
which resulted in inclusive hiring practices and increased repre-
sentation. However, E11 reflected: “a combination of top-down
guidance and bottoms-up ‘get it done’ are required to have a
positive impact on increasing a team’s representation.”Top leadership commitment —"a vision of diversity demonstrated
and communicated throughout an organization by top-level
management”; Diversity as part of an organization’s strategic
plan—“a diversity strategy and plan that are developed and
aligned with the organization’s strategic plan” [ 40];Account-
ability —“the means to ensure that leaders are responsible for
diversity by linking their performance assessment and compen-
sation to the progress of diversity initiatives." [40]
“also be accountable for it” not just at the “surface level” like simply
requiring diversity training, said E4.
4.1.4 Establishing Guidelines and Accountability. Having described
recruitment and hiring practices that worked well for interviewees,
in this section we describe how making such practices known and
established in an organization had a positive impact. Participants
reported that managers in leadership positions – leadership refers
to the employees who decide on the values, strategy and direction
that guides the company – instituted ways to keep hiring managers
accountable to follow these practices, contributing to a lasting effect
on the diversity in their teams (E11, M13, M19, M20).
Interviewees discussed the role of managers at leadership posi-
tions (Director level and up) in growing diversity on engineering
teams, congruent with prior work’s findings about the importance
of “top leadership commitment” [ 40]. Our participant sample im-
plied a connection between diversity and leadership too: while
our sampling strategy could have yielded random teams around
the company, we instead found two groups of participants clus-
tered under two Vice Presidents (VPs). In one group, managers
mentioned that their leadership emphasizes the importance of di-
versity by instituting top-down accountability measures for the
hiring process. As managers, they are required to consider multiple
candidates, and they need to justify their hiring decision to the Vice
President. Instituting this process makes hiring managers seriously
consider more candidates, which means there is a greater chancecandidates from URGs will be considered in the process too. Also,
if there are conscious or unconscious biases that affect the hiring
manager’s selection process, they will become more apparent and
can be mitigated. Although the majority of hires still come from
overrepresented groups, the accountability and due diligence in
the hiring process helps make sure that engineers from URGs were
also hired.
On M20’s team, for “every single hire or transfer [...] the hiring
manager has to present [pros and cons for each candidate] to
the VP.” Hiring managers need to present a standard number
(e.g. at least five) of candidates that they considered for every
level they hire.
The leadership requiring managers to justify their selection
in writing ensures that this practice is implemented all the way
through. Top-down accountability measures are necessary, but in-
terviewees explained they need to be combined with bottom-up
intentions and efforts from managers during the hiring process
(E11, M16, M17, M19, M20). Interviewees also reflected that not all
managers recognize the need to grow diversity on their teams and
therefore D&I training needs to focus on those who need convincing
(E4, E5, E8, E11, M12, M16).
M19 said: “Our VP [...] has goals for increasing diversity [...]. I
try, but you know there’s obviously rules about how you can
636Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
hire or not hire. So I focus on getting the people, casting a
wide net and looking to find people that have the best fit for
the roles and make sure that we’re not excluding people that
we don’t need to be excluding.”
While inclusive hiring processes like those instituted by M19’s
leadership can be impactful, interviewees reflected that leadership
should also provide assurance for hiring managers that they can
follow the process without risking losing open roles on their teams
(E3, M13, M17). Managers reflected on the challenges they faced
when they tried to follow encouraged processes such as taking
more time in hiring. As hiring managers, they often face pressure
from their managers to fill the open roles quickly. One suggestion
was that leadership could provide security, ensuring that hiring
managers have time to follow the preferred processes once a role
opens up:
M17 said “there’s huge, huge tension between the really equi-
table hiring process and the hiring structure.” As a manager,
she is pressed by business needs and if she doesn’t fill the
role quickly, she risks “losing the headcount” on her team.
M17 suggested leadership can develop a process to reassure
hiring managers they have time to follow the proper process,
even at times of hiring slowdowns. She said that providing a
guarantee to hiring managers that once a role is open, they
are allocated predetermined time to fill it without the risk of
the role being retracted, will make managers confident they
can follow the slower, more equitable, and more inclusive
hiring process.
4.2 Developing Technical Allyship
In addition to the recruiting and hiring practices mentioned in
the prior section, technical allyship emerged as an overarching
theme. Based on the interviews, we define technical allyship as a
practice with three properties: (1) it is performed by a team member
of an engineer from an URG; (2) it is grounded in actions that
improve equity by addressing potential sources of inequity, beyond
simply expressing support; and (3) it bolsters confidence in the
technical skills possessed by engineers from URGs, or advocates
for them when their technical expertise is being undervalued due
to their racial, ethnic, or gender identity. Technical allyship is a
more specific form of the existing concept of allyship, the practice
of helping someone from a marginalized group by identifying and
amplifying the concerns that person faces, when the person helping
does not identify as a member of that group [29, 35].
We next unpack the actions of technical allies organized in three
levels. First, in Section 4.2.1, we describe how managers act as tech-
nical allies to combat biases and create a more inclusive space on
their team. Second, in Section 4.2.2, we describe what managers in
leadership positions do from the top down. Finally, in Section 4.2.3,
we describe how individual coworkers (e.g. engineers on teams)
acted to inspire technical confidence in engineers from URGs.4.2.1 Managers. With attention to biases, creation of growth op-
portunities, and active attempts to build confidence and trust, man-
agers can act as technical allies to support their engineers from
URGs.
Evaluating performance after diligently gathering infor-
mation: there are many moments where managers’ actions can
have a long lasting influence on engineers’ technical career de-
velopment. Managers on diverse teams acted as technical allies
by actively seeking growth opportunities for their engineers from
URGs (E5, E11, M15, M17, M19, M20). Managers were mindful of
conscious and/or unconscious biases which may sometimes lead
them or others on the team to unintentionally overlook engineers’
technical skills (E11, M14, M15, M19, M20). They recognized that a
lack of this awareness could run the risk of making their engineers
feel “pigeonholed” (M17) or stereotyped into less technical roles,
which could then hinder, derail, or discourage further development
of the engineers’ technical career, as several engineers described:
E10 felt that a team lead overlooked her software engineering
skills when he asked her to delay her departure from the team
for the sake of keeping up team morale, later admitting that
he did not have further technical work for her to complete.
As a woman engineer, E3 noticed she may have been un-
dervalued and underestimated because when she finally got
promoted, others on her team were surprised that she was
not already a couple levels higher.
E6 felt she gets “typecasted a bit as a female front-end engi-
neer.” She said it is frustrating since front-end work is not
seen as difficult and is often more associated with women. In
another case, E6’s previous manager gave her an unsolicited
suggestion to switch to a “less technical ladder” despite fully
knowing E6 was actively working on an advanced degree in
computer science. E6 was particularly upset by this because
her manager at the time appeared to be dismissing her techni-
cal skills even as she demonstrated her commitment to being
an engineer by pursuing a more advanced degree in the field.
Creating “stretch opportunities” and recognizing that skill
development requires trial-and-error : once managers have di-
versity on their team, they should “give equal opportunities to those
people from URGs to grow and thrive, and make sure that they’re
not just getting lost” (E5). Impostor syndrome is one of the chal-
lenges that could interfere with engineers’ confidence to contribute
to their team (E5, E6, E8, E9, M14). For example, engineers from
URGs hesitated to ask questions when starting on their team; as
E8 said, she was “very afraid of saying anything wrong or coming
across like [she] didn’t know what she was doing.” M14 noticed that
impostor syndrome could even influence how others on the team
treated underrepresented engineers, such as “not trusting them
with interesting work and [not] treating them as an equal peer.”
To combat this, managers proactively try to find development
opportunities for their engineers (E2, E4, E5, E8, M15, M17, M19,
M20), called “providing opportunities for challenging work” in
Kalliamvakou et al. [ 27]. When member-checking, E8 wanted to
637ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
Table 2: A summary of Developing Technical Allyship practices, example supporting evidence, and related practices from the
great managers [27] and diversity management [40] literature.
Practices Example Evidence as Vignettes Related Practices from [27] and [40]
Manager practices (Section 4.2.1). Eval-
uate performance after diligent informa-
tion gathering; Create “stretch opportu-
nities” and recognize that skill develop-
ment requires trial-and-error; Encourage
a culture of mutual respect.M15 said, “You’ve got to take a chance and give the folks who are
from these traditionally underrepresented backgrounds a chance
to fail on projects. You might find skills there that you didn’t
appreciate or see.” He gave an example of a junior engineer who
got an opportunity to demonstrate that she was “exceptionally
good” at leading engineers who were much more senior than
her. He suggests managers avoid "protecting” people from URGs
by keeping growth opportunities away from them.Enables autonomy —"to provide freedom on how engineers work,
show trust and support for their decisions, and help engineers be
independently responsible [ 27];Supports Experimentation —“to
encourage the engineer to try out new things, and signal a safe
environment for unsuccessful attempts” [ 27];Grows talent (see
Table 1) [ 27];Build a relationship with team members —“to take
an interest in the employees’ life outside work, and care about
them as a person." [27]
Leader practices (Section 4.2.2). Recog-
nize the lack of diversity in engineering
management roles and need to proac-
tively increase it.M20, an engineering director from an overrepresented group,
reflected that “everyone needs to see their own representation
and at all different levels of management. ” He believes that more
representation in management would demonstrate to junior en-
gineers that they have a career path in engineering. M20 said
that managers should be very deliberate about making a change
and be aware that statistically, when they recruit and hire for
higher management positions, the candidate pool will skew to
the overrepresented groups in engineering (White/Asian and
men). Finally, M20 reflected that more representation at the lead-
ership level will also have a trickle down effect on diversity in the
organizations—he “found that it’s a faster path to [grow diversity
on engineering teams by] just creat[ing] a leadership team that
has strong representation.”Top leadership commitment —"a vision of diversity demonstrated
and communicated throughout an organization by top-level
management” [ 40];Diversity as part of an organization’s strate-
gic plan —"a diversity strategy and plan that are developed and
aligned with the organization’s strategic plan” [ 40];Succession
planning —”an ongoing, strategic process for identifying a diverse
talent pool and developing them into an organization’s potential
future leaders." [40]
Coworker practices (Section 4.2.3). Ex-
plicitly recognize others’ technical con-
tributions and be generally open and sup-
portive; Cultivate a sense of team ease
and security to mitigate the effects of
impostor syndrome; Care about mentor-
ship; Be aware of biases that can nega-
tively impact engineers’ career develop-
ment; Express empathy with technical
challenges.E8 commented, “Respectful and constructive code reviews make
me feel supported and more confident. Particularly, when a team-
mate asks questions and opens up the floor for a productive
discussion about design decisions rather than assuming their
point of view must be correct and demanding things be changed
a certain way.” E8 added: “when my [coworkers] would explic-
itly thank me for my work and emphasize [when presenting to
others] that they thought it was important and well-done [. . . it]
made me feel way more confident about speaking up and putting
myself out there.”Employee involvement —“employee’s contributions in driving
diversity throughout an organization” [ 40];Diversity train-
ing—“organizational efforts to inform and educate management
and staff about diversity’s benefits to the organization." [40]
“emphasize that it’s not that the manager needs to push the engineer
to make up for lacking skills, but rather that the manager trusts
the engineer to complete difficult work well and learn new skills
quickly.” Managers worked with their engineers to make plans for
their career growth and encouraged underrepresented engineers
by creating “stretch opportunities” (M15) so the engineers could
grow confidence in their abilities:
When E5 chose to join her current manager’s team, she did
this because “It felt like a place where I could succeed and
the manager would push me and raise me up.” E5 said she
wanted to be challenged in the right way and valued choosing
a manager who had a plan for her career growth.
When member-checking, E8 commented: “By assigning the
engineer a stretch project, the manager shows they have con-
fidence in the engineer’s potential and gives them an oppor-
tunity to demonstrate that, instead of assuming they would
prefer less challenging work. My manager assigned me L4-
scoped2projects right away when I joined the team as an
L3, which allowed me to grow a lot faster and demonstrate
my technical skills to everyone on the team, and I think this
helped me avoid being typecast or assumed to be less technical
than anyone else.”Encouraging a culture of mutual respect: healthy team cul-
ture can encourage participation from everyone (E1, E4, E6, E7, E8,
E10, M15, M18, M19). Managers emphasized building teams where
engineers value learning from each other rather than competing,
and when feedback is given, it is constructive and respectful.
M15 gave an example of a non-diverse sibling team where
“conflict was definitely a part of their culture, people would
yell at each other.” This was not productive, and “women
engineers in particular just [...] couldn’t see themselves par-
ticipating in that kind of decision-making.” He believes that
the few engineers from URGs on that team left due to this
culture. When building his team, he developed the team’s
culture in reaction to these really competitive aspects of “the
default engineering culture [in tech].” On his team, engineers
want to spend time teaching and helping each other grow. He
describes it as having “a really good teacher culture of both
teaching and learning things going in both directions.”
M19 said it is important to have good mentors on the team
who can also mentor engineers from underrepresented back-
grounds. When hiring engineers, he evaluates if they would
“invest in other people and not just think about their own
2L4 refers to a technical level in the company’s career ladder. L4 is a more advanced
level than L3. Work at higher levels requires more skills and responsibilities.
638Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
personal growth,” checking their code review communication
styles and asking himself: “Are they polite? Do they typically
give constructive feedback [...]?” This helped him identify and
hire good mentors in the past.
While not strictly limited to technical discussions, managers can
also learn from the experiences of the underrepresented engineers
on their teams by seeking feedback from them (E9, M19). This
could also help make the engineers feel valued and build their
self-confidence.
E9 suggested that managers should ask their reports for feed-
back in one-on-one conversations. He said this could help
build trust, especially when done informally and not on offi-
cial records, and this practice would emphasize to their reports
that their voices matter. It could “really [be] empowering and
also make [managers] build a lot of trust with [engineers from
URGs].”
Another way managers can inspire confidence in engineers from
URGs is by opening up channels of discussion across technical levels
to build trust. For example, M19 mentioned that his manager makes
herself available and approachable across levels to help engineers
from URGs feel welcomed. M19’s reports meet with M19’s manager
regularly and directly reach out to her. M19 was content about
his reports having another channel of communication with their
management. He said “there’s lots of channels for [my reports to
ask] questions, and sometimes they tell [my manager] things they
won’t tell [me].”
4.2.2 Leaders. Managers at higher levels of leadership are in a good
position to affect the representation of URGs in those management
roles. The lack of diversity on teams and higher management levels
bothered engineers from URGs (E1, E3, E4, E5, E6, E7, E8, M17).
Engineers from URGs wanted and asked to see more representation
in leadership levels (E3, E4, E5, E6, E7, M17).
Technical allies recognized the lack of diversity and explained
that more representation of engineers from URGs in management
roles will help grow engineers’ confidence in their future career
paths. Since fewer engineers from URGs are in the hiring pipeline,
leaders need to proactively increase representation in management
roles (E11, M15, M17, M19, M20).
4.2.3 Coworkers. Coworkers can have a large impact as technical
allies by explicitly recognizing others’ technical contributions and
being generally open and supportive. Engineers described how
their coworkers encouraged their contribution to the team with
explicit recognition and constructive feedback (E1, E3, E5, E6, E8).
These positive actions were particularly important given potential
negative past experiences, as described by a few engineers:
As a member of an URG in college, E6 needed to “blend in as
one of the guys in order to survive” and she “still has some
of those experiences as baggage”. While E6’s engineering
experience is better on her current team than it was when she
was in college, her “baggage” is that in college her ideas were
automatically disregarded.E6 previously worked with a more senior tech lead on her
team who was from a majority background. When E6 took a
leap of confidence and suggested an idea on his code change,
he explicitly accepted and praised the idea as a really good
one. This built her confidence in contributing to others at
higher technical levels. She mentioned that beyond this spe-
cific exchange, this tech lead was also involved with D&I
efforts.
People from URGs may experience elevated impostor syndrome
also due to the lack of representation in the field [ 8]. By cultivating
a sense of ease and security on their team, coworkers mitigated the
potential harmful effects of impostor syndrome (E5, E6, E7, E8).
When first starting on the team, E5’s assigned “tech mentor”
was vital to her success. He validated her technical confidence
by explicitly praising her work or affirming her questions.
She felt comfortable asking him the questions she might have
worried would sound stupid to others.
Managers also recognized that coworkers who care about men-
torship can cultivate a culture of teaching and learning on the team,
thus positively encouraging engineers from URGs to participate in
the work (M15, M19). In contrast, when engineers feel less confi-
dent on a team, they may prefer to work with near-peers. Since in
the current state of the field, there are fewer like-peers to engineers
from URGs, this preference could steer them away from potential
collaborations with their coworkers. However, once engineers from
URGs established their technical confidence, they felt more at ease
working with engineers from all backgrounds.
E6 reflected on how when she first started to work on engi-
neering teams, she preferred working with women. However,
since she now has an official tech lead role and her technical
contributions continue to be rewarded, she has less imposter
syndrome and feels “more comfortable working with other
people” too.
Coworkers practicing technical allyship were aware there are
biases which, if unattended, could negatively impact engineers’ long
term career development, like promotion opportunities. Therefore,
they were attentive and advocated for URGs in the background too,
as noted by one of the managers:
M19 noticed an engineer from an underrepresented group
was really talented. He recalled: “I was doing a [code] review
for her [...] I left a note in the [performance review that she
should be promoted]. Then I was always advocating for her
growth and support in the backchannels.”
Finally, coworkers who simply commented and expressed empa-
thy in response to technical challenges were also helping engineers
from URGs feel more at ease and help develop their technical con-
fidence. As E1 described: “it’s nice to see when I’m like...‘I don’t
know what I’m doing’ they’re like: ‘same’, so it’s nice to see people
that are different than you also have the same [technical] strug-
gles as you”. E8 explained: “It’s nice when people admit and laugh
639ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
about their own mistakes, and even talk about their own imposter
syndrome, so I feel like I fit in more!”
5 DISCUSSION
We posit in this paper that the practices used by highly diverse
teams can be transferred to other teams to help them increase their
diversity. One might argue, however, that diversity is a zero-sum
game because the pool of engineers from URGs is fixed; that is, if
one team can increase their diversity by applying these practices
to attract an engineer from an URG, that engineer’s prior team by
definition becomes less diverse. We view this argument as a cop out,
enabling teams to avoid responsibility for providing an inclusive
environment and instead shifting blame for low diversity to further
upstream in the recruiting pipeline. The engineering talent pool
may indeed be of fixed size at any given instant, but over the long
term, the pool is both absorbent and leaky, and those with the
power to influence cultural and structural changes at each phase of
the pipeline – parents, educators, governments, and organizational
leaders – bear responsibility for implementing that change. In this
paper, we have collected diversity practices at the professional
software engineering team stage.
While we believe that the practices used by the teams described
in this paper can be applied in other engineering teams, we expect
that doing so is not easy. One reason is that the practices entail
trade offs; for instance, enabling managers to retain open positions
for a long period of time reduces organizations’ ability to reallocate
resources in an agile way, in response to changing market condi-
tions. Another challenge to applying these practices is that it was
clear from our interviews that these managers were committed and
felt personal responsibility towards increasing diversity; we expect
that managers who do not feel such a duty, are not fully bought-in
to organizational diversity priorities, or are using these practices in
a perfunctory manner will see less success in increasing diversity.
We were initially somewhat surprised that team member re-
tention did not emerge as a frequently mentioned theme in the
interviews. Our surprise probably stems from a conceptualization
of retention issues as being solved primarily when a manager con-
vinces an employee, who has a competing offer in hand, to stay
on the manager’s team. As an experienced engineering manager,
Lopp [ 31] refers to this situation as The Diving Save, noting that in
his experience it is “usually a sign of poor leadership”. In retrospect,
we were naive to equate retention with The Diving Save. When we
examine the few cases where interviewees discussed retention, it
seems that people left teams due to cultural issues, rather than some
specific catalyzing event before a team member left. For instance,
M15 reflected on a sibling team who had a hard time retaining
engineers from URGs due to the teams’ aggressive culture.
Throughout Section 4, we showed how the practices we uncov-
ered resemble those of ‘great software engineering managers’ [ 27]
and those recommended by the broader diversity management
literature [ 40], adding to previous findings’ reliability. However,
some practices in this prior literature were not mentioned by our
participants, such as great managers “facilitating external commu-
nication” [ 27]. Likewise, our participants mentioned practices that
did not emerge in this prior work. For example, managers combat-
ing bias by evaluating performance only after diligently gatheringinformation, and encourage culture of mutual respect to grow a
team where engineers learn from each other, rather than compete
(Section 4.2.1). In addition, our findings highlight the important
role coworkers can play in reifying an inclusive culture. Cowork-
ers have the ability to uplift engineers from URGs through acts of
technical allyship. These include showing awareness and empa-
thy by explicitly recognizing others’ technical contributions, being
generally open and supportive (e.g., providing constructive feed-
back), practicing respectful code review, and being attentive and
advocating when necessary to help combat biases (Section 4.2.3).
6 IMPLICATIONS
Here, we summarize implications based on our findings for en-
gineering team members as a call to action to help team leaders
recruit and retain engineers from URGs. Even though leadership
can institute practices towards this goal, managers and engineers
have the power to affect change too. Every person can play a role
in creating inclusive engineering teams.
6.1 Engineers
•Act as a technical ally: help build others’ confidence in their
skills. Whenever possible, assure others that their technical
contributions are valued and advocate on their behalf when
necessary.
•Be attentive to disparities in workload and wary of typecast-
ing people into roles. Proactively ensure that non-technical
work, like organizing and note-taking, is being distributed
fairly amongst your colleagues.
•Make efforts towards changing the status quo by being vo-
cal about asking for more representation of engineers from
URGs. Further, you can ask your managers for more trans-
parency in their hiring and promotion decisions.
6.2 Managers
•Individually investigate and evaluate the diversity and inclu-
sion practices on your team: be honest with yourself about
your decision making processes.
•Develop your awareness and empathy by self educating (e.g.,
through joining allyship groups and events), to develop your
understanding of the broad range of life experiences.
•Empower your reports by seeking informal feedback from
them. Listen and actively try to improve your practices to-
wards a more inclusive working environment.
•Follow inclusive hiring processes, such as taking more time
to grow their candidate pool and examine your biases when
considering candidates.
•Evaluate your reports’ performance not just by following
your intuition or first impressions. Diligently gather infor-
mation and question your decisions at every step of the
process.
•When talking to potential candidates from URGs, make it
clear you are committed to helping them grow their careers
(e.g. by mentioning how you support engineers on your
team).
•Make sure stretch opportunities are given to all the engineers
in your team. Be careful to not “protect” engineers who are
640Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
from URGs, accidentally keeping them from challenges that
would actually help them develop their skills. Recognize
that skill development requires trial-and-error, and create
an environment where engineers feel secure to explore new
challenges.
6.3 Leaders
•Engineers from URGs mentioned they are looking for diver-
sity in their managers (at different levels). Therefore, you
should aim to grow diversity at the leadership level of man-
agement.
•Establish required practices that managers should follow in
the recruiting, hiring, and promotion processes. For example,
require your managers to interview at least five potential
candidates before choosing who to hire.
•Institute accountability measures. For example, ask hiring
managers to share their decision making process with the top
leader of the team (e.g. VP) to ensure that an appropriately
diverse pool of candidates was considered, and check that
the final choice was not based on conscious or unconscious
biases.
•Acknowledge and reward managers who grow diversity and
their teams’ inclusive culture.
•Give managers security to do due diligence when recruiting
and hiring by committing to the promised resources. For
example, clearly provide a timeframe in which an open role
can be filled without being retracted.
7 LIMITATIONS
The reader should consider several limitations of the findings de-
scribed in this paper. In terms of transferrability, we studied soft-
ware engineering teams at one specific, large, US-based tech com-
pany, and results are more likely transfer to similar contexts than
dissimilar contexts. For instance, our findings may not transfer
well to small companies without a mature recruiting program or to
open source projects where project members are part-time, unpaid
volunteers. Transferrability is also limited in that we assumed that
the teams we studied were diverse because of the actions taken
by people, but it could be that these teams were diverse due to
contextual factors, such as that the type of software being built was
highly appealing to engineers from URGs. Another limitation is
that participants may have told the interviewer what they thought
the interviewer wanted to hear due to social desirability bias [ 39].
We also assumed that what people told us made their teams success-
fully diverse actually did so; rather, it may be that teams who are
not diverse are also using the same inclusion practices, yet are still
failing to build diverse teams. To address the limitation, follow-up
research should correlate the usage of practices described in this
paper (e.g. hiring manager self-empowerment and assigning stretch
opportunities) with the amount of diversity on a variety of teams.
In terms of credibility, we studied limited facets of team diver-
sity (race, ethnicity, and gender) and only broad, US-centric de-
mographic categories (e.g. Asian and Black or African American).
Diversity defined in terms of other demographic categorizations
(e.g. race and ethnicity in Latin America [ 46]) and other facets (e.g.socioeconomics [ 41] or disability [ 5]) may require different strate-
gies than those described here. Likewise, credibility is limited by
survivorship bias in that we did not interview former engineers
who left the company or industry, possibly for reasons that cannot
be combated even by an engineering team that practices all of the
inclusion strategies described in this paper.
8 CONCLUSION
We studied what leads to diversity in the dimensions of race/ethnicity
and gender on engineering teams by identifying highly diverse
teams at Google. We conducted 20 interviews with managers and
engineers from URGs on these teams to learn from their experiences
of what worked in practice. We synthesized the data by applying the-
matic analysis and validated the results through member-checking.
Our findings suggest that combining top-down and bottom-up ap-
proaches to D&I efforts can lead to improved diversity. We hope
organizations will take action by establishing accountability mea-
sures for effective and impactful D&I practices. Additionally, we
show how developing technical allyship allows people at different
levels on engineering teams to play an active role and have long
lasting influence on the technical opportunities and career growth
for engineers from URGs. If extended beyond software engineer-
ing teams, the theme of technical allyship could inspire positive
change toward improving diversity and inclusion in any technical
environment, where people from URGs experience challenges due
to their backgrounds. We hope this research inspires the research
community to continue investigating ways to grow diversity and
inclusive practices in tech, the workplace, and beyond. In doing so,
our hope for the future is simple: teams like the ones we studied
in this paper should not be exceptionally diverse but should be the
norm.
9 DATA AVAILABILITY
To enable replication, we provide our interview guides in our ap-
pendix. To maintain participant confidentiality, we do not include
interview transcripts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research would not have been possible without the willing-
ness of the study participants to engage candidly in the interview
process and provide their honest points of view. We appreciate the
time and effort they invested through talking to us, reviewing our
findings, and providing us with feedback under the member check-
ing process. Thanks also to Bianca Trinkenreich, Bogdan Vasilescu,
Ciera Jaspan, Collin Green, Corrina Burnley, Danny Berlin, Paul
Ralph, Real Canty, and Ruslan Osipov for for early feedback on this
work. Finally, we thank our anonymous external reviewers for their
valuable feedback that helped us identify places for improving this
paper before its publication.
REFERENCES
[1]Signorell Andri et mult. al. 2023. DescTools: Tools for Descriptive Statistics . https:
//cran.r-project.org/package=DescTools R package version 0.99.47.
[2]Evan P Apfelbaum, Katherine W Phillips, and Jennifer A Richeson. 2014. Re-
thinking the baseline in diversity research: Should we be explaining the effects
of homogeneity? Perspectives on Psychological Science 9, 3 (2014), 235–244.
[3] Apple. 2021. Inclusion & Diversity. https://www.apple.com/diversity/.
641ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Ella Dagan, Anita Sarma, Alison Chang, Sarah D’Angelo, Jill Dicker, and Emerson Murphy-Hill
[4]Fatma Başak Aydemir and Fabiano Dalpiaz. 2018. A Roadmap for Ethics-Aware
Software Engineering. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Software
Fairness (Gothenburg, Sweden) (FairWare ’18) . Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3194770.3194778
[5]Phoebe Ball, Gregory Monaco, James Schmeling, Helen Schartz, and Peter Blanck.
2005. Disability as diversity in Fortune 100 companies. Behavioral Sciences & the
Law 23, 1 (2005), 97–121.
[6]Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2011. Towards a feminist HCI methodol-
ogy: social science, feminism, and HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems . 675–684.
[7]Kelly Blincoe, Olga Springer, and Michal R Wrobel. 2019. Perceptions of Gender
Diversity’s impact on mood in software development teams. Ieee Software 36, 5
(2019), 51–56.
[8]Dena M Bravata, Sharon A Watts, Autumn L Keefer, Divya K Madhusudhan,
Katie T Taylor, Dani M Clark, Ross S Nelson, Kevin O Cokley, and Heather K
Hagg. 2020. Prevalence, predictors, and treatment of impostor syndrome: a
systematic review. Journal of General Internal Medicine 35, 4 (2020), 1252–1275.
[9]Michelle M Byrne. 2001. Evaluating the findings of qualitative research. AORN
journal 73, 3 (2001), 703–703.
[10] Gemma Catolino, Fabio Palomba, Damian A Tamburri, Alexander Serebrenik,
and Filomena Ferrucci. 2019. Gender diversity and women in software teams:
How do they affect community smells?. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS) .
IEEE, 11–20.
[11] Pauline Rose Clance and Suzanne Ament Imes. 1978. The imposter phenomenon
in high achieving women: Dynamics and therapeutic intervention. Psychotherapy:
Theory, research & practice 15, 3 (1978), 241.
[12] Jacob Clark Blickenstaff*. 2005. Women and science careers: leaky pipeline or
gender filter? Gender and education 17, 4 (2005), 369–386.
[13] Jennifer L Davidson, Rithika Naik, Umme Ayda Mannan, Amir Azarbakht, and
Carlos Jensen. 2014. On older adults in free/open source software: reflections of
contributors and community leaders. In 2014 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages
and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC) . IEEE, 93–100.
[14] Steve Easterbrook, Janice Singer, Margaret-Anne Storey, and Daniela Damian.
2008. Selecting empirical methods for software engineering research. In Guide
to advanced empirical software engineering . Springer, 285–311.
[15] Facebook. 2021. Annual Diversity Report. https://diversity.fb.com/wp-content/
uploads/2021/07/Facebook-Annual-Diversity-Report-July-2021.pdf.
[16] Susan T Fiske. 2015. Intergroup biases: a focus on stereotype content. Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 3 (2015), 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.
2015.01.010 Social behavior.
[17] Google. 2022. Diversity Annual Report. https://about.google/belonging/diversity-
annual-report/2022/.
[18] Greg Guest, Kathleen M MacQueen, and Emily E Namey. 2011. Applied thematic
analysis . sage publications.
[19] Mariam Guizani, Igor Steinmacher, Jillian Emard, Abrar Fallatah, Margaret Bur-
nett, and Anita Sarma. 2022. How to Debug Inclusivity Bugs? A Debugging
Process with Information Architecture. In 44th IEEE/ACM International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society ICSE (SEIS) 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 22-24, 2022 . IEEE, 90–101.
[20] Elizabeth L. Haines, Kay Deaux, and Nicole Lofaro. 2016. The Times They Are a-
Changing . . . or Are They Not? A Comparison of Gender Stereotypes, 1983–2014.
Psychology of Women Quarterly 40, 3 (2016), 353–363. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0361684316634081
[21] Monique M Hennink, Bonnie N Kaiser, and Vincent C Marconi. 2017. Code satu-
ration versus meaning saturation: how many interviews are enough? Qualitative
health research 27, 4 (2017), 591–608.
[22] Claudia Hilderbrand, Christopher Perdriau, Lara Letaw, Jillian Emard, Zoe
Steine-Hanson, Margaret Burnett, and Anita Sarma. 2020. Engineering gender-
inclusivity into software: ten teams’ tales from the trenches. In Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering . 433–444.
[23] Charles G. Hill, Maren Haag, Alannah Oleson, Christopher J. Mendez, Nicola
Marsden, Anita Sarma, and Margaret M. Burnett. 2017. Gender-Inclusiveness
Personas vs. Stereotyping: Can We Have it Both Ways?. In Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, CO, USA, May
06-11, 2017 . ACM, 6658–6671. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025609
[24] Astrid C Homan and Lindred L Greer. 2013. Considering diversity: The positive
effects of considerate leadership in diverse teams. Group Processes & Intergroup
Relations 16, 1 (2013), 105–125.
[25] Astrid C Homan, Seval Gündemir, Claudia Buengeler, and Gerben A van Kleef.
2020. Leading diversity: Towards a theory of functional leadership in diverse
teams. Journal of Applied Psychology 105, 10 (2020), 1101.
[26] John M Ivancevich and Jacqueline A Gilbert. 2000. Diversity management: Time
for a new approach. Public personnel management 29, 1 (2000), 75–92.
[27] Eirini Kalliamvakou, Christian Bird, Thomas Zimmermann, Andrew Begel, Robert
DeLine, and Daniel M German. 2017. What makes a great manager of software
engineers? IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 45, 1 (2017), 87–106.[28] Tanjila Kanij, John C. Grundy, Jennifer McIntosh, Anita Sarma, and Gayatri
Aniruddha. 2022. A New Approach Towards Ensuring Gender Inclusive SE Job
Advertisements. In 44th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineer-
ing: Software Engineering in Society ICSE (SEIS) 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May
22-24, 2022 . IEEE, 1–11.
[29] Elizabeth Kiehne and Quinn Hafen. 2022. Advancing Active Allyship for Social
Justice: Cross-Group Friendships, Social Empathy, and Political Engagement.
Social Work Research 46, 3 (2022), 193–204.
[30] Patricia A Kreitz. 2008. Best practices for managing organizational diversity. The
journal of academic librarianship 34, 2 (2008), 101–120.
[31] Michael Lopp. 2014. The Diving Save. https://randsinrepose.com/archives/the-
diving-save/.
[32] Christopher Mendez, Lara Letaw, Margaret Burnett, Simone Stumpf, Anita Sarma,
and Claudia Hilderbrand. 2019. From GenderMag to InclusiveMag: An inclusive
design meta-method. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
Centric Computing (VL/HCC) . IEEE, 97–106.
[33] Danaë Metaxa-Kakavouli, Kelly Wang, James A. Landay, and Jeff Hancock. 2018.
Gender-Inclusive Design: Sense of Belonging and Bias in Web Interfaces. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174188
[34] Microsoft. 2021. Diversity & Inclusion Report. https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/diversity/inside-microsoft/annual-report.
[35] Robyn Moore and Meredith Nash. 2021. Women’s experiences of racial mi-
croaggressions in STEMM workplaces and the importance of white allyship.
International Journal of Gender, Science and Technology 13, 1 (2021), 3–22.
[36] Renate Motschnig and Seyhan Güver. 2019. Leading Diverse Teams to Success:
What Are the Factors that Can Make a Difference?. In International Conference
on Human Interaction and Emerging Technologies . Springer, 365–370.
[37] Emerson Murphy-Hill, Ciera Jaspan, Carolyn Egelman, and Lan Cheng. 2022.
The pushback effects of race, ethnicity, gender, and age in code review. Commun.
ACM 65, 3 (2022), 52–57.
[38] Reza Nadri, Gema Rodríguez-Pérez, and Meiyappan Nagappan. 2022. On the
Relationship Between the Developer’s Perceptible Race and Ethnicity and the
Evaluation of Contributions in OSS. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
48, 08 (2022), 2955–2968.
[39] Anton J Nederhof. 1985. Methods of coping with social desirability bias: A review.
European journal of social psychology 15, 3 (1985), 263–280.
[40] US Government Accountability Office. 2005. Diversity management: Expert-
identified leading practices and agency examples. https://www.gao.gov/assets/
gao-05-90.pdf.
[41] Julie J Park, Nida Denson, and Nicholas A Bowman. 2013. Does socioeconomic
diversity make a difference? Examining the effects of racial and socioeconomic
diversity on the campus climate for diversity. American Educational Research
Journal 50, 3 (2013), 466–496.
[42] Carianne Pretorius, Maryam Razavian, Katrin Eling, and Fred Langerak. 2020.
Combined intuition and rationality increases software feature novelty for female
software designers. IEEE Software 38, 2 (2020), 64–69.
[43] Huilian Sophie Qiu, Yucen Lily Li, Hema Susmita Padala, Anita Sarma, and
Bogdan Vasilescu. 2019. The Signals that Potential Contributors Look for When
Choosing Open-source Projects. Proc. ACM Hum. Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW
(2019), 122:1–122:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359224
[44] Gema Rodríguez-Pérez, Reza Nadri, and Meiyappan Nagappan. 2021. Perceived
diversity in software engineering: a systematic literature review. Empirical
Software Engineering 26, 5 (16 Jul 2021), 102. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-021-
09992-2
[45] Monique Ross, Zahra Hazari, Gerhard Sonnert, and Philip Sadler. 2020. The
Intersection of Being Black and Being a Woman: Examining the Effect of Social
Computing Relationships on Computer Science Career Choice. ACM Trans.
Comput. Educ. 20, 2, Article 9 (feb 2020), 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377426
[46] Edward Telles. 2014. Pigmentocracies: Ethnicity, race, and color in Latin America .
UNC Press Books.
[47] Josh Terrell, Andrew Kofink, Justin Middleton, Clarissa Rainear, Emerson Murphy-
Hill, Chris Parnin, and Jon Stallings. 2017. Gender differences and bias in open
source: Pull request acceptance of women versus men. PeerJ Computer Science 3
(2017), e111.
[48] Jakita O. Thomas, Nicole Joseph, Arian Williams, Chan’tel Crum, and Jamika
Burge. 2018. Speaking Truth to Power: Exploring the Intersectional Expe-
riences of Black Women in Computing. In 2018 Research on Equity and Sus-
tained Participation in Engineering, Computing, and Technology (RESPECT) . 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/RESPECT.2018.8491718
[49] Parastou Tourani, Bram Adams, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2017. Code of conduct
in open source projects. In 2017 IEEE 24th International Conference on Software
Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER) . 24–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SANER.2017.7884606
[50] Bianca Trinkenreich, Ricardo Britto, Marco Aurelio Gerosa, and Igor Steinmacher.
2022. An Empirical Investigation on the Challenges Faced by Women in the
Software Industry: A Case Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10555 (2022).
642Building and Sustaining Ethnically, Racially, and Gender Diverse Software Engineering Teams ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
[51] Anniek van den Hurk, Martina Meelissen, and Annemarie van Langen. 2019.
Interventions in education to prevent STEM pipeline leakage. International
Journal of Science Education 41, 2 (2019), 150–164.
[52] Bogdan Vasilescu, Daryl Posnett, Baishakhi Ray, Mark GJ van den Brand, Alexan-
der Serebrenik, Premkumar Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov. 2015. Gender and
tenure diversity in GitHub teams. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM confer-
ence on human factors in computing systems . 3789–3798.
[53] Yi Wang and David Redmiles. 2019. Implicit gender biases in professional software
development: An empirical study. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference
on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS) . IEEE, 1–10.
[54] Tiffani L Williams. 2020. ’Underrepresented Minority’ Considered Harmful,
Racist Language. Communications of the ACM Blog (2020).[55] Alison T Wynn and Shelley J Correll. 2018. Puncturing the pipeline: Do technol-
ogy companies alienate women in recruiting sessions? Social studies of science
48, 1 (2018), 149–164.
[56] Shatrughan Yadav and Usha Lenka. 2020. Diversity management: a systematic
review. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal 39, 8 (2020),
901–929.
[57] Christian R. Østergaard, Bram Timmermans, and Kari Kristinsson. 2011. Does
a different view create something new? The effect of employee diversity on
innovation. Research Policy 40, 3 (2011), 500–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
respol.2010.11.004
Received 2023-02-02; accepted 2023-07-27
643