TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation
Elizabeth Dinella∗
University of Pennsylvania
edinella@seas.upenn.eduGabriel Ryan∗
Columbia University
gabe@cs.columbia.edu
Todd Mytkowicz
Microsoft Research
todd.mytkowicz@gmail.comShuvendu K. Lahiri
Microsoft Research
shuvendu@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Testing is widely recognized as an important stage of the software
development lifecycle. Effective software testing can provide bene-
fits such as bug finding, preventing regressions, and documentation.
In terms of documentation, unit tests express a unit’s intended
functionality, as conceived by the developer. A test oracle, typi-
cally expressed as an condition, documents the intended behavior
of a unit under a given test prefix. Synthesizing a functional test
oracle is a challenging problem, as it must capture the intended
functionality rather than the implemented functionality.
In this paper, we propose TOGA (a neural method for TestOracle
GenerAtion), a unified transformer-based neural approach to infer
both exceptional and assertion test oracles based on the context of
the focal method. Our approach can handle units with ambiguous
or missing documentation, and even units with a missing implemen-
tation. We evaluate our approach on both oracle inference accuracy
and functional bug-finding. Our technique improves accuracy by
33% over existing oracle inference approaches, achieving 96% over-
all accuracy on a held out test dataset. Furthermore, we show that
when integrated with a automated test generation tool (EvoSuite),
our approach finds 57 real world bugs in large-scale Java programs,
including 30 bugs that are not found by any other automated testing
method in our evaluation.
ACM Reference Format:
Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri.
2022. TOGA : A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation. In 44th Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’22), May 21–29, 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3510003.3510141
1 INTRODUCTION
Unit testing is a critical aspect of software development. Effective
unit tests for a component (a method, class, or module) can provide
documentation, find bugs, and prevent regressions. In terms of doc-
umentation, unit tests express the unit’s intended functionality, as
conceived by the developer. Documenting the unit’s functionality
∗Performed this work while interning at Microsoft. Equal contributor.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510141through a test conveys the unit’s intended usage. The test also
serves as a mechanism for detecting functional bugs during devel-
opment. When executed, a test checks for mismatches between
intended and implemented functionality. Such a mismatch causes a
test failure, indicating a bug in the implementation. Furthermore,
unit tests can alert the developer when future code changes intro-
duce bugs. Effective (unit) testing during development can prevent
release of buggy software and reduce costs by billions of dollars
[29].
A unit test is composed of two parts: a prefix, which drives the
unit under test to an interesting state, and an oracle, which specifies
a condition that the resultant state should satisfy. A sufficiently
expressive test suite should document functionality under both
normal invocations where the precondition is met, and exceptional
behaviors where the precondition is violated. Figure 1 shows two
examples of unit tests for a stack class. The tests document a
normal invocation (Figure 1a) and an exceptional invocation (Fig-
ure 1b). Figure 1a shows a normal invocation of the unit where
the test prefix instantiates a stack and makes sequential calls to
push andpop. The test oracle, highlighted in red, asserts that the
stack’s isEmpty method should return true at the resultant state.
If the unit contains a bug related to the tested behavior (e.g., if pop
always fails to remove an item from the stack), this test can aid in
detecting the bug. On the other hand, Figure 1b shows the unit’s
expected behavior when the precondition of popis not satisfied. In
this case, the intended behavior of calling popon an empty stack
is to raise an exception. As such, the test oracle is the expected
exception. The try-catch structure ensures that the unit does indeed
raise an exception. If the unit contains a bug and does not raise an
exception, the test will fail by executing Assert.fail().
public void testPop () {
Stack <int > s = new Stack <int >();
int a = 2;
s. push (a);
s. pop ();
bool empty = s. isEmpty ();
assertTrue ( empty );
}
(a) Normal invocation of poppublic void testPop () {
try {
Stack <int > s = new Stack <int >();
s. pop ();
Assert . fail (); // fail
}catch ( Exception e) {
// pass
}
}
(b) Exceptional invocation of pop
Figure 1: Unit tests of a Stack class. The test oracles are highlighted
in red. A correct implementation of Stack will be empty after a se-
quential push and pop and must raise an exception if pop is called
on an empty stack.
21302022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
It is clear that testing has immense benefits. However, authoring
high quality unit tests is time consuming. On average, developers
spend 15% of their time writing tests [ 7]. As such, extensive work
has been devoted to automated unit test generation [ 10,16,22,36].
However, test generation tools have no definitive knowledge of the
developer’s intended program behavior. This creates a challenge
for generating functional test oracles. Instead, these tools consider
program crashes and undesirable exceptions (e.g. null dereference
or out of bound array accesses) as the test oracles. These tests are ca-
pable of finding numerous safety bugs in the unit’s implementation,
but are not sufficient to find violations of intended functionality
and thus do not replace the need for manual unit tests.
Complimentary to automated test generation tools, extensive
work has been devoted to test oracle creation from documenta-
tion and comments [ 2,13,23,28,37]. We refer to these techniques
asspecification mining methods for test oracle generation. These
methods rely on a restricted structure of documentation and a set
of handcrafted rules to infer exceptions and assertions for a unit.
However, given that users do not follow a prescribed format for
writing documentation, or omit them altogether, these methods fail
to extract interesting oracles on most real-world software compo-
nents. In our evaluation, we show that these methods cannot infer
bug-finding assertions for a benchmark of real world Java projects.
Recently, neural generative models have shown promise in gen-
erating functional test oracles [ 32–34]. Neural methods are more
flexible than specification mining approaches as they do not rely
on fixed patterns. This flexibility makes neural generative mod-
els robust to imprecise or even missing documentation. However,
we find in our evaluation that these methods struggle to generate
accurate oracles due to the large space of possible assertions.
In summary, an effective test generation approach must infer
both exception and assertion oracles that accurately reflect devel-
oper intent, and find bugs in real world programs. Additionally,
such an approach must gracefully handle cases with ambiguous or
missing documentation, or even missing implementations.
We propose a neural approach to infer both exceptional and
assertion bug finding test oracles: TOGA . To address the limitations
of existing neural generative methods, we propose a new approach
that reformulates the oracle generation problem as a ranking over
a small set of highly likely, possible oracles. We base our approach
on the empirical observation that oracles in developer-written unit
tests typically follow a small number of common patterns. We
describe a taxonomy on these patterns and define a simple grammar
that expresses this taxonomy. We use this grammar along with
type-based constraints to restrict the space of candidate oracles
and produce well-formed test oracles satisfying syntactic and type
correctness. To perform ranking, we develop a two-step neural
ranking procedure using pretrained transformers finetuned to score
candidate oracles.
We evaluate our approach on both test oracle inference and bug-
finding. Our technique improves accuracy by 33% over existing
oracle inference approaches, achieving 96% accuracy on a held out
test dataset that fits our grammar and constraints, and 69% accuracy
on an overall assertion benchmark, a relative improvement of 11%
over existing methods. Furthermore, we show that when integrated
with a randomized test generation tool (EvoSuite), our approach
finds 57 real world bugs in Java benchmark, Defects4J [14]. Ourapproach finds 30 bugs that are not found by any other automated
testing method in our evaluation. We provide an open source im-
plementation of TOGA at https://github.com/microsoft/toga.
Contributions. In summary, this paper:
(1)Introduces a transformer (neural network) based approach
to generating both exceptional and assertion oracles without
relying on the unit’s implementation.
(2)Derives adapted datasets for exceptional and assertion oracle
training that incorporate method signatures and docstrings.
These datasets are included in our open source release.
(3)Implements TOGA , an end-to-end test generation technique
that integrates neural test oracle generation with the auto-
mated test generation tool, EvoSuite.
(4)Performs an extensive evaluation on test oracle inference.
We demonstrate that our approach improves oracle inference
accuracy by 33% and finds 57 real world bugs, including 30
bugs that are not found by any other method in our evalua-
tion.
2 RELATED WORK
We broadly categorize related work on unit test generation into
(i) automated test generation methods, (ii) specification mining
methods, and (iii) neural methods.
2.1 Automated Test Generation Tools
Automated unit test generation techniques use a combination of
black-box or white-box techniques to generate interesting test pre-
fixes for a unit. For example, tools such as Randoop [ 21,22] use
random fuzzing of APIs of a unit to construct test prefixes that
drives the unit to interesting states. Fuzzers such as AFL [ 36] use
fuzzing on the data inputs of a method to derive interesting val-
ues to drive a method. Korat [ 18] performs test generation for
data structure inputs based on lazy unfolding of the type structure.
PeX [ 31] performs concolic execution [ 12,24] to enumerate paths
in a program and synthesize inputs using a constraint solver to
derive inputs.
However, none of these tools explore the generation of test ora-
clesto find functional bugs in a unit. They rely on program crashes
(from implicit or explicit assertions present in the code), or use
exception type heuristics to distinguish between desirable and un-
desirable behavior. For example, null dereferences or out of bounds
exceptions may be considered as undesirable. Regression Oracles,
used by tools such as EvoSuite [ 10,11], are intended to find future
bugs and assume the unit under test is correctly implemented. This
assumption allows for generating assertions from observed exe-
cution behavior. However, expecting a correct implementation is
not always a safe assumption. When the implementation is buggy,
the regression oracles are incorrect with respect to the intended
behavior. That is, regression oracles are incapable of catching non-
exceptional bugs, introducing false negatives.
Consider the example in Figure 2a that shows a buggy no-op
implementation of stack pop. Figure 2b shows a generated unit
test with a regression oracle. The test creates a stack and makes
sequential push and pop calls. Since the pop method has a buggy no-
op implementation, the stack will have one element after executing
2131
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
class Stack () {
public void pop () {
// NO -OP
}
...
}
(a) Buggy implementation.public void testPop () {
Stack <int > s = new Stack <int >();
int a = 2;
s. push (a);
s. pop ();
bool empty = s. isEmpty ();
assertFalse ( empty );
}
(b) Regression oracle test.public void testPop () {
try {
Stack <int > s = new Stack <int >();
s. pop ();
// pass
}catch ( Exception e) {
// fail
Assert . fail ();
}
}
(c) Safety oracle test.
Figure 2: Regression and safety oracles for a buggy pop method. The regression oracle (employed by EvoSuite) assumes that the current
behavior is correct, resulting in an incorrect oracle asserting that the stack is non-empty. The safety oracle (employed by Randoop) assumes
that any non-crashing behavior is correct. As such, it results in an incorrect oracle asserting that an exception should notbe raised when
calling pop on an empty stack. Correct oracles for pop are shown in Figure 1.
pop. Thus, the regression oracle is an incorrect assertion: the stack
should notbe empty.
Similarly, qualifying any exceptional output as a bug (Safety
Oracle ) can fail on correctly implemented methods, causing false
positives, (e.g., the intended behavior of calling pop() on an empty
method is to throw an exception). Figure 2c shows a generated unit
test with a safety oracle. A method that relies on safety oracles
will also generate a passing test on the buggy pop implementation.
Since pop is implemented as a no-op, an exception will not be raised
when calling pop on an empty stack. In this case, the test oracle is
implicit and asserts that an exception will not be thrown.
Therefore although automated test generation techniques find
numerous non-functional bugs, and are useful for detecting regres-
sion bugs for future code changes, they are not a substitute for
manually written unit tests documenting intended functionality.
2.2 Specification Mining Methods
Specification mining works [ 2,13,23,28,37] aim to generate test
oracles that accurately reflect the intended behavior (as in Figure 1).
Unlike randomized test generation methods, specification mining
approaches do not have any knowledge of the unit’s implementa-
tion and as such, do not require execution. Instead, they rely on
docstring documentation. Specification mining methods typically
define a set of natural language docstring patterns. These patterns
cannot capture all docstrings as program comments can be written
flexibly without any necessary syntax or structure.
@Tcomment [ 28] defines natural language patterns along with
heuristics to infer nullness properties. However, it cannot gener-
alize to other property or exception types. An example heuristic
@Tcomment employs is: generate an “expected NullPointerExcep-
tion” oracle if the keyword @param has the words null andnot
within 3 words of each other. ToraDocu [ 13] uses a combination of
pattern, lexical, and semantic similarity matching. Unlike @TCom-
ment, ToraDocu is not limited to nullness properties. However,
ToraDocu can only generate oracles for exceptional behavior. JDoc-
tor [2] is an extension of ToraDocu that can also generate asser-
tion oracles. More recently, MeMo [ 3] uses equivalence phrases in
javadoc comments to infer metamorphic relations (e.g., sum(x,y)
== sum(y,x) ), which are also used as test oracles. These methods
can precisely determine oracles when code comments fit their ex-
pected patterns, but do not generalize when comments fall outside
these patterns.Lastly, C2S [ 37] generates JML specifications from docstrings.
C2S does not manually define patterns, but instead performs a
search over JML tokens. However, C2S relies on a developer writ-
ten test prefix to filter candidate assertions. C2S has performance
improvements over JDoctor in terms of specification synthesis ac-
curacy, but does not improve performance in bug finding.
On average, real-world Java projects lack precisely structured
docstring documentation. In our evaluation, we show that specifi-
cation mining methods struggle to infer bug-finding oracles for a
benchmark of real world Java projects.
Invariant Mining. There is a long line of work in deriving pro-
gram invariants for the observed execution behavior of the pro-
gram. These include systems such as Daikon [ 8] and DySy [ 6],
which extends the derived program invariants with symbolic execu-
tion. Recently, EvoSpex [ 19,20] combines observed executions with
mutations to generate samples of both valid and likely invalid pro-
gram states and applies a genetic algorithm to infer invariants for
method postconditions. GAssert [ 30] also utilizes an evolutionary
approach to make inferred program invariants more accurate and
compact. These approaches can be used to generate specifications
and associated test oracles from the inferred invariants, but because
they are based on the execution/symbolic behavior of the current
implementation they will generate regression oracles, and cannot
detect if bugs are already present in the unit under test.
2.3 Neural Methods
Recently, neural models have shown promise in generating test
oracles and even entire unit tests. In contrast to specification mining
methods, neural methods are not tied to hard coded patterns and
can generalize to flexibly written docstrings. Furthermore, unlike
randomized test generation tools, neural methods do not necessarily
require knowledge or execution of the unit under test.
We refer the reader to CodeBERT [ 9] for a discussion on the
transformer architectures as applied to code. A transformer, like
a recurrent neural network, maps a sequence of text into a high
dimensional representation, which can then be decoded to solve
downstream tasks. While not originally designed for code, trans-
formers have found many applications in software engineering [ 4,
15, 26, 27].
ATLAS is a neural-network-based approach to generate assertion
oracles. Given a test prefix and the unit under test, ATLAS [ 34]
generates assertions using a recurrent neural network. ATLAS relies
on the unit’s implementation and does not have any knowledge of
2132
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
the docstring documentation. ATLAS exclusively targets assertion
oracle generation and does not attempt to infer any exceptional
oracles.
Subsequent methods [ 17,33,35] have improved upon ATLAS by
using a transformer-based seq2seq architecture pretrained on natu-
ral language and code. A transformer seq2seq model outperforms
ATLAS in terms of inference accuracy. However, in section 5, we
show that in combination with a test prefix generator, it struggles
to find real world bugs in Java projects.
Lastly, AthenaTest [ 32] is a transformer model approach to gener-
ate entire unit tests including both prefixes and oracles. AthenaTest
takes as input the unit’s context (e.g., surrounding class, method
signatures, etc.), and implementation. Like the previous neural
methods, it does not have any knowledge of the docstring docu-
mentation and relies on the implementation for inferring intended
behavior.
3 STRUCTURE OF AN ORACLE
Our approach addresses the limitations of existing neural methods
by employing a ranking architecture over a set of candidate test
oracles, rather than a generative model. In this section we develop
a grammar for describing this set of test oracles. We first describe
a taxonomy of commonly occurring oracle structures based on a
qualitative investigation of a unit test dataset, and then use this
taxonomy to inform the construction of our oracle grammar.
We develop a taxonomy of common oracle structures based on
unit tests from methods2test [ 1], a dataset of Java unit tests collected
from GitHub. We describe methods2test in Section 4.2
Unit test oracles typically test either exceptional behavior (i.e.,
verifying an expected exception is raised) or return behavior (asser-
tion oracles). Additionally, an implicit exception oracle is usually
present in tests with assertion oracles. That is, a test with an asser-
tion oracle is not expected to raise an exception.
Taxonomy: We develop the following taxonomy of oracle usage,
drawn from our observations of almost 200K developer-written
tests. To develop this taxonomy, we manually inspected 100 random
samples and categorized the most frequently occurring types of
oracles we observed. To ensure that our grammar generalized well
and did not overfit to our 100 inspected samples, we evaluated the
proportion of tests in the dataset that fit the grammar (Section 5.2).
(1)Expected Exception Oracles. Expected exception oracles
verify that executing the test prefix with some invalid usage
raises an exception. They are most frequently expressed with
the following structure:
try {
Unit . methodcall ( invalidInput );
Assert . fail ();
}catch ( Exception e) {
verifyException (e, ExceptionType );
}
(2)Assertion Oracles. Assertion oracles verify correct return
behavior, although they will also fail if any exception is
thrown. We observe several common assertion patterns:
(a)Boolean Assertions. Boolean assertions are used to check
some property of the unit under test is true /false . They
are typically asserted directly on method return values:Unit . methodcall ( input );
assertTrue ( Unit . getStatus ());
(b)Nullness Assertions. Nullness assertions usually check
the return value of a method call that processes some
input.
assertNotNull ( Unit . processInput ( input ));
assertNull ( Unit . processInput ( invalidInput ));
(c)Equality Assertions. Developers typically write equality
assertions to check the return value of a single method
call. The return value is usually checked against a constant
or literal representing the expected value. In many cases,
especially when the unit under test incorporates some
data structures, the expected value was previously passed
as an argument to some method in the test prefix.
String msg = " foo " ;
Unit . sendMessage ( msg );
assertEqual ( Unit . getLastMessage (), msg );
As we demonstrate in Section 5.2 this taxonomy captures a major-
ity of tests (82% of a large dataset of developer written tests). This
coverage could potentially be expanded by including other asser-
tion types (e.g., AssertSame ), however, in developing the oracle
taxonomy, our goal is not to express the entire grammar of Java
test oracles. Instead, we aim to identify a minimal syntactic subset
which represents many semantically equivalent oracles. Such a
grammar greatly restricts the output space for the oracle generator
to consider.
Uncommon oracles. We note several other patterns that occur
more rarely, including equality assertions on arrays or assertions on
multiple method calls (as opposed to a method call and a constant).
We also note that there are some assertion patterns that we did not
observe in anyunit test, although they are often used to express
invariants within programs. These include assertions with logical
connectives and assertions with inequality constraints.
Test oracle grammar. Based on the taxonomy of common oracle
structures, we develop a restricted grammar that expresses com-
monly used test oracles.
Test T := O(P)
Prefix P := statement | P; P
Oracle O(P) := E(P) | R(P)
Except Oracle E(P) := try{P; fail();} catch(Exception e){}
Return Oracle R(P) := P; A
Assertion A := assertEquals(const|var,expr) |
assertTrue(expr) | assertFalse(expr) |
assertNull(expr) | assertNotNull(expr)
Intuitively, TOGA is a code-generation model for tests that is ex-
plicitly designed to exploit the structure of a unit test. This grammar
succinctly describes a set of test oracles that are possible candidates
for generation. In particular, given a test prefix 𝑃, we can synthe-
size either an exceptional oracle 𝐸(𝑃)or an assertion oracle on the
return value of a method 𝑅(𝑃). Further the assertion oracle can be
constructed using one of the five assert* constructs when instan-
tiated with the return value and other constants and variables.
2133
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
In the sections that follow, we demonstrate how to (i) prune this
set, using type constraints, and (ii) rank the resulting possible test
oracles using neural models.
4TOGA: NEURAL TEST ORACLE GENERATION
In this section we present our approach for inferring test oracles
that reflect developer intent. Unlike previous works, TOGA is capable
of inferring both exception and assertion oracles. Furthermore, TOGA
can handle units with vaguely written or absent docstrings, or even
absent implementation. Our approach infers test oracles from only a
given test prefix and unit context. Unit context may refer to method
signature(s), or a docstring (if present). Notably, the unit context
need not include the unit’s implementation.
4.1 Method Overview
TOGA depicted in Figure 3 contains two key components: the Excep-
tional Oracle Classifier and the Assertion Oracle Ranker.
The Exceptional Oracle Classifier, described further in Section 4.2,
is a pretrained transformer model fine-tuned on a binary decision
task. The model decides if an exception should be thrown according
to the developer intent conveyed through the unit context. If the
classifier infers that the given test prefix should raise an excep-
tion, TOGA has found an exceptional oracle and can now generate a
complete test. The resulting test has the Expected Exception Oracle
format shown in Section 3. Otherwise, the classifier predicts that
the input should not raise an exception and TOGA continues in the
test generation process by invoking the Assertion Oracle Ranker.
The Assertion Oracle Ranker, described in Section 4.3, similarly
uses a pretrained transformer model backbone. To address the
limitations of existing neural assertion generation methods, our
approach treats oracle inference as a ranking over a small set of
possible common oracles. We base our approach on our observed
taxonomy and defined grammar described in Section 3. We use this
grammar along with type-based constraints to restrict the space of
candidate oracles and enforce syntactic and type correctness. The
model is is fine-tuned on ranking the set of candidate assertions
given the test prefix and unit context. Each assertion in the set is
ranked, and the highest ranked candidate is selected as the assertion
oracle. Lastly, TOGA generates a test with the given test prefix and
the inferred assertion oracle.
4.2 Exceptional Oracle Classifier
As mentioned previously, the Exceptional Oracle Classifier is based
on a pretrained BERT transformer model. In particular, we use the
CodeBERT [ 9] model trained on both natural language and code
masked language modelling. To train the Exceptional Oracle Clas-
sifier we fine-tune the pretrained model on the task of exceptional
oracle inference. The fine-tuning is performed using a supervised
dataset𝐷=((𝑝,𝑐),𝑙)1,...(𝑝,𝑐),𝑙)𝑛)where𝑝is a test prefix, 𝑐is a
unit context, and 𝑙is a binary label ( 𝑙∈0,1). A label of 1 indicates
that the sample should raise an exception while a label of 0 indicates
that it should not raise an exception.
Methods2Test* dataset. Our training dataset 𝐷is variation of the
Methods2Test dataset [ 32], we call Methods2Test*. As the name sug-
gests, Methods2Test is a corpus of unit methods and corresponding
developer written unit tests extracted from over 91K open sourceJava projects. Originally created to train AthenaTest, Methods2Test
is structured for the translation task from methods to tests. We
adapt Methods2Test to our setting of exception oracle inference.
Our adapted dataset, Methods2Test*, has modifications in both the
input methods and developer written tests. The input method’s im-
plementation is removed, and the method docstring (if present) is
added. The tests are modified to remove any exception or assertion
oracles. These stripped oracles are used to create binary labels for
expected exceptions. Lastly, we normalize the test method name to
prevent potential information leakage. For example, a test method
named testThrowsException would leak label information to the
model. To remedy this, we rename all tests to follow the format:
testN where N is a positive integer. In summary, Methods2Test* is
a supervised dataset for exception oracle inference. It excludes unit
implementation and includes docstrings if present. Our resulting
dataset contains a training set of more than 432,000 labeled samples.
4.3 Assertion Oracle Ranker
The Assertion Oracle Ranker is also based on the pretrained Code-
BERT [ 9] model. To train the Assertion Oracle Ranker we fine-
tune the pretrained model on the task of assertion oracle infer-
ence. The fine-tuning is performed using a supervised dataset
𝐷=((𝑝,𝑐,𝑎),𝑙)1,...(𝑝,𝑐,𝑎),𝑙)𝑛where𝑝is a test prefix, 𝑐is a unit
context,𝑎is a candidate assertion and 𝑙is a binary label ( 𝑙∈0,1).
A label of 1 indicates that the given candidate assertion accurately
reflects developer intent. For a given 𝑝and𝑐only one𝑎can have
a label of 1. The other assertions in the candidate set will have a
negative label.
Atlas* dataset. Our training dataset 𝐷is a variant of the Atlas
dataset [ 34]. Atlas is a corpus of test case prefixes, corresponding
method units, and assertions. Atlas was collected from 9K open
source Java projects on GitHub. We modify Atlas to create our vari-
ant dataset Atlas*. Similar to our construction of Methods2Test*,
we remove the method implementation, normalize the test method
name, and remove the assertion from the test case. Then, we gen-
erate a set of assertion candidates for each sample and construct
our labels to indicate the correct assertion in the set. Our negative
samples are also taken from the candidate set of assertions. In total
the resulting Atlas* dataset contains over 170,000 labeled (𝑝,𝑐,𝑙)
samples for supervised training.
4.4 Candidate Assertion Set Generation
To generate a candidate set of assertions, we use our grammar
along with type-based constraints to restrict the space of candidate
oracles and enforce syntactic and type correctness. Based on the
return value of the unit under test, we iteratively construct a set of
candidate assertions. Our assertion candidate generation algorithm
is shown in Algorithm 1. If the assertion that is being added requires
an additional value ( assertEquals ), our approach draws likely
candidates from Global and Local Dictionaries.
Global Constant Dictionary. The Global Constant Dictionary
contains the most frequently occurring constant values in the train-
ing data. Our global dictionary contains the top K values of each
type. The use of a global dictionary is inspired by our observation
that the vast majority of constants in test asserts are a few common
values. For example, over 90% of the integer constants in asserts in
2134
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
Exceptional Oracle Classifier  
Exception Expected  Exception  
Not Expected  
Test Prefix
Method Context  
Assertion  Oracle Ranker
Figure 3: Overall TOGA framework. The system takes as input a test prefix and a unit context. The unit context contains method signature(s)
and docstrings, but not the implementation. It outputs a unit test with an inferred test oracle. The system has two main components: the
Exceptional Oracle Classifier and the Assertion Oracle Ranker.
the ATLAS dataset are one of the top 10 most frequently occurring
integer values.
Local Dictionary. In addition to the global constant dictionary,
we also build a local dictionary based on values that appear in
the test prefix. Note that these values are not necessarily constants.
Variables that appear in the test prefix are also valid local dictionary
entries. The use of a local dictionary is based on the observation
that many assertions check against values that were previously
passed as arguments to methods called in the test prefix.
At inference time, our method makes calls to the Assertion Ora-
cle Ranker for each assertion in the set of candidates. The model
outputs a predicted label along with a confidence score. We use this
confidence score in post-processing to select the highest ranked
assertion. The test prefix along with the selected assertion oracle is
output as the generated test.
4.5 End-to-End EvoSuite integration
We have described a method, TOGA , to infer functional test oracles
given a test prefix and unit context. However, in order to catch
bugs, a test prefix that exercises the buggy behavior is necessary.
To obtain a high quality test prefix, we use the randomized test
generation tool EvoSuite. As mentioned in Section 2.1 EvoSuite
generates a set of tests guided by coverage. We extract test prefixes
by stripping EvoSuite’s oracles from each test. In cases where a
test contains multiple assertions, we extract the test prefix for each
assertion individually. For each of the generated test prefixes, we
invoke TOGA to infer a test oracle. In combination with a large set of
prefixes that attempt to cover the entirety of the unit, our approach
is able to generate functional test oracles that find real world bugs.
When we obtain prefixes from EvoSuite, we assume that prefixes
will be written in EvoSuite’s standardized format. This allows us to
identify the variables on which EvoSuite generated assertions in
theextractRetVal method (Algorithm 1).
Lastly, we apply a confidence threshold to the assertion oracle
ranker to suppress low confidence assertions. In these cases, only
the exception oracle is applied to the test. Conceptually, this allows
the model to avoid generating incorrect assertions in cases where
the model believes all the candidate assertions are incorrect.Algorithm 1 Assertion Template Creation
1:procedure CreateCandidateTemplates(GlobalDict, k, test)
2:𝑐𝑠←∅ ⊲Template Candidates
3: retVal = extractRetVal(test)
4: t = type(retVal)
5: LocalDict = createLocalDict(test)
6: ifretVal is an object then
7:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertNull(retVal)
8:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertNotNull(retVal)
9: else if retVal is a boolean then
10:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertTrue(retVal)
11:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertFalse(retVal)
12: forglobalVal∈GlobalDict.get(t) do
13:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertEquals(globalVal, retVal)
14: forlocalVal∈LocalDict.get(t) do
15:𝑐𝑠←𝑐𝑠∪assertEquals(localVal, retVal)
16: return𝑐𝑠
17:
18:procedure CreateLocalDict(test)
19: LocalDict = { }
20: forval in getValue(test) do⊲Loop over all values in prefix
21: LocalDict[type(val)] += {val}
22: return LocalDict
23:
24:procedure extractRetVal(test)
25: assign = getLastLine(test) ⊲last line will be an assignment
26: retVal = getLHS(assign)
27: return retVal
5 EVALUATION
Research Questions. We consider the following research ques-
tions in our evaluation:
RQ1 IsTOGA ’s grammar representative of most developer-written
assertions?
RQ2 Can TOGA infer assertions and exceptional behavior with
high accuracy?
RQ3 Can TOGA catch bugs with low false alarms?
2135
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
5.1 Evaluation Setup
Datasets. Our evaluation uses the Atlas* and Methods2Test* datasets
described in sections 4.3 and 4.2 respectively. For exceptional ora-
cle inference, we evaluate on a Methods2Test* held-out test set of
size 53,705. For assertion oracle inference, we evaluate on an Atlas*
held-out test set of size 8,024.
Bug Benchmark. We evaluate real-world bug finding on the De-
fects4J [ 14] benchmark. Defects4J is a benchmark of 835 bugs from
17 real world Java projects. Each sample in the benchmark includes
both buggy and fixed code versions. Each fixed program version is
based on a minimal patch to fix the bug, and passes all the project
tests, while each buggy program version fails at least one test. Each
bug is based on an error that was logged in the project’s issue
tracker, involves source code changes, and is reproducible (i.e., with
a deterministic test). The benchmark also includes utilities for gen-
erating and evaluating test suites on the programs to determine if
generated tests pass on the fixed versions and catch bugs.
Test environment. The evaluation was conducted on a Linux
machine with Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2690 v3 CPU (2.60GHz) and
112GB main memory. As in the Defects4J environment, we use JDK
8.
5.2 RQ1: Oracle Grammar
We evaluate RQ1 on the original ATLAS dataset, which contains
a total of 188,157 assertions mined from Java projects. To answer
RQ1, we parse each assertion and check if it can be expressed in
the grammar based on the assertion method name and structure
of the AST. After excluding 695 samples that fail to parse, we find
that 154,523 (82%) can be expressed by our grammar.
Of the 32,938 (18%) of assertions that cannot be expressed in our
grammar, the majority (23,913, 13%) use assertion methods that we
do not include (e.g., assertThat ,assertSame ). In many cases (74%
based on a manual inspection of 50 samples), the non-matching
assertions appear to be symbolically equivalent to assertions ex-
pressible in our grammar (Figure 4).
assertThat ( counter . get (), CoreMatchers . equalTo (2))
vs.
assertEquals ( counter . get () ,2)
Figure 4: The first assertion highlighted in red cannot be expressed
in our grammar. However, the equivalent assertion highlighted in
green, does fit our grammar.
Other assertions that did not match our grammar (5%) include
equality assertions on expressions rather than variables or literals.
For example:
assertEquals(id1.hashCode(),id2.hashCode())
Although we deliberately exclude generic assertions like these from
our grammar, we note for a test executing in a deterministic en-
vironment, an equivalent property could be enforced through a
syntactic rewrite.Result 1: 82% of the developer-written assertions in the ATLAS
dataset are in our grammar, and many other assertions are se-
mantically equivalent to assertions expressed in our grammar.
5.3 RQ2: Oracle Inference Accuracy
To answer RQ2, Tables 1 and 2 reports accuracy results on a held-
out test set. We include results for both exceptional and return test
oracle inference.
For exceptional oracle inference (Table 1), our experimental setup
involves the Methods2Test* dataset described in Section 4.3. There
are no neural techniques for exceptional oracle inference that we
are aware of. Instead, we include a random baseline (weighted
coin) to illustrate the complexity of the problem space. The coin
performs a random choice weighted on the distribution in our
training set. In our training set, we observed that 80% of samples
are non-exceptional. As such, the coin predicts negative labels
frequently (and usually correctly), but rarely predicts a positive.
The coin performs similarly to our approach in terms of accuracy,
but significantly worse in terms of F1 score, as it rarely predicts a
positive label correctly.
For assertion oracle inference (Table 2), our experimental setup
involves the Atlas* dataset described in Section 4.2. The accuracy
metric is syntactic: a suggestion is considered correct if it is an exact
lexical match. As a baseline, we compare to a sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) return test oracle model [ 33]. The seq2seq model is a
transformer pre-trained on natural language and code with a beam
search decoder. In contrast to our approach which performs ranking
over a set of template assertions, the seq2seq model generates a
test oracle token by token. As such, the model suffers due to the
large space of possible oracles. We report results on two held out
test sets: an Overall set and an In-Vocab set. The in-vocab set is
the subset of the overall set that can be expressed by our grammar
and vocabulary based on the local and global dictionaries. Our
model achieves 96% accuracy on the in-vocab set compared to 63%
by the seq2seq model, and 69% overall accuracy, an 11% relative
improvement over the seq2seq model.
Result 2: Our assertion oracle inference model achieves over 69%
accuracy compared to 62% accuracy from existing approaches.
Our exceptional inference model achieves 86% accuracy with an
F1 score of .39 relative to a weighted coin baseline’s .15 F1 score.
Vocabulary size ablation. We perform an study on K, the vocab-
ulary size of our global dictionary, to examine the tradeoff between
generating a larger number of assertion candidates and ranking the
assertion candidates accurately. Figure 5 shows the overall model
accuracy, percent of samples supported by the vocabulary, and ac-
curacy on samples supported by the vocabulary evaluated on the
ATLAS* test set.
ForK=0, the global dictionary is unused and only variables and
constants in the local dictionary are considered the assertion gen-
eration. Using only the local dictionary can still generate correct
assertion candidates for approximately 50% of the samples in the
test set. Increasing Kcauses the model accuracy to decline slightly,
but causes overall accuracy to improve because more correct asser-
tion candidates are generated using the global dictionary. Once the
2136
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
Appr oach Accuracy Pr
ecision Recall F1-Score
TOGA Model 86% .55 .30
.39
Weighted Coin 76% .15 .13 .15
Table 1: RQ2: Evaluation of Exceptional Oracle Inference
Appr oach In-V o
cab Accuracy Overall Accuracy
TOGA Model 96% 69%
Seq2Se q
63% 62%
Table 2: RQ2: Evaluation of Assertion Oracle Inference
Appr oach Bugs Found (TPs)
FPR
EvoSuite + Gr ound
Truth 120 0%
EvoSuite + TOGA (Ours) 57 25%
Randoop 20 87%
EvoSuite + seq2seq 6 46%
AthenaTest 0 15%∗
EvoSuite + JDoctor 1 0.4%
Table 3: RQ3: Overall Bug Finding.∗AthenaTest FPR based on 5
projects
vocabulary becomes too large however, the model accuracy starts
to drop off, and setting higher Ks reduces overall accuracy.
In RQ2, we set K=8 based on tuning on the ATLAS* validation
set. This setting achieves the best tradeoff between high model
accuracy on the candidate set, and supporting a large set of likely
assertions.
0 2 4 6 8 10
K0.00.20.40.60.81.0Accuracy/T emplate Ratio
Overall Accuracy
Matched T emplate Accuracy
% Assertions in T emplates
Figure 5: Evaluation of global dictionary size Kon overall accuracy.
Matched Template Accuracy indicates model accuracy when the
candidate assertion set included the correct assertion. % Assertions
in Templates indicates the percentage of dataset assertions that ap-
pear in the candidate assertion set for a given K.Exception Exception Assertion
Appr oach
Raised Not Raised Failure
EvoSuite + Gr ound
Truth 45 27 51
EvoSuite + TOGA (Ours) 39 5 14
Randoop 20 0 0
EvoSuite + seq2seq 0 0 6
AthenaTest 0 0 0
EvoSuite + JDoctor 1 0 0
Table 4: RQ3: Number of bugs found by oracle type. Note that some
bugs can be detected by multiple oracle types.
5.4 RQ3: Bug Detection
To answer RQ3, we run our end-to-end test generation system,
integrated with EvoSuite. As described in section 4.5, the system
uses EvoSuite to generate test prefixes guided by coverage. Our
models are invoked to generate the test oracles.
Baselines. We consider the following baselines in this evaluation:
(1)Randomized Test Generation. To represent randomized
test generation we run Randoop [ 22], which is a widely used
and actively maintained test generation tool used for bug
finding. We also run EvoSuite [ 10] as a baseline, although
EvoSuite’s intended use case for regression testing limits
its ability to find bugs present in the program. We run both
Randoop and EvoSuite for 3 minutes per tested program,
following the procedure used in [25].
(2)Neural Test/Oracle Generation. To test neural methods,
we compare with a seq2seq transformer finetuned to gen-
erate assertions [ 33]. We also evaluate against a whole-test
generation model, AthenaTest [32].
(3)Specification Mining. We use JDoctor’s open source im-
plementation to evaluate specification mining approaches.
JDoctor supports exception oracle generation by parsing spe-
cific patterns in docstrings [ 2]. We integrate the generated
oracles with the same EvoSuite-generated tests used by TOGA
in this evaluation. Note that we do not evaluate on C2S [ 37]
because the implementation is not publicly available.
Evaluation setting. We evaluate RQ 3 on the Defects4J [ 14] bench-
mark. To evaluate the effectiveness of oracles in detecting bugs
present in the program, the generated tests are run on a buggy
version of the unit under test. We consider a bug is found if a gen-
erated test both fails on the buggy program and passes on the fixed
program. Since each fixed program is distinguished from the buggy
program by a minimal patch fixing the specific bug, a test must be
failing due to the specific bug if it only fails on the buggy version.
For the oracle generation methods in the evaluation that require
a test prefix ( TOGA , seq2seq, JDoctor), we evaluate on a set of bug-
reaching EvoSuite test prefixes that exercise buggy behavior (and
therefore can detect a bug given the right test oracle). We obtain
this bug-reaching test prefix set by running EvoSuite with default
settings (i.e., coverage-guided) on the fixed program versions to
generate regression tests, and then selecting tests that fail the buggy
program version, indicating they exercise buggy behavior. We ex-
tract these tests’ prefixes as an evaluation set. Methods evaluated
on this set are denoted "EvoSuite + <method>" in Tables 3 and 4.
2137
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
It is important to note that our evaluation setting is fundamen-
tally different from the regression evaluation setting in which the
Defects4J benchmark is most often used. In a regression evaluation,
tests are generated on the fixed program version and evaluated on
the buggy version. Regression studies of randomized test genera-
tion tools report finding larger numbers of bugs than in our setting
as they use regression assumptions to generate higher quality or-
acles [ 25]. In our setting where tests are generated on the buggy
program version, regression test oracles will not find bugs as they
assume the observed buggy behavior is correct.
In addition to evaluating the number of bugs found, we use per-
test metrics as defined in [ 2]. These metrics include false positives
to evaluate the performance of an oracle generation method from
a usage perspective. A method that generates many erroneously
failing tests will not usable in a realistic application setting where a
developer must inspect each failure to determine if they represent
real bugs or false alarms.
A failing test is considered a “positive” while a passing test is a
“negative”. However, a “positive” does not necessarily indicate that
the oracle caught the bug. A failing test can indicate one of two
things:
(1)True Positive - The test has a correct oracle and fails due
to the buggy implementation.
(2)False Positive - The test has an incorrect oracle and fails
on the correct functionality of the unit in the fixed version.
To distinguish between these cases, we run the same test on the
unit’s fixed version. If the test fails on the fixed version, we can
safely assume the test has an incorrect oracle, and is a FP.
Similarly, a passing test can indicate one of two things:
(1)True Negative - The test has a correct oracle and is testing
correct functionality.
(2)False Negative - The test has an incorrect oracle and is
testing buggy functionality.
Again, to distinguish between these cases, we run the same test on
the unit’s fixed version. If the test fails on the fixed version, we can
safely assume the test has an incorrect oracle, and is a FN.
We summarize the meaning of these metrics in Figure 6. In our
evaluation, we summarize these metrics in the False Positive (FPR),
which represents the rate of incorrectly failing tests on non-buggy
code. A high FPR implies that a developer will need to validate
many tests that have no utility and thus is a good metric for a
bug-finding tool.
Figure 6: Bug Finding Metrics
Discussion of RQ3 Results. Table 3 reports overall bug finding
performance. EvoSuite + Ground Truth is a measure of EvoSuite’sability to generate bug-reaching tests. These tests were generated
from the fixed program versions with regression oracles to obtain
ground truth. We use this to distinguish between EvoSuite prefix
generation performance from test oracle generation performance.
EvoSuite + Ground Truth detects 120 bugs, indicating the best
possible performance that any of the oracle generation methods
can achieve on the EvoSuite test prefixes.
TOGA finds 57 total bugs, including 30 that are not found by any
other method in our evaluation. The next best performing method,
Randoop, finds 20 bugs but with a much higher false positive rate.
Of the two tested neural methods, AthenaTest does not generate any
bug-finding tests. The seq2seq model run on EvoSuite-generated
test prefixes finds 6 bugs, but incurs a higher error rate. The speci-
fication mining tool, JDoctor, only finds one bug, but is the most
precise oracle generation method in the evaluation.
Table 4 reports a breakdown of bug finding performance on
three different bug types: unexpected exception raised, expected
exception not raised, and assertion failures. TOGA ’s ability to infer
exception oracles correctly is critical to its bug finding performance.
Overall 44 of the bugs it finds are exceptional, and 5 involve ex-
pected exceptions not being raised. None of the other methods
in the evaluation detect any expected exception not raised bugs.
Of the other evaluated methods, AthenaTest and JDoctor are both
capable of generating expected exception bugs in principle but in
practice do not generate any in the evaluation. For raised (unex-
pected) exceptions, TOGA exception model correctly identifies 39/45
of them are unexpected exceptions. This demonstrates the value
of using a neural model for exception oracle generation, which is
more flexible than the fixed rules used by a tool like Randoop.
TOGA also identifies 14 assertion bugs. The only other method in
the evaluation to generate assertion oracles that catch bugs is the
seq2seq generative model, which catches 6 bugs. This shows that
while TOGA ranking-based oracle generation procedure is effective
for bug finding, its overall performance in bug finding comes from
providing a unified method for oracle generation that can detect all
three types of bugs. In contrast, none of the methods in the evalu-
ation are successful in generating oracles for more than one type
of bug, although JDoctor and AthenaTest can in theory generate
oracles for all three classes of bugs.
The AthenaTest and seq2seq assertion generation models do not
effectively find bugs. This evaluation illustrates the challenges in
neural oracle generation. In practice we found that both Athen-
aTest’s whole test generation and the seq2seq assertion model
generated many tests and oracles that were not executable. The
AthenaTest authors noted this issue in their evaluation, where they
found that only 16% of the generated test cases were executable
without errors and actively tested the unit under test [ 32]. The
oracle generation model generated 34% executable oracles, and of
these we observed that a further 5% were tautologies, resulting
in an overall yield of 29% potentially meaningful oracles. In con-
trast, the ranked oracle generation used by TOGA always generates
oracles that are executable and exercise the unit under test. Note
that due to the large volume of generated test candidates (30 per
tested method) that must be individually compiled and run when
following the procedure in [ 32], we estimate the false positive rate
of AthenaTest on five projects and otherwise only generate tests
specifically on methods exercising buggy code.
2138
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
class KeyedValues () {
public void removeValue ( int i){
this . keys . remove (i);
this . values . remove (i);
// Bug , misses update
if (i < this . keys . size ()) {
rebuildIndex ();
}
}
public int itemCount () {
return this . index . size ();
}
}
(a) Buggy implementation.public void testKeyedValues () {
KeyedValues kv;
kv = new KeyedValues ();
Short short = new Short (2);
kv. insertValue (0, short0 , 2);
kv. removeValue (0);
// Asserts buggy itemCount 1
// is correct and misses bug
assertEquals (1, kv. itemCount ());
}
(b) Regression oracle test.public void testKeyedValues () {
try {
KeyedValues kv;
kv = new KeyedValues ();
Short short = new Short (2);
kv. insertValue (0, short0 ,2);
kv. removeValue (0);
// No exception raised
}catch ( Exception e) {
fail (); // misses bug
}
}
(c) Safety oracle test.public void testKeyedValues () {
KeyedValues kv;
kv = new KeyedValues ();
Short short = new Short (2);
kv. insertValue (0, short0 , 2);
kv. removeValue (0);
// Asserts itemCount should be 0
// Test fails and identifies bug
assertEquals (0, kv. itemCount ());
}
(d)TOGA generated oracle.
Figure 7: Different types of test oracles for a bug in the removeValue method from the Java Chart project. The bug causes a data structure to
return an incorrect item count when the most recently added item is removed. Although the test input exposes this behavior, regression and
safety oracles will generate a false negative by passing the buggy behavior, either by generating an incorrect assert statement or because the
bug does not cause any exceptions to be thrown. Only the oracle generated by TOGA correctly asserts that itemcount should be 0 after an item
is inserted and removed detects the bug. TOGA is the only system in our evaluation that correctly identifies this bug.
public void testStack () {
try {
NumberUtils .
createNumber ( "0XT" );
// Safety Oracle
} catch ( Exception e) {
fail ();
}
}
(a) Safety oracle test.public void testStack () {
try {
NumberUtils .
createNumber ( "0XT" );
// Expected Exception
fail ( " expecting exception " );
}catch ( Exception e) {
verifyException (e,
NumberFormatException );
}
}
(b)TOGA generated oracle.
Figure 8: Generated oracles testing a buggy createNumber method
in the Java Lang project. The bug prevents a NumberFormatException
from being raised on an invalid input. The oracle generated by TOGA
correctly checks that an exception should be raised on the invalid
input, and fails when no exception is raised due to the bug. A safety
oracle cannot detect the absence of an exception. TOGA is the only
system in our evaluation that detects this bug.
The specification mining method, JDoctor also does not effec-
tively find bugs, but it generates oracles precisely. JDoctor only
produces an exceptional test oracle if there is a docstring comment
indicating specific behavior. However, on the projects in the De-
fects4J benchmark, this approach only succeeds in generating test
oracles to catch a single bug. We observed that in practice, many
buggy methods either had vaguely worded docstrings or lacked
docstrings entirely, and JDoctor created few test oracles as a result.
JDoctor’s inability to generate sufficient oracles to effectively find
bugs illustrates why robustness to vague or missing docstrings is
a important requirement for effective oracle generation. In many
cases, the bugs detected by TOGA occurred on methods that lacked
docstrings entirely, where any specification mining approach would
not be able to identify them.
EvoSuite vs. TOGA Performance: Finding bugs requires both test
prefixes that reach buggy behavior and oracles that correctly iden-
tify the bug. For the oracle generation methods in this evaluation,
we distinguish the performance of the test prefix generator (Evo-
Suite) by evaluating the generated test prefixes with the ground
truth oracles. Out of the 835 bugs in the Defects4J benchmark, the
EvoSuite generated tests reach 120 bugs. That is, overall EvoSuite+TOGA misses 715 Defect4J bugs due to EvoSuite not generating
reaching test prefixes, and 63 bugs due to TOGA not generating cor-
rect oracles. This result highlights that generating test prefixes to
reach buggy code remains a challenging open problem, and im-
proving the test prefix generator used with TOGA could have large
impact on bug detection performance.
TOGA Exception Oracle Error Analysis: For a single focal method,
EvoSuite often generates multiple test cases. For some focal methods
(~10%), EvoSuite generates both exceptional and non-exceptional
input states. However, TOGA rarely predicts (4%) differing exception
oracles for the same focal method, regardless of input state. This
observation suggests that TOGA is conditioning primarily on the
focal method signature rather than particular input states.
TOGA Assertion Oracle Error Analysis: We performed a man-
ual analysis of ground truth oracles and found that of 229 total
assertion oracles, 31 were predicted correctly. The remaining 198
predictions can be broken down as follows: 106 of the ground truth
assertions could not be expressed with the given vocabulary, 13
could not be expressed with the grammar, and 9 were not predicted
because TOGA incorrectly predicted an exceptional oracle. In the
remaining 70 samples, the ground truth oracle could be expressed
by the vocab and grammar, but the model made the wrong predic-
tion, resulting in an in-vocab accuracy of 31% on the bug-reaching
EvoSuite tests. This is significantly lower than TOGA ’s 96% in-vocab
accuracy on ATLAS*. The difference in performance suggests that
the distribution of tests in ATLAS* is very different from EvoSuite’s
generated tests. A model trained specifically on EvoSuite generated
(test, oracle) pairs instead of ATLAS* pairs may result in better
performance.
Result 3: Our approach finds 57 bugs in real world Java projects,
30 of which are not found by any other method in the evaluation.
5.4.1 Case Studies. We consider two case studies of bugs that are
detected by TOGA in our evaluation but not by other methods.
Assertion bug case study. The first case study, shown in Figure 7
involves a bug in a key-value store used in the Chart Java project.
The buggy method, shown in Figure 7a, contains incorrect logic
that prevents the data structure from updating its index when the
most recently added item is removed. This causes the itemCount()
2139
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. TOGA: A Neural Method for Test Oracle Generation ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
method to return an incorrect count, because it bases the item count
on the index.
The EvoSuite-generated test for this method shown in Figure
7b uses a regression oracle and generates an assertion based on
the observed execution behavior. Because the method is buggy,
this results in an incorrect assertion being generated, which not
only fails to catch the bug but also could potentially make future
detection of the bug more difficult. Figure 7c shows a simplified
version of an unexpected exception oracle, which is the approach
used by Randoop in the evaluation.
In contrast to these two approaches, TOGA generates the correct
oracle by performing a ranking over a small number of assertions
on integers and the return value of kv.itemCount() . This identi-
fies that after calling removeValue(0) , the most likely assertion is
assertEquals(0, kv.itemCount()).
Expected exception case study. Figure 8 illustrates how TOGA is
able to catch an expected exception bug detected in our evaluation.
The bug in the NumberUtils.createNumber method of the Java
Lang project prevents the method from correctly detecting invalid
inputs and raising an exception. The exception ranking model pre-
dicts that the createNumber("0XT") call should raise an exception
based on the method signature and context, and TOGA generates
an oracle based on this prediction to pass the test if an exception
is raised on fail otherwise. In contrast, a safety oracle that checks
for unexpected exceptions cannot detect this type of bug where a
raised expected is desired behavior. 5 of the bugs found the TOGA in
the evaluation are expected exception bugs, and no other tool in
evaluation finds any expected exception bugs.
5.5 Threats to Validity
We consider three potential sources of bias that could conceivably
threaten the validity of our results: (i) test dataset bias, (ii) bug
dataset bias, and (iii) bias from EvoSuite performance. Both of the
unit test datasets ATLAS and Methods2Test sourced tests from
publicly available Java projects, and filtered their results using
heuristics such as GitHub star count and presence of matching focal
methods to select tests for inclusion. Bias in these datasets towards
specific applications or types of tests may effect the validity of RQ1
and RQ2. However, we note that these datasets are large (sourced
from 91K open source Java projects in the case of Methods2Test),
and therefore likely to be representative of common patterns in
Java unit testing.
Our RQ3 bug evaluation dataset, Defects4J, is much smaller
with 835 samples from 17 projects due to difficulty in constructing
minimal bug samples, so bias towards specific applications or bug
types is possible. However, Defects4J only contains large, widely
used projects and difficult real-world bugs, so evaluations on this
benchmark are likely to be indicative of real world performance on
large software projects.
Finally, bias in EvoSuite’s test prefix generation is also a potential
threat to validity for RQ3. EvoSuite can only generate bug-reaching
tests for a fraction of the Defects4J bugs (120 out of 835), and may be
biased towards classes of bugs that are easier to reach with coverage
guided exploration.6 LIMITATIONS
Grammar and Vocabulary :TOGA makes the tradeoff of support-
ing a restricted set of commonly used oracles, but predicting oracles
in that set accurately. A limitation of this approach is that TOGA
can only generate oracles that can be expressed by the grammar
and exclusively contain values that appear in the vocabulary. We
conducted a manual analysis of TOGA predictions in RQ3. When
TOGA did not correctly predict a bug-finding assertion, in 54% of
the cases the assertion value did not appear in the vocabulary, and
in 8.5% of cases the assertion could not be expressed in the grammar.
For example, TOGA could not predict the following ground truth
assertion as the string literal is not contained in either the global
or local dictionaries:
assertEquals("\"qDxD_5>q,)`dEgM", string0)
While our grammar limitation is strict, we found that approaches
with unlimited vocabularies also did not correctly predict these
oracles.
Out of distribution training :TOGA is also limited by its depen-
dence on datasets of (primarily) developer-written unit tests for
both training and vocabulary learning. However, the RQ3 test set is
taken from EvoSuite, an out of distribution sample set. As a future
direction, TOGA could be trained on an EvoSuite generated dataset
for a model that more closely fits an end-to-end automated testing
distribution.
Dependencies on EvoSuite :TOGA assumes a particular structure
of the test prefixes generated by EvoSuite to select the variable to
assert on. However, as long as the assertion variable is specified
to TOGA and defined somewhere in the test prefix, the test prefix
could conceivably have any format. Therefore, integrating TOGA
with another test generation method might require integrating a
suitable mutation analysis tool such as PIT [ 5] to select variables
on which to generate assertions.
7 CONCLUSION
This paper presents TOGA , a neural technique to infer both exception
and assertion test oracles from a given test prefix and unit context.
TOGA is a two step transformer based architecture that is capable of
generating oracles for units without implementation or docstrings.
It improves upon generative neural assertion oracle inference tech-
niques by ranking a small set of likely candidate assertions. When
integrated with a random test generation tool (EvoSuite) to obtain
prefixes, TOGA finds 57 real world bugs, out-performing existing
test oracle inference techniques. Additionally, this paper presents
two datasets for future work in neural exception and assertion test
oracle inference.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Michele Tufano and Alexey Svyatkovskiy
for their help with the ATLAS and Methods2Test datasets and
running AthenaTest, and helpful discussions and feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Methods2Test. https://github.com/microsoft/methods2test.
[2]Arianna Blasi, Alberto Goffi, Konstantin Kuznetsov, Alessandra Gorla, Michael D.
Ernst, Mauro Pezzè, and Sergio Delgado Castellanos. 2018. Translating Code
Comments to Procedure Specifications. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT
2140
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Amsterdam, Nether-
lands) (ISSTA 2018). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
242–253. https://doi.org/10.1145/3213846.3213872
[3]Arianna Blasi, Alessandra Gorla, Michael D. Ernst, Mauro Pezzè, and Antonio
Carzaniga. 2021. MeMo: Automatically identifying metamorphic relations in
Javadoc comments for test automation. Journal of Systems and Software 181
(2021), 111041. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2021.111041
[4]Colin B. Clement, Dawn Drain, Jonathan Timcheck, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, and
Neel Sundaresan. 2020. PyMT5: multi-mode translation of natural language and
Python code with transformers. arXiv:2010.03150 [cs.LG]
[5]Henry Coles, Thomas Laurent, Christopher Henard, Mike Papadakis, and An-
thony Ventresque. 2016. PIT: A Practical Mutation Testing Tool for Java (Demo).
InProceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analy-
sis(Saarbrücken, Germany) (ISSTA 2016). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 449–452. https://doi.org/10.1145/2931037.2948707
[6]Christoph Csallner, Nikolai Tillmann, and Yannis Smaragdakis. 2008. DySy.
In2008 ACM/IEEE 30th International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE,
281–290.
[7]Ermira Daka and Gordon Fraser. 2014. A Survey on Unit Testing Practices and
Problems. In 2014 IEEE 25th International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering. 201–211. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE.2014.11
[8]Michael D Ernst, Jeff H Perkins, Philip J Guo, Stephen McCamant, Carlos Pacheco,
Matthew S Tschantz, and Chen Xiao. 2007. The Daikon system for dynamic
detection of likely invariants. Science of computer programming 69, 1-3 (2007),
35–45.
[9]Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming
Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020.
CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages.
arXiv:2002.08155 [cs.CL]
[10] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. 2011. Evolutionary Generation of Whole Test
Suites. In International Conference On Quality Software (QSIC). IEEE Computer
Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 31–40. https://doi.org/10.1109/QSIC.2011.19
[11] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. 2014. A large-scale evaluation of automated
unit test generation using evosuite. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
and Methodology (TOSEM) 24, 2 (2014), 1–42.
[12] Patrice Godefroid, Nils Klarlund, and Koushik Sen. 2005. DART: directed au-
tomated random testing. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2005 Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Chicago, IL, USA, June
12-15, 2005, Vivek Sarkar and Mary W. Hall (Eds.). ACM, 213–223. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1065010.1065036
[13] Alberto Goffi, Alessandra Gorla, Michael D. Ernst, and Mauro Pezzè. 2016. Au-
tomatic Generation of Oracles for Exceptional Behaviors. In Proceedings of the
25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Saarbrücken,
Germany) (ISSTA 2016). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 213–224. https://doi.org/10.1145/2931037.2931061
[14] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D. Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: A Database of
existing faults to enable controlled testing studies for Java programs. In ISSTA
2014, Proceedings of the 2014 International Symposium on Software Testing and
Analysis. San Jose, CA, USA, 437–440. Tool demo.
[15] Aditya Kanade, Petros Maniatis, Gogul Balakrishnan, and Kensen Shi.
2020. Learning and Evaluating Contextual Embedding of Source Code.
arXiv:2001.00059 [cs.SE]
[16] Stephan Lukasczyk, Florian Kroiß, and Gordon Fraser. 2020. Automated Unit
Test Generation for Python. In Proceedings of the 12th Symposium on Search-
based Software Engineering (SSBSE 2020, Bari, Italy, October 7–8) (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 12420). Springer, 9–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
59762-7_2
[17] Antonio Mastropaolo, Simone Scalabrino, Nathan Cooper, David Nader Palacio,
Denys Poshyvanyk, Rocco Oliveto, and Gabriele Bavota. 2021. Studying the
usage of text-to-text transfer transformer to support code-related tasks. In 2021
IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
336–347.
[18] Aleksandar Milicevic, Sasa Misailovic, Darko Marinov, and Sarfraz Khurshid.
2007. Korat: A Tool for Generating Structurally Complex Test Inputs. In 29th
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2007), Minneapolis, MN,
USA, May 20-26, 2007. IEEE Computer Society, 771–774. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE.2007.48
[19] Facundo Molina. 2020. Applying learning techniques to oracle synthesis. In
2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE). IEEE, 1153–1157.
[20] Facundo Molina, Pablo Ponzio, Nazareno Aguirre, and Marcelo Frias. 2021.
EvoSpex: An evolutionary algorithm for learning postconditions. In 2021
IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
1223–1235.
[21] Carlos Pacheco and Michael D Ernst. 2007. Randoop: feedback-directed random
testing for Java. In Companion to the 22nd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-
oriented programming systems and applications companion. 815–816.[22] Carlos Pacheco, Shuvendu K. Lahiri, Michael D. Ernst, and Thomas Ball. 2007.
Feedback-directed random test generation. In ICSE 2007, Proceedings of the 29th
International Conference on Software Engineering. Minneapolis, MN, USA, 75–84.
[23] Rahul Pandita, Xusheng Xiao, Hao Zhong, Tao Xie, Stephen Oney, and Amit
Paradkar. 2012. Inferring method specifications from natural language API
descriptions. In 2012 34th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE).
815–825. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227137
[24] Koushik Sen, Darko Marinov, and Gul Agha. 2005. CUTE: a concolic unit
testing engine for C. In Proceedings of the 10th European Software Engineer-
ing Conference held jointly with 13th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
on Foundations of Software Engineering, 2005, Lisbon, Portugal, September 5-9,
2005, Michel Wermelinger and Harald C. Gall (Eds.). ACM, 263–272. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1081706.1081750
[25] Sina Shamshiri, René Just, José Miguel Rojas, Gordon Fraser, Phil McMinn, and
Andrea Arcuri. 2015. Do automatically generated unit tests find real faults?
an empirical study of effectiveness and challenges (t). In 2015 30th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 201–211.
[26] Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu Fu, and Neel Sundaresan. 2020.
IntelliCode Compose: Code Generation Using Transformer. In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Virtual Event, USA)
(ESEC/FSE 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1433–1443. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3417058
[27] Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Todd Mytkowicz, Negar Ghorbani, Sarah Fakhoury, Eliz-
abeth Dinella, Christian Bird, Neel Sundaresan, and Shuvendu Lahiri. 2021.
MergeBERT: Program Merge Conflict Resolution via Neural Transformers.
arXiv:2109.00084 [cs.SE]
[28] Shin Hwei Tan, Darko Marinov, Lin Tan, and Gary T. Leavens. 2012. @tComment:
Testing Javadoc Comments to Detect Comment-Code Inconsistencies. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Verification
and Validation (ICST 2012). Montreal, Canada, 260–269.
[29] Gregory Tassey. 2002. The Economic Impacts of Inadequate Infrastructure for
Software Testing. (05 2002).
[30] Valerio Terragni, Gunel Jahangirova, Paolo Tonella, and Mauro Pezzè. 2020.
Evolutionary Improvement of Assertion Oracles (ESEC/FSE 2020). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1178–1189. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3368089.3409758
[31] Nikolai Tillmann and Jonathan de Halleux. 2008. Pex-White Box Test Generation
for .NET. In Tests and Proofs - 2nd International Conference, TAP 2008, Prato,
Italy, April 9-11, 2008. Proceedings (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4966) ,
Bernhard Beckert and Reiner Hähnle (Eds.). Springer, 134–153. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-540-79124-9_10
[32] Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shao Kun Deng, and Neel
Sundaresan. 2021. Unit Test Case Generation with Transformers and Focal
Context. arXiv:2009.05617 [cs.SE]
[33] Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, and Neel Sundaresan. 2020.
Generating Accurate Assert Statements for Unit Test Cases using Pretrained
Transformers. arXiv:2009.05634 [cs.SE]
[34] Cody Watson, Michele Tufano, Kevin Moran, Gabriele Bavota, and Denys Poshy-
vanyk. 2020. On learning meaningful assert statements for unit test cases. Pro-
ceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
(Jun 2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380429
[35] Robert White and Jens Krinke. 2020. Reassert: Deep learning for assert generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09784 (2020).
[36] Michal Zalewski. 2015. American Fuzzy Lop (AFL). http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/
afl/
[37] Juan Zhai, Yu Shi, Minxue Pan, Guian Zhou, Yongxiang Liu, Chunrong Fang,
Shiqing Ma, Lin Tan, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2020. C2S: Translating Natural
Language Comments to Formal Program Specifications. In Proceedings of the
28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Sym-
posium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Virtual Event, USA) (ES-
EC/FSE 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 25–37.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409716
2141
Authorized licensed use limited to: LAHORE UNIV OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES. Downloaded on August 07,2025 at 08:54:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 