arXiv:2505.07768v1  [cs.SE]  12 May 2025Enhancing Code Generation via Bidirectional
Comment-Level Mutual Grounding
Yifeng Di, Tianyi Zhang
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
di5@purdue.edu, tianyi@purdue.edu
Abstract —Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
unprecedented capability in code generation. However, LLM-
generated code is still plagued with a wide range of functional
errors, especially for complex programming tasks that LLMs
have not seen before. Recent studies have shown that developers
often struggle with inspecting and fixing incorrect code generated
by LLMs, diminishing their productivity and trust in LLM-
based code generation. Inspired by the mutual grounding theory
in communication, we propose an interactive approach that
leverages code comments as a medium for developers and
LLMs to establish a shared understanding. Our approach facil-
itates iterative grounding by interleaving code generation, inline
comment generation, and contextualized user feedback through
editable comments to align generated code with developer intent.
We evaluated our approach on two popular benchmarks and
demonstrated that our approach significantly improved multiple
state-of-the-art LLMs, e.g., 17.1% pass@1 improvement for code-
davinci-002 on HumanEval. Furthermore, we conducted a user
study with 12 participants in comparison to two baselines: (1)
interacting with GitHub Copilot, and (2) interacting with a
multi-step code generation paradigm called Multi-Turn Program
Synthesis. Participants completed the given programming tasks
16.7% faster and with 10.5% improvement in task success rate
when using our approach. Both results show that interactively
refining code comments enables the collaborative establishment
of mutual grounding, leading to more accurate code generation
and higher developer confidence.
Index Terms —LLM, Code Generation, Code Refinement
I. I NTRODUCTION
The quest for automated code generation, dating back to the
1960s [1], [2], has evolved significantly. This field has transi-
tioned from early deductive program synthesis methods [3]–[6]
to the recent advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) [7]–
[9]. Despite the significant progress, LLMs often fail to align
with developer intent due to factors such as reliance on
spurious features, lack of user context, and misunderstand-
ing of complex specifications [10]–[14]. Recent efforts to
address these limitations include model fine-tuning [15], [16],
new prompting strategies [17], [18], and iterative refinement
paradigms [19], [20]. However, the improvement brought by
these methods is still limited. For example, Self-Debug [19]
only achieved a 4.8% pass@ 1increase for Codex on MBPP
when test execution feedback is not available.
Recent studies [11], [21], [22] highlight the critical role of
bi-directional communication between developers and LLMs
in programming tasks. While developers can edit prompts,
LLMs often treat such edits as new prompts, hindering their
ability to understand and incorporate developers’ refinement
PInGCode RefinementComment GenerationHuman Review
Code SnippetCode Solution
Fig. 1. Generating a code solution in our pipeline.
intent. Conversational models like ChatGPT offer multi-turn
dialogues for feedback. However, effectively encoding histor-
ical utterances and contextualizing feedback within conversa-
tions remains a complex and challenging task [23]–[26].
In this work, we propose a new interactive approach called
Programming with Interactive Grounding (PI NG). Figure 1
illustrates this approach. PI NG employs inline comments as a
medium for bi-directional communication between a developer
and the model. This approach is inspired by the grounding the-
ory in communication [27], which underscores the importance
of mutual understanding in collaborative interactions. Unlike
prior work that relies on coarse-grained code explanations for
refinement [19], [28], PI NG’s use of inline comments offers a
more fine-grained approach. These comments directly address
individual statements of the code, making it easier to target
specific code segments for precise feedback and refinement.
Given a code snippet generated by an LLM, PI NG uses
a code comment generation model to create inline com-
ments that clarify each statement’s behavior. These comments
provide developers with an immediate, understandable code
description, helping them quickly spot potential errors. Devel-
opers can edit the comments to specify the correct behavior
for the erroneous statement. A code refinement model then
regenerates the statement and subsequent segment identified
by the feedback, rather than the entire code snippet.
Inline comments are essentially natural language descrip-
tions, which are suitable for developers at all levels. This
approach allows for more precise error identification compared
to prompt editing or conversational models, which often re-
quire the model to infer the location of errors throughout the
entire code snippet. Comment editing also directly indicateserror locations, leading to more efficient model-based code
refinement. This simplifies and improves the process of code
refinement compared to previous approaches that require re-
generating the entire code snippet.
We evaluate PI NG through simulated and real user studies
on multiple code generation models. In our simulated user
studies, we benchmark PI NG against eight state-of-the-art
code generation and refinement techniques [19], [28]–[34],
demonstrating that PI NG significantly outperforms these base-
lines. On HumanEval, pass@ 1rates increased by 17.1% for
code-davinci-002, 9.7% for InCoder, and 11.6% for CodeGen.
MBPP benchmark also saw notable gains. In a user study with
12 real programmers, PI NG outperformed GitHub Copilot [35]
and Multi-Turn Program Synthesis [36] in task success rate
by 16.7% and 58.3%, respectively, while improving the task
completion speed by 10.5% and 22.9%, respectively. Besides,
participants reported 20% increased confidence and satisfac-
tion, demonstrating PI NG’s effectiveness in enhancing code
quality and user experience.
In summary, our main contributions include:
1) We propose PI NG, a new interactive code generation
paradigm that enhances developer-model grounding via
comment refinement.
2) We implement PI NG as a VSCode extension and have
open-sourced our code and data.1
3) We comprehensively evaluate PI NG with various mod-
els, benchmarks, and user studies, showing significant
improvements in code accuracy and developer produc-
tivity over state-of-the-art methods.
II. B ACKGROUND
Effective human interaction requires establishing common
ground —mutual knowledge, beliefs, and assumptions [27].
Grounding in communication involves a collaborative pro-
cess [37], where speakers design utterances for listener com-
prehension, and listeners provide feedback to demonstrate un-
derstanding [38]. Clark and Schaefer’s contribution model [37]
outlines this as a presentation by the speaker and acceptance
by the listener, supported by mechanisms including repetition,
reformulation, and elaboration [39]. The importance of com-
mon ground is underscored when communication falters due
to participants’ differing backgrounds [40].
Recent studies in code generation reveal challenges due to
poor bi-directional communication between models and de-
velopers [11], [21], [22]. Models often misinterpret developer
intent, while developers struggle to understand the generated
code [11]. This communication gap, stemming from the lack
of common ground, leads to code that does not align with
developers’ expectations and hinders effective feedback [22].
Thus, fostering shared understanding between models and
developers is a key to enhancing code generation accuracy.
In NLP, there have been some recent investigations on
applying grounding theory to text-generation tasks [41], [42].
Zhang et al. [41] proposed a retrieval-augmented generation
1https://github.com/NecoraNyaru/PInGmodel that retrieves related examples to ground the generative
context in the relevant information. Chandu et al. [42] analyzed
coordination and constraints in NLP tasks, proposing adapta-
tions for grounding. However, grounding in code generation
is still underexplored. Our work aims to fill this gap with a
grounding-based pipeline for code generation and refinement,
enhancing developer-model communication.
III. A PPROACH
We formally define the task as follows: Given an initial con-
textcthat comprises a natural language problem description
and an initial code snippet xproduced by a code generation
model, the task is to generate a refined code solution ˆxthat
fixes the errors in xand aligns the code more closely with the
developer’s intent as articulated in the problem description.
We introduce Programming with Interactive Grounding
(PING), which leverages inline code comments for bidirec-
tional communication. PI NG includes three steps: comment
generation, human review, and code refinement. We elaborate
on each step in the following sections.
A. Comment Generation
PING first parsed the initial code snippet xinto an Abstract
Syntax Tree (AST) to segment the code snippet into individual
statements. We opted for statement-level comment generation
due to its fine-grained nature, which allows for a more accurate
and detailed explanation of code behavior. This approach
contrasts the previous approach that leverages coarser-grained
code explanations or summaries, by providing targeted insights
into specific statements of code.
We do not consider ‘import’ and ‘definition’ statements
since they are trivial to explain. For compound statements
such as ‘if’, ‘for’, ‘while’, ‘try’, and ‘with’, we adopt a
tailored approach for code segmentation. For such nodes with a
conditional statement, the condition expression is first added
to the statement list, followed by its body statement nodes.
The statements in the ‘else’ clause, if present, are handled
afterward. For ‘try’ nodes, the process directly navigates
through its body nodes without additional processing. For
‘with’ statements, the part of the statement excluding its ‘suite’
is first added, after which is its suite part.
If the generated code snippet xis not compilable, which
prevents its transformation to AST, we resort to a simple
strategy. In such cases, xis directly segmented into individual
lines for subsequent comment generation.
Given individual statements, a specialized comment gen-
eration model MCgenerates an inline comment cfor each
of them. Figure 2 1shows a code example with generated
comments. When processing the for loop, PI NG first generates
an explanation for the loop condition. Then it proceeds to
clarify the operations within the loop body.
To implement the comment generation model, we use
CodeBERT [43] and fine-tune it with our finetuning dataset.
CodeBERT is a transformer-based encoder-only model. It is
pre-trained on a diverse corpus of programming languages and
natural language text. To develop the fine-tuning dataset, we# Initialize the variable 'sum_of_digits' to 0sum_of_digits = 0# Convert Nto a stringdigits = str(N)# Iterate through each digit in 'digits' for digit in digits :     # Update'sum_of_digits' by addingthe integer value of 'digit'    sum_of_digits += int(digit)# Convert the sum of digits to a binary,removethefirsttwocharactersandreturnreturn bin(sum_of_digits)[2:] 1.Code Snippet with Comment ̇𝑥
···-# Convert Ntoa string)+# Convert Ntoa binary,andremoveitsprefix'0b'digits = str(N)···2.Refine the comment of the incorrect line of codedef solve(N):"""Given a positive integer N, return the total sum of its binarydigits in binary. Example For N = 1000, the sum of digits will be 6 the output should be "110". For N = 150, the sum of digits will be 4 the output should be "100". For N = 147, the sum of digits will be 4 the output should be "100". Variables: @N integer Constraints: 0 ≤ N ≤ 10000. Output: a string of binary number """ Context c
sum_of_digits = 0 digits = str(N)for digit in digits:     sum_of_digits += int(digit) return bin(sum_of_digits)[2:] Code Snippetx
# Initialize the variable 'sum_of_digits' to 0sum_of_digits = 0# Convert Nto a binaryandremoveitsprefix'0b'-digits=str(N))+digits =str(bin(N)).removeprefix('0b')# Iterate through each digit in 'binary_n' for digit in digits:     # Update'sum_of_digits' by addingthe integer value of 'digit'    sum_of_digits += int(digit)# Convert the sum of digits to a binary,removethefirsttwocharactersandreturnreturn bin(sum_of_digits)[2:] 3.Regenerate basedonthe refined comment
Fig. 2. Refining a code snippet with our approach via comment editing.
adopted the approach outlined in the CodeBERT paper [43]
and applied the preprocessing steps from CodeXGLUE [44] to
the CodeSearchNet [45] dataset. The postprocessing process
first cleans the data by (1) removing examples where the code
cannot be parsed into an AST, (2) removing examples where
the number of tokens in the document is fewer than 3 or greater
than 256, (3) removing examples that contain special tokens
(e.g.,⟨img ...⟩or https://...), and (4) removing examples that
are not written in English. Then, it extracts comments and
their corresponding code to produce a fine-tuning dataset with
280,652 code-to-comment pairs. We use Adam [46] to fine-
tune the parameters. The learning rate was set to 5e−5, with
a batch size of 32. We also set the maximum sequence length
of input and inference as 256 and 128, respectively.
B. Human Review
In the human review step, the code snippet with inline
comments is presented to the developer. When users notice an
error by reading the comments, they can directly modify the
corresponding comment to describe the desired behavior. For
example, in Figure 2 1, the developer notices the statement
in Line 4 is wrong based on the comment of that statement.
Specifically, instead of converting the input Nto a string, it
should convert it to a binary first. Fixing this bug requires
changing this line of code to call three APIs: (1) converting
the number to binary via bin, (2) transforming this binary to
a string via str, and finally removing the string’s prefix via
str.removeprefix . The developer may not be familiar
with the first and third APIs as they are less commonly used.
To manually fix it, the developer would typically need to
search online and learn how to use these specific APIs first,
which causes extra time and effort. Using PI NG, the developer
can modify the comment instead, as shown in Figure 2 2.
Then, PI NG will regenerate the code based on the refined
comment, which is more convenient for the developer.C. Code Refinement
The original context c, the generated code up to the refined
comment ¨x, and the refined comments are concatenated to
form a new, updated context ˆc. A code refinement model, ˆM,
then processes ˆcto regenerate code starting from the edited
comment. This regeneration aims to address the identified error
while maintaining the integrity of the correct parts.
To develop the code refinement model, we fine-tune the
6.7B version of DeepSeek Coder [47]. DeepSeek Coder is a
recently released code generation model with superior coding
performance while being small enough to be fine-tuned on our
GPUs. Instead of using the original code generation model, we
decided to fine-tune it, since the original one is designed to
generate code based on general, high-level task descriptions.
However, in our code refinement step, the task is to generate
a dedicated program statement based on a specific, detailed
inline comment. Therefore, fine-tuning is necessary.
To construct a high-quality dataset for code refinement, we
utilize the Stack dataset [48], which includes 190.73 GB of
Python code files. We first follow the filtering methods of
Codex [7] and remove files with:
•an average line length greater than 100 characters
•a maximum line length above 1,000 characters
•less than 25% of the characters being alphanumeric
•keywords in the first few lines of the file indicating that
the file was likely automatically generated
Then, we select code snippets that are sufficiently docu-
mented through comments. For each code file, we compute
the comments-to-code ratio by counting the lines of comments
and the lines of code. Finally, we set minimum and maximum
thresholds for this ratio, selecting snippets within this range.
After testing various thresholds, we established a MinRatio of
0.3 and a MaxRatio of 0.95 that optimally balances the number
of code snippets against the richness of their comments.
We fine-tune the model with the next-token prediction
objective, which is widely used in decoder-only models such
as GPT-3. We use the Adam optimizer [46] with a learning rateFig. 3. User Interface of PI NG
of2e−5for updating the model weights. We use the Cross-
Entropy [49] loss to optimize the model parameters. This loss
compares the model’s predicted probability distribution for the
next token in a code or comment sequence against the ground-
truth token. Mathematically, it is defined as:
L=−NX
i=1yilog(ˆyi) (1)
Here, Ndenotes the dictionary size, yiis the ground-truth
token, and ˆyiis the model’s predicted token. We compared the
performance of our fine-tuned model with the original model.
Please refer to Section IV for details.
D. Implementation Details
We have implemented PI NG as an extension for Visual
Studio Code (VSCode). Figure 3 shows the user interface of
this extension. The development of the PI NG extension for
VSCode involved writing 4,605 lines of code. The default
models used in PI NG are DeepSeek Coder for code gener-
ation, CodeBERT for comment generation, and the fine-tuned
DeepSeek Coder model for code refinement.
IV. S IMULATED USERSTUDY
In the evaluation, we strive to investigate to what extent
PING improves the accuracy of different kinds of code gen-
eration models in a broad range of programming tasks under
different settings. Since PI NG requires user feedback to guide
the code refinement process, conducting such experiments
at scale requires recruiting a large number of developers,
which is costly and time-prohibitive to achieve in academia.
Therefore, as a tradeoff, the first author acted as a simulated
user and interacted with PI NG in the experiments in this
section. In other words, the first author manually inspectedthe code generated by PI NG in each setting and edited the
comments to provide feedback for code refinement (detailed
in Section IV-B). With the simulated user, we investigate the
following research questions:
•RQ1: How effectively can our interactive approach im-
prove the code generation accuracy of different LLMs?
•RQ2: How does our approach compare with other code
generation approaches?
•RQ3: How sensitive is our approach to different code
comment generation models?
•RQ4: To what extent can fine-tuning improve the code
refinement accuracy?
In the end, we collected a very large interaction dataset, in-
cluding 1224 code snippets generated by four different LLMs
for 306 programming tasks, their inline comments generated
by different comment generation models, comments edited by
the simulated user, and code snippets generated by different
code refinement models based on the edited comments. We
have released this dataset to support the reproducibility of our
experiments and also facilitate the development of new code
refinement models for the research community.
A. Benchmarks
We used two popular code generation benchmarks in this
evaluation. HumanEval [7] includes 164 hand-written Python
programming tasks. MBPP [50] includes 974 crowd-sourced
Python programming tasks. Since some tasks of MBPP have
ambiguous task descriptions, the authors created a sanitized
version with 427 tasks. For our evaluation, we randomly
sampled 142 tasks from this sanitized version (about one-third)
as analyzing all 427 tasks manually takes a lot of effort.
A recent study found that the original test cases from Hu-
manEval do not sufficiently cover corner cases and thus cannot
reliably assess the correctness of LLM-generated code [51].
The authors later released HumanEval+ andMBPP+ , which
extend HumanEval and MBPP with additional test cases.
In our evaluation, we also measured model performance on
HumanEval+ and MBPP+.
B. User Feedback Collection
For the total of 306 programming tasks from HumanEval
and MBPP, we experimented with four LLMs to generate
the initial code snippets. We selected these models since
they are well-known code generation models with different
performance levels. We explain each of them below.
CodeGen [36] leverages multi-task learning on textual and
programming language tasks, CodeGen can effectively gener-
ate syntactically valid code while capturing natural language
meaning. For our evaluation, we used its 16B version.
InCoder [52] utilizes a retrieve-and-edit approach in code
generation. Given a text description, it first retrieves relevant
code snippets and then edits them to match the input. Its hybrid
pointer-generator network allows both copying and generating
tokens. For our evaluation, we used its 6B version.
Code-davinci-002 is OpenAI’s GPT-3-based code genera-
tion model. It generalizes well across programming languageswithout task-specific training. As a close-sourced model, its
model size is undisclosed. We used the API provided by
OpenAI to access this model and test it in our experiments.
DeepSeek Coder [47] is a new series of code language
models that show superior coding performance. These models
are pre-trained with a large project-level code corpus with both
the next token prediction and the fill-in-the-middle objectives.
For our evaluation, we used its 6.7B version.
For each task, we analyzed the top one program generated
by each model. This resulted in 1,224 code snippets. 738 of
them fail to pass the test cases. Table I shows the distribution
of these 738 incorrect solutions across these models. Two
annotators manually inspected these incorrect code solutions
and edited the comments to refine the code. One of the
annotators is the first author, a graduate student with over
nine years of programming experience, including three years
of industry experience. The other annotator, who is not the co-
author of this paper, is a graduate student invited externally
with five years of programming experience. We describe the
detailed annotation procedure below.
The first step is to identify the buggy statements in each
code snippet by examining the comments. The two annotators
first had a 30-minute session to get familiar with the annotation
task and go over 10 code snippets together to practice. Subse-
quently, they split the remaining 728 code snippets into halves
and each independently inspected 364 code snippets. During
the inspection and fault localization process, they discussed
in case of uncertainty. After finishing their first round of
inspection, they exchanged to check each other’s results. The
initial agreement level between the two annotators in this
step is 0.85 in terms of Cohen’s Kappa, indicating a perfect
agreement level [53]. This agreement level makes sense since,
in most cases, it is obvious which line of code is incorrect.
The annotators then discussed and resolved all disagreements.
The second step is to edit the comment to reflect the
expected behavior of a buggy statement for PI NG to refine the
code. Like the previous step, they first practiced together on
10 snippets and then independently edited comments in half of
the remaining snippets. Upon completion, they inspected the
edited comments with each other and checked whether they
agreed on the edited comments. The initial Cohen’s Kappa is
0.72, indicating a substantial agreement level [53]. Compared
with the previous step, the agreement level is a bit lower since,
in some cases, the annotators disagreed on the clarity and
specificity of edited comments. For example, one annotator
found another annotator’s comment edit ambiguous, too trivial,
or even confusing. The annotators discussed each comment
edit they initially disagreed on and came up with a final edit
that both of them found appropriate.
They then ran PI NG to refine the code with the edited
comment for each code snippet. If the refined code still failed
the test cases, the two annotators repeated the previous steps
to provide feedback to the refined code. Due to the enormous
manual effort in this process, the annotators only provided up
to three rounds of feedback to the 251 incorrect solutions from
the HumanEval dataset.TABLE I
COMPARISON OF CODE GENERATION MODELS EVALUATED
Model
SizePass@ 1 Incorrect
Solution # HumanEval MBPP
INCODER 6B 16.5 19.7 262
CODEGEN-MONO 16B 29.9 35.2 212
CODE -DAVINCI -002 Undisclosed 46.3 58.5 165
DEEPSEEK-CODER 6.7B 74.4 73.2 99
After this annotation process, we logged all the generated
code in each iteration and code comments before and after
editing to form the interaction dataset described at the begin-
ning of this section. We reported the performance gains of
each round of feedback in Table IV.
C. Evaluation Metrics
Following the Codex paper [7], we measured each model’s
performance using pass@ k. We set kto 1 and only considered
the top 1 program generated by each model in our experiments.
D. Comparison Baselines
Since RQ1 only aims to measure the performance gain
achieved on different LLMs, we compared the pass@ 1of
each model with and without the augmentation of PI NG. We
also compared the pass@ 1of each model after each feedback
iteration and reported the improvement trend over iterations.
RQ2 compares PI NG with other code generation and re-
finement techniques. Thus, we selected eight state-of-the-art
methods as the baselines. To ensure comparison consistency,
we use GPT-3.5 with the default temperature (1.0) and top p
(1.0) as the base model for PI NG and all baselines in our
experiments. For iterative methods such as Self-Edit [32] and
Self-Debugging [19], we set the iteration upper bound to three,
since the performance of these methods often saturates after
two or three iterations based on the experiments in their papers.
We describe each method below.
•ReAct [29]. ReAct prompts an LLM to generate both
a reasoning trace and an action plan in an interleaved
manner. This allows the model to perform dynamic
reasoning to adjust the action plan.
•ToT [30]. ToT structures potential reasoning paths in a
tree-like manner, which goes beyond the linear reason-
ing of traditional Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting to
enable the exploration of multiple reasoning pathways.
•RAP [31]. RAP enhances LLM’s problem-solving by
using them as both reasoning agents and world models to
generate actionable plans and conduct complex reasoning,
which predict environmental states and simulate action
outcomes for more effective problem-solving.
•Self-Edit [32]. Self-Edit improves code generation accu-
racy by executing the generated code, analyzing results,
and guiding the fault-aware code editor to correct errors
in a generate-and-edit cycle.
•Self-Planning [28]. Self-Planning employs a two-phase
(planning and implementation) approach in LLMs toTABLE II
PASS@1(%)ON THE HUMAN EVAL AND HUMAN EVAL+DATASETS
HumanEval HumanEval+
Original PI NG PI NG w/o Finetuning Original PI NG PI NG w/o Finetuning
INCODER -6B 16.5 29.9 13.4↑ 26.2 9.7↑ 12.2 25.6 13.4↑ 23.8 11.6↑
CODEGEN-MONO-16B 29.9 43.9 14.0↑ 41.5 11.6↑ 28.0 41.5 13.5↑ 40.2 12.2↑
CODE -DAVINCI -002 46.3 63.4 17.1↑ 63.4 17.1↑ 42.1 59.1 17.0↑ 59.1 17.0↑
DEEPSEEK-CODER -6.7B 74.4 79.9 5.5↑ 78.7 4.3↑ 70.7 76.2 5.5↑ 74.4 3.7↑
TABLE III
PASS@1(%)ON THE MBPP AND MBPP+ DATASETS
MBPP MBPP+
Original PI NG PI NG w/o Finetuning Original PI NG PI NG w/o Finetuning
INCODER -6B 19.7 30.3 10.6↑ 27.5 7.8↑ 16.9 26.8 9.9↑ 24.6 7.7↑
CODEGEN-MONO-16B 35.2 45.8 10.6↑ 45.1 9.9↑ 33.1 44.4 11.3↑ 43.0 9.9↑
CODE -DAVINCI -002 58.5 69.0 10.5↑ 69.0 10.5↑ 50.7 63.4 12.7↑ 63.4 12.7↑
DEEPSEEK-CODER -6.7B 73.2 78.2 5.0↑ 76.8 3.6↑ 64.1 69.7 5.6↑ 67.6 3.5↑
TABLE IV
PASS@1RATES ACROSS MULTIPLE ITERATIONS ON HUMAN EVAL
HumanEval
Original 1 iteration 2 iterations 3 iterations
INCODER -6B 16.5 26.2 9.7↑ 31.1 4.9↑ 34.1 3.0↑
CODEGEN-MONO-16B 29.9 41.5 11.6↑ 45.7 4.2↑ 48.2 2.5↑
CODE -DAVINCI -002 46.3 63.4 17.1↑ 67.7 4.3↑ 70.1 2.4↑
DEEPSEEK-CODER -6.7B 74.4 78.7 4.3↑ 81.7 3.0↑ 83.5 1.8↑
enhance LLMs’ understanding and handling of complex
code generation tasks.
•Self-Debugging [19]. Self-Debugging empowers LLMs
to perform rubber duck debugging on their own generated
code via few-shot demonstrations, natural language code
explanation, and execution analysis.
•SCoT [33]. SCoT improves traditional Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting by incorporating the program structures
to obtain structured CoTs, which leads to more organized
and efficient code generation.
•CodeChain [34]. CodeChain prompts LLMs to generate
modular code and refine it via self-revisions. It boosts
accuracy by extracting, clustering, and reusing code sub-
modules, emulating expert programming practices.
For RQ3, we evaluated how PI NG performs with a different
comment generation model, Seq2Seq [54]. Prior research has
validated Seq2Seq’s effectiveness in generating inline com-
ments [55]. We compared the pass@ 1rates when using the
proposed CodeBERT model and the Seq2Seq model.
V. E XPERIMENT RESULTS
A. RQ1: Effectiveness on Different Code Generation Models
Table II shows the pass@ 1results after a single refinement
iteration of PI NG across different LLMs on both HumanEval
and its more rigorous version, HumanEval+. Similarly, Table
III shows the pass@ 1results after a single refinement iteration
of PI NG on MBPP and its more rigorous version, MBPP+.Results shown in Table II reveal significant improvements
in code generation accuracy through just one iteration of
refinement. For instance, the code-davinci-002 model shows a
remarkable improvement on the HumanEval dataset, with the
pass@ 1rate improved from 46.3% to 63.4%. This enhance-
ment highlights the significant influence of focused, iterative
feedback in correcting model misconceptions.
Similar patterns of improvement were discernible across
other models, including InCoder and CodeGen. Notably, In-
Coder’s performance on the HumanEval dataset ascended from
16.5% to 29.9%, while CodeGen’s accuracy experienced a
boost from 35.2% to 45.8% on the MBPP benchmark. These
improvements again confirm the effectiveness of incorporating
human insights into the code generation process.
The overarching findings from our investigation affirm the
critical role of human feedback in guiding LLMs toward syn-
thesizing more functionally accurate programs. The consistent
improvements across different models further validate the hy-
pothesis that collaborative interaction is key to effectively ad-
dressing the challenges of code generation. This collaborative
paradigm facilitates a model’s ability to dynamically adjust its
outputs based on constructive feedback, thereby incrementally
moving closer to generating error-free, functional code.
We also conducted experiments to explore how extending
the interactive refinement process beyond a single iteration im-
pacts the improvements in code generation. Table IV demon-
strates a consistent pattern of improvement across all evalu-
ated models, with each additional iteration yielding positive
gains, albeit at a diminishing rate. For instance, the InCoder
model shows a continuous gain from a baseline of 16.5% to
34.1% after three iterations, marking a total improvement of
17.6%. Similarly, the CodeGen model’s performance ascends
progressively, culminating in a 48.2% pass@ 1rate, while the
code-davinci-002 model reaches a peak of 70.1%.
In summary, our analysis of both single and multiple
iterations of interactive refinement reveals a clear trajectory
of improvement in code generation accuracy. The gains wereTABLE V
COMPARISON OF PINGWITH OTHER CODE GENERATION APPROACHES ON
HUMAN EVAL AND MBPP BENCHMARKS
HumanEval MBPP
Pass@1 Time (sec) Pass@1 Time (sec)
ReAct [29] 56.7 50.8 66.9 42.6
ToT [30] 54.3 62.4 65.5 51.3
RAP [31] 62.8 59.6 70.4 50.9
Self-Edit [32] 62.2 40.1 56.3 35.7
Self-Planning [28] 65.2 37.8 58.5 34.5
Self-Debugging [19] 61.6 42.7 59.9 36.1
SCOT [33] 61.0 48.2 46.5 44.2
CodeChain [34] 62.8 64.5 59.2 58.7
PING 65.9 35.2 71.1 29.3
consistent across diverse model architectures, showing col-
laboration is vital for complex code generation. The findings
highlight the efficacy of human feedback in guiding LLMs to-
ward higher accuracy levels, affirming the value of interactive
approaches in code generation.
Finding 1: PING significantly improves the code gen-
eration capability of four different LLMs on multiple
benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of comment-
level code refinement.
B. RQ2: Comparison to Other Prompting Approaches
Table V shows the pass@ 1results of different code gener-
ation and refinement methods on the HumanEval benchmark.
Note that the results on PI NG in this table are only based
on one iteration of human feedback. The results highlight
the performance of our approach, PI NG, compared to other
leading LLM-based approaches in code generation.
Table V demonstrates that PI NG not only performs compet-
itively but also surpasses other approaches on both HumanEval
and MBPP benchmarks. It proves to be a highly effective
approach for addressing the complexities of code generation
and refinement with pass@ 1of 65.9 and 71.1, respectively.
On the HumanEval benchmark, PI NG’s leading score of
65.9 marks a notable advancement in code generation, exceed-
ing Self-Planning, the closest competitor. This performance
illustrates PI NG’s effectiveness in producing correct code from
natural language task descriptions. Similarly, on the MBPP
benchmark, PI NG outperforms RAP, demonstrating superior
refinement capabilities by integrating human feedback. This
success is largely due to PI NG’s innovative use of inline
comments to align generated code with user intent for more
precise code refinement.
Finding 2: PING outperformed state-of-the-art code gen-
eration and refinement methods, demonstrating its effec-
tiveness in leveraging human feedback for more accurate
and contextualized code refinement.
C. RQ3: Sensitivity to Code Comment Generation Models
Table VI compares the pass@ 1rates of PI NG on different
LLMs when CodeBERT vs. Seq2Seq as the code comment
generation model. The results reveal an advantage in favor ofTABLE VI
PASS@1WITH DIFFERENT COMMENT GENERATION MODELS ON THE
HUMAN EVAL DATASET
Original Seq2Seq CodeBERT
INCODER -6B 16.5 23.8 7.3↑ 26.2 9.7↑
CODEGEN-MONO-16B 29.9 39.0 9.1↑ 41.5 11.6↑
CODE -DAVINCI -002 46.3 60.4 14.1↑ 63.4 17.1↑
using CodeBERT over Seq2Seq across all LLMs. However,
the impact of using different code comment generation models
is not significant for all three LLMs—around 2% to 3%
differences in pass@ 1. This implies that while using a better
comment generation model can contribute to the refinement
process, the advantage of PI NG is more pronounced by lever-
aging human feedback to refine code comments. Even with the
suboptimal Seq2Seq model, the pass@ 1improvements over
the original LLMs are around 7% to 14%.
In addition to measuring the impact of the code comment
model on pass@ 1, we further measured the accuracy of the
CodeBERT model. Due to the lack of ground-truth comments,
the same two annotators from Section IV-B sampled 385 code-
comment pairs from the simulation dataset and categorized the
comments into three accuracy levels: fully accurate ,largely
accurate but with missing information , and contain wrong
information . This sample size is statistically significant with
a 95% confidence level and a margin of error of 5%. The
annotators followed a similar data annotation process as in
Section IV-B to first have a 1-hour session to go over 25
code-comment pairs together. Then, they independently an-
notated half of the remaining 360 pairs and exchanged their
annotations for validation. The initial agreement between the
two annotators is 0.76 in terms of Cohen’s Kappa, indicating
a substantial agreement level [53]. Then, they discussed the
disagreements to achieve a consensus.
Among 385 code-comment pairs, the majority (72%) of
comments generated by PI NG are fully correct. 12% of the
comments are largely correct but with missing information,
while 16% contain wrong information. Given that PI NG only
regenerates the code for user-revised comments, missing or
wrong information in other unchanged comments has little
impact on the regenerated code. Yet we acknowledge that
they may confuse or distract developers, since developers may
spend extra time scrutinizing the code and comments to figure
out whether the missing information is because of incorrect
code or simply a comment generation error.
Finding 3: PING’s performance is not significantly im-
pacted by the choice of comment generation model, il-
lustrating its robustness and the primary value of iterative
human feedback in enhancing code generation accuracy.
D. RQ4: The Impact of Finetuning
RQ4 investigates how fine-tuning the code refinement model
affects the code generation accuracy of PI NG. Column PING
and Column PING w/o Finetuning in Table II and III comparethe results of PI NG with a fine-tuned code refinement model
against its performance without fine-tuning.
Both the InCoder and CodeGen models show notable im-
provements in pass@ 1rates on both datasets with fine-tuning.
InCoder’s performance increased by 3.7% on HumanEval
and 2.8% on MBPP, while CodeGen saw a 2.4% gain on
HumanEval. These results highlight the effectiveness of fine-
tuning in enhancing code refinement accuracy and understand-
ing of user intent.
Finding 4: Fine-tuning code generation models enhances
code refinement accuracy, with our PI NG approach yield-
ing marked improvements over baselines and fine-tuning
offering additional performance boosts.
VI. U SERSTUDY
To evaluate the real-world utility and usability of our
grounding-based approach, we utilize our integrated extension
for Visual Studio Code to conduct a within-subjects user
study with 12 participants, including both college students and
professional programmers. This study aims to investigate the
following research question:
•RQ5: How useful is our interactive approach to real
programmers in practice?
A. Participants
We recruited 12 participants (10 males, 2 females) from
a diverse background, comprising 2 graduate students, and
10 professional developers. They were recruited by emailing
student mailing lists at an R1 university and reaching out to ex-
perienced software developers through our personal network. 2
had 1-2 years of Python experience (early intermediate), 5 had
3-5 years of experience (late intermediate), and 5 participants
had over 5 years of Python experience (expert). This choice
allows us to assess how well our grounding-based approach
performs across a spectrum of Python expertise.
B. Task
Our task selection was inspired by the programming tasks
used by Xu et al. [56] and Vaithilingam et al. [11]. We first
categorized the TranX Developer Study tasks [56] and tasks
from the DS-1000 benchmark [57] into different common
programming task types. We then employed stratified random
sampling from the two datasets. This process resulted in a pool
of 6 code generation tasks with different types, including File
I/O, OS, Web Scraping, Web Server & Client, Data Analysis,
and Data Visualization. The ground-truth code for those tasks
ranges from 15 LOC to 50 LOC.
C. Comparison Baselines
In addition to PI NG, we used GitHub Copilot [35] and
Multi-Turn Program Synthesis (Multi-Turn for short from
henceforth) [36] as comparison baselines. GitHub Copilot,
powered by Codex, is an AI assistant that suggests code
completions but lacks explicit repair feedback loops. Multi-
Turn is a paradigm that decomposes code generation into steps,where the model generates subprograms in response to natural
language instructions. Here, users can only accept the gener-
ated code and provide further instructions for subsequent steps.
The individually generated subprograms are concatenated into
a single, complete program as the final generated program.
GitHub Copilot offers continuous code generation without
direct feedback mechanisms, while Multi-Turn enables task
decomposition and multi-turn interaction without any chances
for refinement. We used the VSCode extension of GitHub
Copilot for our studies. For Multi-Turn, since it originally
lacked a VSCode extension, we developed one with a similar
user interface to PI NG’s to ensure a fair comparison.
D. Procedure
Our study employed a within-subjects design to directly
compare PI NG with two comparison baselines. The whole
study lasted about 100-115 minutes.
Participants first received an overview of the procedure,
completed a consent form, and filled out a pre-study question-
naire that collected their background information. Then, each
study was divided into three sessions, with each focusing on
a specific code generation tool.
During these sessions, participants were asked to use the
designated tool to tackle the assigned programming task within
20 minutes. To minimize learning effects, the assignment
orders of both tasks and tools are counterbalanced across
participants to ensure that each task-tool pair has the same
number of trials. In each study, a participant was required to
use all three different tools on three different tasks, with the
ordering of the three task-tool pairs randomized.
Each session began with a tutorial video about the particular
tool in focus. A subsequent 5-minute practice period allowed
participants to get familiar with the tool before delving into the
actual tasks. For each task, participants were asked to study
its task description and use the tool to generate the code first.
Participants could review the code and then use the tool’s
interactive features to refine it until they deemed the code to
be correct. Participants are allowed to adopt any approaches
to verify the correctness of their current programs, including
writing unit tests. If participants found a task too challenging,
they could choose to skip it.
After each session, participants filled out a post-task ques-
tionnaire to assess confidence in their final code, perceived
success rates, and five different cognitive load questions from
NASA TLX [58]. After wrapping up all sessions, participants
completed a final survey to compare their experiences of
using these three tools. We record all the screen activities
for playback to aid in discussing observed behaviors. All the
systems logged interaction events, including code editing and
comment editing, to analyze participants’ behavior patterns.
E. User Performance Results
As shown in Figure 4, 10 of 12 participants successfully
solved the assigned programming task using PI NG within the
given time. In comparison, 8 participants solved the given task
with GitHub Copilot, and 3 with Multi-Turn. Compared toPInG Copilot Multi-TurnParticipant Count10
 8
 3
PInG Copilot Multi-TurnAverage # of iterations4.65.16.7Fig. 4. The number of participants whose final code was functionally correct
and the average number of iterations these participants took.
TABLE VII
THE AVERAGE TASK COMPLETION TIME (INMINUTES )
Task Type PInG GitHub Copilot Multi-Turn
File I/O 9.6 10.8 15.2
OS 13.7 16.2 18.8
Web Scraping 16.3 19.4 20
Web Server & Client 19.7 20 20
Data Analysis 11.5 13.6 20
Data Visualization 17.1 18.2 20
Average 14.65 16.37 19
GitHub Copilot and Multi-Turn, PI NG improved the success
rate by 16.7% and 58.3%, respectively. It showcases the
effectiveness of solving programming tasks by using inline
comments to guide code generation.
Table VII compares task completion times across different
tools. On average, participants finished their tasks 10.5%
and 22.9% faster with PI NG when compared to GitHub
Copilot and Multi-Turn, respectively. We further analyzed the
average number of iterations participants tried to complete
the given programming task with the assigned tool. Figure
4 shows these results. On average, participants using PI NG
required fewer iterations (4.6) compared to GitHub Copilot
(5.1) and Multi-Turn (6.7) to complete a programming task.
This highlights how leveraging comments as a communication
vehicle between users and LLMs improves the efficiency of
identifying and resolving errors in LLM-generated code.
Although our study did not prohibit participants from writ-
ing unit tests, we observed that most participants chose not to
write tests during the task. Instead, they relied on the inline
comments generated by PI NG to inspect and understand code
functionality quickly and effectively. At the end of each task,
some participants opted to write one or two unit tests to
double-check the correctness of their final code. This reflects a
practical balance between immediate, comment-driven insights
and traditional unit testing for comprehensive validation.
F . User Confidence and Cognitive Overhead Result
In the post-study survey, participants self-reported their
confidence in solving the given programming task on a 7-point
scale (1—very low confidence, 7—very high confidence).
Notably, 9 of 12 participants agreed or strongly agreed that
PING helped generate code that aligned with their intent,
compared to 7 participants for GitHub Copilot and just 1
for Multi-Turn. Furthermore, PI NG significantly enhances
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Strongly disagree                Neutral                   Strongly agree
Participant Count1 134
3
12
14
3
15
4
1 1 1
median: 6.0 median: 5.0 median: 2.0I felt confident about the code generated using the assigned tool.
 PInG 
 Copilot 
 Multi-Turn Fig. 5. The distribution of participants’ confidence in the final code generated
using the assigned tools.
Mental Demand Temporal Demand Performance Effort Frustration1234567PInG Copilot Multi-Turn
Fig. 6. The distribution of participants’ cognitive load when solving the given
programming tasks with the assigned tools.
developers’ confidence in auto-generated patches. As shown
in Figure 5, 7 participants agreed or strongly agreed that they
felt confident about the generated code when using PI NG.
In contrast, only 4 and 1 participant felt so when using
GitHub Copilot and Multi-Turn, respectively. This can be
largely attributed to PI NG’s interactive refinement process,
which empowers users to iteratively refine the generated code
through inline comments, offering a more transparent and
controlled development experience. This stark contrast in user
confidence levels underscores the value of PI NG’s approach,
emphasizing the importance of a feedback loop in fostering
trust and satisfaction with AI-generated code.
As shown in Figure 6, solving programming tasks with
PING generally leads to a better user experience across all five
cognitive load metrics compared to using Multi-Turn. Three
of the five metrics show statistically significant differences
between using PI NG and Multi-Turn based on the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test ( Performance :p= 0.047,Effort :p= 0.038,
and Frustration :p= 0.022). This shows the benefits of
using comments as the communication vehicle between users
and LLMs. Compared to Copilot, PI NG slightly reduces the
programming workload in terms of Mental Demand ,Tempo-
ral Demand ,Performance , and Frustration . However, these
differences are not statistically significant.
Additionally, the user study shows our interactive approach
assists real-world programming in multiple ways. For simple
tasks, 67% of the participants directly used the code with
minor edits. For complex tasks, while extensive changes were
required, over 83% agreed the generated code gave usefulTABLE VIII
THE SUCCESS RATES ACROSS THREE DIFFICULTY LEVELS
PInG GitHub Copilot Multi-Turn
Easy 4/4 4/4 2/4
Medium 4/4 3/4 1/4
Hard 2/4 1/4 0/4
structural scaffolds to build on. 75% of them reported that
the inline comments enabled quickly identifying and fixing
erroneous portions rather than debugging from scratch. On
average, from 2-3 iterations, participants felt the code matched
specifications sufficiently to serve as a quality starting point.
G. Impact of Task Difficulty Level
We categorized the programming tasks into three levels:
easy, medium, and hard. Each level contains two tasks, which
are classified based on the lines of code (LOC) in the ground
truth code for each task. Tasks File I/O (16 LOC) and Data
Analysis (22 LOC) are categorized as easy tasks. Tasks OS
(27 LOC) and Web Scraping (37 LOC) are categorized as
medium. Tasks Web Server & Client (46 LOC) and Data
Visualization (51 LOC) are categorized as hard.
Table VIII shows the success rates for each difficulty level of
programming tasks. We observe that participants using PI NG
outperform those using the other two tools in medium and hard
tasks. In easy tasks, PI NG and GitHub Copilot demonstrate
equivalent success rates, both outperforming Multi-Turn. Table
IX shows the average task completion time for each difficulty
level. PI NG consistently saves time compared with GitHub
Copilot and Multi-Turn across all difficulty levels.
H. Impact of User’s Programming Expertise
The impact of programming expertise on solving program-
ming tasks with code generation tools is noteworthy. Table X
shows the success rates of participants with different levels of
programming expertise and Table XI shows how participants’
years of Python experience influenced their task completion
time. Participants using PI NG perform better than those using
the other two tools in hard tasks in terms of both success rates
and average completion time. For easy and medium tasks,
PING and GitHub Copilot show similar success rates, both
significantly outperforming Multi-Turn. PI NG also saves much
time over the other two tools in medium tasks. Surprisingly,
we observed that programmers with 1-2 years of Python
experience completed tasks faster using GitHub Copilot than
with PI NG. This result suggests two potential reasons. One
is that our tool might not be as beneficial for novices, who
may struggle with reading code comments and understanding
complex logic in natural language. The other one can be the
small sample size of only two participants with 1-2 years of
Python experience, which could make this result a coincidence.
Overall, compared to programmers with less programming
experience, those with longer programming experience solved
the tasks faster across the three code generation tools, which
is consistent with our intuition.TABLE IX
THE AVERAGE TASK COMPLETION TIME FOR EACH DIFFICULTY LEVEL
PInG GitHub Copilot Multi-Turn
Easy 10.5 12.2 17.6
Medium 15.0 17.8 19.4
Hard 18.4 19.1 20
TABLE X
THE SUCCESS RATES OF PARTICIPANTS WITH DIFFERENT LEVELS OF
PROGRAMMING EXPERTISE
PInG GitHub Copilot Multi-Turn
1-2 Years 1/2 1/2 0/2
2-5 Years 4/5 4/5 1/5
Over 5 Years 5/5 3/5 2/5
VII. L IMITATION AND FUTURE WORK
The results of our experiments demonstrate the potential
for grounding-based interaction to significantly improve the
accuracy and reliability of neural code generation models.
Our approach, which leverages user feedback through inline
comment editing, fosters a collaborative process of iterative
alignment between the model’s output and the user’s intent.
It underscores the synergy of human insights and model
capabilities and thus makes code generation more reliable and
adaptable through mutual grounding.
An interesting area for further analysis is studying the
patterns in user edits that prove most effective for code refine-
ment. Certain types of edits to comments, such as specifying
additional conditions, correcting logical errors, or clarifying
algorithm steps, may be particularly influential in guiding the
model towards more accurate code refinement. Identifying and
categorizing these high-leverage edits could inform techniques
for eliciting more targeted feedback from users.
The comment generation and editing interface could also
be enhanced to further optimize the grounding process. For
example, highlighting model uncertainty and providing editing
guidance could help users identify high-impact refinements
more easily. Optimizing the cycle time between edits and
regeneration could also affect overall productivity.
When applying PI NG to complex codebases, generating
inline comments for each statement may make complex code
look more overwhelming. This could hinder code readability,
counter to clean code principles that emphasize simplicity and
minimalism in annotations [59]. However, compared to simple
code, complex code also benefits more from having detailed
comments to facilitate program comprehension. We propose a
couple of solutions to mitigate the negative effect of generating
statement-level comments. First, we can allow users to hide all
comments by default and only display the comments for the
statements they do not understand. Second, we can develop a
more advanced method that groups closely related statements
to a block and only generates one comment for that block to
reduce the number of comments.TABLE XI
THE AVERAGE TASK COMPLETION TIME (IN MINUTES )OF PARTICIPANTS
WITH DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PROGRAMMING EXPERTISE
PInG GitHub Copilot Multi-Turn
1-2 Years 17.8 17.5 20
2-5 Years 14.7 16.1 19.5
Over 5 Years 13.3 16.2 18.1
In addition, our user study did not differentiate between
participants who were previously familiar with the assigned
programming tasks and those encountering them for the first
time. Given that task familiarity could influence cognitive load
and problem-solving strategies, as noted by Barke et al. [22],
future work should incorporate this variable.
VIII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
A threat to internal validity is that our user feedback
collected in the simulated user study was constructed by
two experienced developers. The patterns in refinements and
resulting accuracy improvements on this synthetic dataset may
not fully reflect real-world usefulness. Our user study provides
some mitigation by demonstrating productivity improvements
with real users. However, the study was limited in scale and
duration. More rigorous in-situ analysis is required to ascertain
long-term productivity over continued tool usage.
Additionally, in our user study, we did not schedule breaks
between tasks for participants. Executing tasks continuously
without breaks may lead to fatigue among participants, po-
tentially affecting their performance and the internal validity
of our findings. Future studies should consider incorporating
adequate breaks or spreading tasks across multiple sessions.
In terms of external validity, we only experimented with
Python code generation, which may not generalize to other
languages. Our set of models was also not exhaustive, so
the benefits of grounding-based interaction for other model
architectures are not fully characterized. The approach may
be more or less effective for very small or very large models.
IX. R ELATED WORK
In recent years, large language models have demonstrated
unprecedented performance on code generation tasks [7], [9],
[36], [47], [50], [52], [60], [61]. While these models share sim-
ilar transformer architectures, they vary in training objectives,
training datasets, and model sizes. For instance, Codex [7]
is pre-trained on general text corpora like other GPT models
and then fine-tuned on 54 million public software repositories
hosted on GitHub. StarCoder [9] is pre-trained on a multi-
lingual code corpus called Stack [48] and then fine-tuned on a
Python-only code corpus. Furthermore, compared with Codex,
which only uses next token prediction as the training objective,
StarCoder also utilizes an additional training objective called
fill-in-the-middle [62]. More recently, Magicoder [61] demon-
strates that using LLMs to generate code instructions based
on open-source code and then using them to fine-tune LLMs
can significantly improve their code generation capability.Among the various approaches of improving LLMs for code
generation, the most related to us are the prompting methods
for code generation and refinement [16], [19], [28]–[31], [31]–
[34]. For instance, Self-Debugging [19] prompts LLMs to
perform iterative debugging on the generated code based on
test execution results and code explanations. However, unlike
our approach, they generated high-level code explanations
rather than inline code comments at the statement level. Our
evaluation shows that inline comments can serve as a more
effective method for grounding developer intent for code
refinement, even when unit tests are not available.
In addition to test cases and code explanations, Nijkamp et
al. [36] proposed a multi-step code generation paradigm where
developers can express their intent step by step in a multi-turn
dialogue with an LLM. Some approaches aim to automate
this by using the same LLM for task decomposition or
planning [28]–[31]. In these prompting paradigms, a developer
or an agent needs to proactively decompose a task into smaller
tasks to more precisely guide an LLM for code generation. By
contrast, our work focuses on bi-directional communication
where an agent explains the code to a developer, a developer
pinpoints which part of the code is wrong, and the agent refines
the erroneous part of the code accordingly.
Overall, our work differs from existing techniques by utiliz-
ing inline comments as a fine-grained grounding mechanism
for code refinement. Furthermore, we have also developed
specialized models for code comment generation and code
refinement, rather than relying on the latent capabilities of
LLMs for these specialized tasks. Our evaluation shows that
developing such specialized models via fine-tuning is nec-
essary given the distribution shift between the pre-training
dataset and the targeted tasks.
X. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced an interactive pipeline to
facilitate the grounding of code generation models to user
intent through inline comment editing, which helps direct the
code regeneration process to better match user expectations.
Experiments with multiple code generation models on two
popular benchmarks reveal notable improvements in code
generation accuracy when performing grounding-based code
refinement. Moreover, a user study shows productivity and
usability benefits when compared to alternative code gener-
ation paradigms. Our approach enhances code generation to
be more aligned with user intent, making the process more
manageable. It highlights the synergy between human insights
and models for improving code generation, suggesting future
enhancements in human-AI collaboration research.
XI. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
feedback, as well as for the considerable time and effort they
spent reviewing our work. We also thank the participants of
the user studies for their valuable contributions and comments.
This work was supported in part by NSF grants ITE-2333736
and CCF-2340408.REFERENCES
[1] R. J. Waldinger and R. C. Lee, “Prow: A step toward automatic program
writing,” in Proceedings of the 1st international joint conference on
Artificial intelligence , 1969, pp. 241–252.
[2] P. D. Summers, “A methodology for lisp program construction from
examples,” Journal of the ACM (JACM) , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 161–175,
1977.
[3] R. M. Burstall and J. Darlington, “A transformation system for devel-
oping recursive programs,” Journal of the ACM (JACM) , vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 44–67, 1977.
[4] Z. Manna and R. Waldinger, “Synthesis: dreams →programs,” IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering , no. 4, pp. 294–328, 1979.
[5] ——, “A deductive approach to program synthesis,” ACM Transactions
on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS) , vol. 2, no. 1, pp.
90–121, 1980.
[6] D. R. Smith, “Top-down synthesis of divide-and-conquer algorithms,”
Artificial Intelligence , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 43–96, 1985.
[7] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan,
H. Edwards, Y . Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman et al. , “Evaluating large
language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 ,
2021.
[8] Y . Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, J. Schrittwieser, R. Leblond,
T. Eccles, J. Keeling, F. Gimeno, A. Dal Lago et al. , “Competition-
level code generation with alphacode,” Science , vol. 378, no. 6624, pp.
1092–1097, 2022.
[9] R. Li, Y . Zi, N. Muennighoff, D. Kocetkov, C. Mou, M. Marone,
C. Akiki, L. Jia, J. Chim, Q. Liu et al. , “Starcoder: may the source
be with you!” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023.
[10] B. Kou, S. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Ma, and T. Zhang, “Do large language
models pay similar attention like human programmers when generating
code?” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 1, no.
FSE, pp. 2261–2284, 2024.
[11] P. Vaithilingam, T. Zhang, and E. L. Glassman, “Expectation vs. experi-
ence: Evaluating the usability of code generation tools powered by large
language models,” in Chi conference on human factors in computing
systems extended abstracts , 2022, pp. 1–7.
[12] H. Yu, B. Shen, D. Ran, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y . Ma, G. Liang, Y . Li,
Q. Wang, and T. Xie, “Codereval: A benchmark of pragmatic code
generation with generative pre-trained models,” in Proceedings of the
46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering ,
2024, pp. 1–12.
[13] Z. Z. Wang, A. Asai, X. V . Yu, F. F. Xu, Y . Xie, G. Neubig, and
D. Fried, “Coderag-bench: Can retrieval augment code generation?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14497 , 2024.
[14] Z. Wang, Z. Zhou, D. Song, Y . Huang, S. Chen, L. Ma, and T. Zhang,
“Where do large language models fail when generating code?” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.08731 , 2024.
[15] P. Haluptzok, M. Bowers, and A. T. Kalai, “Language models can teach
themselves to program better,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14502 , 2022.
[16] A. Chen, J. Scheurer, J. A. Campos, T. Korbak, J. S. Chan, S. R.
Bowman, K. Cho, and E. Perez, “Learning from natural language
feedback,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=xo3hI5MwvU
[17] C. Wang, Y . Yang, C. Gao, Y . Peng, H. Zhang, and M. R. Lyu, “No
more fine-tuning? an experimental evaluation of prompt tuning in code
intelligence,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering , 2022, pp. 382–394.
[18] Y . Choi and J.-H. Lee, “Codeprompt: Task-agnostic prefix tuning for
program and language generation,” in Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , 2023, pp. 5282–5297.
[19] X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Sch ¨arli, and D. Zhou, “Teaching large
language models to self-debug,” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=KuPixIqPiq
[20] Y . Dong, X. Jiang, Z. Jin, and G. Li, “Self-collaboration code generation
via chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07590 , 2023.
[21] C. Bird, D. Ford, T. Zimmermann, N. Forsgren, E. Kalliamvakou,
T. Lowdermilk, and I. Gazit, “Taking flight with copilot: Early in-
sights and opportunities of ai-powered pair-programming tools,” Queue ,
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 35–57, 2022.[22] S. Barke, M. B. James, and N. Polikarpova, “Grounded copilot: How
programmers interact with code-generating models,” Proceedings of the
ACM on Programming Languages , vol. 7, no. OOPSLA1, pp. 85–111,
2023.
[23] C.-W. Liu, R. Lowe, I. V . Serban, M. Noseworthy, L. Charlin, and
J. Pineau, “How not to evaluate your dialogue system: An empirical
study of unsupervised evaluation metrics for dialogue response genera-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08023 , 2016.
[24] Z. Tian, R. Yan, L. Mou, Y . Song, Y . Feng, and D. Zhao, “How to
make context more useful? an empirical study on context-aware neural
conversational models,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
2017, pp. 231–236.
[25] C. Sankar, S. Subramanian, C. Pal, S. Chandar, and Y . Bengio, “Do
neural dialog systems use the conversation history effectively? an
empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01603 , 2019.
[26] W. Zheng and K. Zhou, “Enhancing conversational dialogue models with
grounded knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , 2019, pp. 709–
718.
[27] L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, and S. D. Teasley, Perspectives on socially
shared cognition. American Psychological Association, 1991.
[28] X. Jiang, Y . Dong, L. Wang, Q. Shang, and G. Li, “Self-
planning code generation with large language model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.06689 , 2023.
[29] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y . Cao,
“React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022.
[30] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y . Cao, and
K. Narasimhan, “Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10601 , 2023.
[31] W. Wang, Y . Wang, S. Joty, and S. C. Hoi, “Rap-gen: Retrieval-
augmented patch generation with codet5 for automatic program repair,”
inProceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering ,
2023, pp. 146–158.
[32] K. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Li, G. Li, and Z. Jin, “Self-edit: Fault-aware code
editor for code generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04087 , 2023.
[33] J. Li, G. Li, Y . Li, and Z. Jin, “Enabling programming thinking
in large language models toward code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06599 , 2023.
[34] H. Le, H. Chen, A. Saha, A. Gokul, D. Sahoo, and S. Joty, “Codechain:
Towards modular code generation through chain of self-revisions with
representative sub-modules,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08992 , 2023.
[35] “GitHub Copilot · Your AI pair programmer,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/features/copilot
[36] E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y . Zhou, S. Savarese,
and C. Xiong, “Codegen: An open large language model for code with
multi-turn program synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474 , 2022.
[37] H. H. Clark and E. F. Schaefer, “Contributing to discourse,” Cognitive
science , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 259–294, 1989.
[38] H. H. Clark and G. L. Murphy, “Audience design in meaning and
reference,” in Advances in psychology . Elsevier, 1982, vol. 9, pp. 287–
299.
[39] S. E. Brennan and H. H. Clark, “Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in
conversation.” Journal of experimental psychology: Learning, memory,
and cognition , vol. 22, no. 6, p. 1482, 1996.
[40] E. A. Isaacs and H. H. Clark, “Ostensible invitations1,” Language in
society , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 493–509, 1990.
[41] Y . Zhang, S. Sun, M. Galley, Y .-C. Chen, C. Brockett, X. Gao, J. Gao,
J. Liu, and B. Dolan, “Dialogpt: Large-scale generative pre-training for
conversational response generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00536 ,
2019.
[42] K. R. Chandu, Y . Bisk, and A. W. Black, “Grounding’grounding’in nlp,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02192 , 2021.
[43] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong, L. Shou, B. Qin,
T. Liu, D. Jiang et al. , “Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming
and natural languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155 , 2020.
[44] S. Lu, D. Guo, S. Ren, J. Huang, A. Svyatkovskiy, A. Blanco,
C. Clement, D. Drain, D. Jiang, D. Tang et al. , “Codexglue: A machine
learning benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04664 , 2021.[45] H. Husain, H.-H. Wu, T. Gazit, M. Allamanis, and M. Brockschmidt,
“Codesearchnet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436 , 2019.
[46] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[47] D. Guo, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Xie, K. Dong, W. Zhang, G. Chen,
X. Bi, Y . Wu, Y . Li et al. , “Deepseek-coder: When the large language
model meets programming–the rise of code intelligence,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.14196 , 2024.
[48] D. Kocetkov, R. Li, L. Ben Allal, J. Li, C. Mou, C. Mu ˜noz Ferrandis,
Y . Jernite, M. Mitchell, S. Hughes, T. Wolf, D. Bahdanau, L. von Werra,
and H. de Vries, “The stack: 3 tb of permissively licensed source code,”
Preprint , 2022.
[49] R. Rubinstein, “The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and contin-
uous optimization,” Methodology and computing in applied probability ,
vol. 1, pp. 127–190, 1999.
[50] J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, M. Bosma, H. Michalewski, D. Dohan,
E. Jiang, C. Cai, M. Terry, Q. Le et al. , “Program synthesis with large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 , 2021.
[51] Y . Liu, C. Tantithamthavorn, Y . Liu, and L. Li, “On the reliability and
explainability of automated code generation approaches,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.09587 , 2023.
[52] D. Fried, A. Aghajanyan, J. Lin, S. Wang, E. Wallace, F. Shi, R. Zhong,
W.-t. Yih, L. Zettlemoyer, and M. Lewis, “Incoder: A generative model
for code infilling and synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05999 , 2022.
[53] M. L. McHugh, “Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic,” Biochemia
medica , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 276–282, 2012.
[54] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” Advances in neural information processing
systems , vol. 27, 2014.
[55] Y . Huang, H. Guo, X. Ding, J. Shu, X. Chen, X. Luo, Z. Zheng, and
X. Zhou, “A comparative study on method comment and inline com-
ment,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology ,
vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1–26, 2023.
[56] F. F. Xu, B. Vasilescu, and G. Neubig, “In-ide code generation from
natural language: Promise and challenges. corr, abs/2101.11149 (2021),”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11149 , 2021.
[57] Y . Lai, C. Li, Y . Wang, T. Zhang, R. Zhong, L. Zettlemoyer, W.-
t. Yih, D. Fried, S. Wang, and T. Yu, “Ds-1000: A natural and
reliable benchmark for data science code generation,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 18 319–18 345.
[58] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland, “Development of nasa-tlx (task load
index): Results of empirical and theoretical research,” in Advances in
psychology . Elsevier, 1988, vol. 52, pp. 139–183.
[59] R. C. Martin, Clean code: a handbook of agile software craftsmanship .
Pearson Education, 2009.
[60] Z. Luo, C. Xu, P. Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Geng, W. Hu, C. Tao, J. Ma, Q. Lin,
and D. Jiang, “Wizardcoder: Empowering code large language models
with evol-instruct,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2023.
[61] Y . Wei, Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y . Ding, and L. Zhang, “Magicoder: Source
code is all you need,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02120 , 2023.
[62] M. Bavarian, H. Jun, N. Tezak, J. Schulman, C. McLeavey, J. Tworek,
and M. Chen, “Efficient training of language models to fill in the
middle,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14255 , 2022.