JUSTGen: Effective Test Generation for
Unspeciﬁed JNI Behaviors on JVMs
Sungjae Hwang
School of Computing
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
sjhwang87@kaist.ac.krSungho Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Chungnam National University
Daejeon, South Korea
eshaj@cnu.ac.krJihoon Kim
School of Computing
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
kjh618@kaist.ac.krSukyoung Ryu
School of Computing
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
sryu.cs@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract —Java Native Interface (JNI) provides a way for Java
applications to access native libraries, but it is difﬁcult to develop
correct JNI programs. By leveraging native code, the JNI enables
Java developers to implement efﬁcient applications and to reuse
code written in other programming languages such as C and C++.
Besides, the core Java libraries already use the JNI to provide
system features like a graphical user interface. As a result, many
mainstream Java Virtual Machines (JVMs) support the JNI.
However, due to the complex interoperation semantics between
different programming languages, implementing correct JNI
programs is not trivial. Moreover, because of the performance
overhead, JVMs do not validate erroneous JNI interoperations
by default, but they validate them only when the debug feature,
the-Xcheck:jni option, is enabled. Therefore, the correctness of
JNI programs highly relies on the checks by the -Xcheck:jni
option of JVMs. Questions remain, however, on the quality of the
checks provided by the feature. Are there any properties that the
-Xcheck:jni option fails to validate? If so, what potential issues
can arise due to the lack of such validation? To the best of our
knowledge, no research has explored these questions in-depth.
In this paper, we empirically study the validation quality and
impacts of the -Xcheck:jni option on mainstream JVMs using
unspeciﬁed corner cases in the JNI speciﬁcation. Such unspeciﬁed
cases may lead to unexpected run-time behaviors because their
semantics is not deﬁned in the speciﬁcation. For a systematic
study, we propose JUSTG EN, a semi-automated approach to
identify unspeciﬁed cases from a speciﬁcation and generate test
programs. JUSTG ENreceives the JNI speciﬁcation written in
our domain speciﬁc language (DSL), and automatically discovers
unspeciﬁed cases using an SMT solver. It then generates test
programs that trigger the behaviors of unspeciﬁed cases. Using
the generated tests, we empirically study the validation ability
of the -Xcheck:jni option. Our experimental result shows that
the JNI debug feature does not validate thousands of unspeciﬁed
cases on JVMs, and they can cause critical run-time errors such
as violation of the Java type system and memory corruption. We
reported 792 unspeciﬁed cases that are not validated by JVMs
to their corresponding JVM vendors. Among them, 563 cases
have been ﬁxed and the remaining cases will be ﬁxed in near
future. Based on our empirical study, we believe that the JNI
speciﬁcation should specify the semantics of the missing cases
clearly and the debug feature should be supported completely.
Index Terms—Java Native Interface, Java Virtual Machine,
Testing, Empirical Study, Debugging
I. I NTRODUCTION
Java developers use the Java Native Interface (JNI) in
various application domains including games and multimedia,
and mainstream Java Virtual Machines (JVMs) [1]–[4] supportthe JNI. The JNI is an interface that deﬁnes interoperation
between Java code and native code written in C or C++.
Using the JNI, developers can improve the performance of
programs by implementing performance-critical modules in
native code and composing them with Java modules into
a single program via the JNI. In addition, the JNI reduces
software development cost by allowing Java modules to reuse
existing native libraries.
However, building correct JNI programs is a difﬁcult task
due to the complex interoperation semantics between different
languages. In addition, because the JNI speciﬁcation does not
describe the interoperation semantics completely, the seman-
tics of numerous cases are unspeciﬁed, which may lead to
unexpected behaviors. Note that the JNI does not check for
programming errors for the following reasons [5]:
Forcing JNI functions to check for all possible
error conditions degrades the performance of
normal (correct) native methods.
In many cases, there is not enough run-time type
information to perform such checking.
While compilers can detect compile-time errors and provide
useful debug features for programs written in a single pro-
gramming language, they cannot ﬁnd bugs in interoperation
between Java and native code. Furthermore, no publicly avail-
able tools can detect such interoperation errors.
The JNI supports the -Xcheck:jni option to help developers
to diagnose problems in JNI programs, but the speciﬁcation
does not deﬁne its semantics clearly. The -Xcheck:jni option
is a command-line option that causes the VM to do additional
validation on the arguments passed to JNI functions [6], [7].
However, the additional validation is not well deﬁned:
Note: The option is not guaranteed to ﬁnd all invalid
arguments or diagnose logic bugs in the application
code, but it can help diagnose a large number of
such problems.
Because the speciﬁcation does not specify which problems
the option diagnoses, JNI programs may behave differently
on different JVMs depending on their implementation of the
option, which makes reasoning of JNI programs challenging.
In this paper, we study the semantics of the -Xcheck:jni
option and its impacts on mainstream JVMs. Our approach
17082021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00151
is to generate test programs for “unspeciﬁed cases,” which
are interoperation semantics that are not deﬁned in the JNI
speciﬁcation, to execute the test programs on JVMs with
the -Xcheck:jni option enabled, and to inspect the execution
results. Our study has two technical challenges: 1) how to
identify unspeciﬁed cases in the JNI speciﬁcation, and 2)
how to generate test programs that trigger the behaviors
of unspeciﬁed cases. For a systematic study, we propose
JUSTG EN, a semi-automated approach to identify unspeciﬁed
cases and generate test programs. We ﬁrst deﬁne a domain
speciﬁc language (DSL) that can express the JNI interoper-
ation semantics such as the return types and parameters of
JNI functions. Then, we manually transform the interoperation
semantics written in a natural language in Chapter 4 of the
JNI speciﬁcation [8] to a mechanized speciﬁcation expressed
in our DSL. Because the English phrases used to specify the
interoperation semantics are well structured and use speciﬁc
patterns, manually converting them to the DSL is considerably
straightforward. Then, JUSTG ENreceives the mechanized
speciﬁcation, automatically extracts unspeciﬁed cases from
the speciﬁcation, and generates test programs that provoke
them. JUSTG ENleverages an SMT solver to ﬁnd unspeciﬁed
cases by verifying whether the speciﬁcation describes all the
conditions of JNI function calls. If JUSTG ENidentiﬁes a
condition of a JNI function call that the speciﬁcation does
not describe, it considers the condition as an unspeciﬁed case.
For test code generation, JUSTG ENtakes an unspeciﬁed case
and synthesizes C code consisting of JNI function calls with
arguments that satisfy the conditions of the unspeciﬁed case. It
then compiles and links the synthesized C code with prepared
Java modules to generate an executable JNI program.
Using 34,990 test programs generated by JUSTG EN, we
empirically evaluated the -Xcheck:jni option on ﬁve main-
stream JVMs. Our study shows that thousands of unspeciﬁed
cases are not validated by JVMs, and they can cause critical
run-time errors such as run-time type errors and memory
corruption. In addition, we found a bug of the -Xcheck:jni
option, which leads to deadlock between multiple threads.
We also observed that the -Xcheck:jni option of HotSpot,
Zulu, Corretto, and GraalVM validate similar properties, but
OpenJ9 validates properties signiﬁcantly different from them.
We reported the problems of the -Xcheck:jni option to their
JVM vendors, and among 792 reported unspeciﬁed cases, 563
cases have been ﬁxed. The tool used for the empirical study
and the identiﬁed unspeciﬁed cases are publicly available1.
The contributions of this paper include the following:
We present an approach to identify unspeciﬁed cases
from a speciﬁcation and implement JUSTG ENthat
automatically identiﬁes them from a mechanized spec-
iﬁcation and generates test code provoking them. We
believe that JUSTG ENis applicable to other speciﬁca-
tions with only changes in test code generation.
We identify unspeciﬁed cases from the JNI speciﬁca-
tion. Describing the semantics of the identiﬁed unspeci-
1https://github.com/sjmini/justgen.1public class HelloJNI{
2 static { System.loadLibrary( "Hello" ); }
3 private native String foo();
4 public static void main(String[] args){
5 String n = new HelloJNI().foo();
6 ... }
7 private String name(){
8 return this .getClass().getName(); }
9}
(a) Java code
1jmethodID get_name_id(JNIEnv *env, jobject obj){
2 jclass cls = ( *env)->GetObjectClass(env, obj);
3 return (*env)->GetMethodID(env, cls, "name" ,
"()LJava/lang/String;" );
4}
5jstring Java_HelloJNI_foo(JNIEnv *env, jobject
thisObj){
6 jmethodID mid = get_name_id(env, thisObj);
7 return (*env)->CallObjectMethod(env, thisObj,
mid);
8}
(b) Normal JNI interoperation in C code
1jstring Java_HelloJNI_foo(JNIEnv *env, jobject
thisObj){
2 jmethodID mid = get_name_id(env, thisObj);
3 jcharArray arr = ( *env)->NewCharArray(env, 2);
4 return (*env)->CallObjectMethod(env, arr,
mid);
5}
(c) Unspeciﬁed JNI interoperation case in C code
Fig. 1: JNI code example for normal and unspeciﬁed behaviors
ﬁed cases in the JNI speciﬁcation would make consistent
behaviors of JNI programs on different JVMs.
It is the ﬁrst work that analyzes the quality of the
-Xcheck:jni option on ﬁve mainstream JVMs. Our
empirical study reports limitations of the -Xcheck:jni
option, and JVM vendors ﬁxed 563 among 792 reported
cases. We believe that our work would be helpful in
enhancing the quality of the JNI debug feature on JVMs,
which in turn improves the quality of JNI programs.
II. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
A. JNI Interoperation
The JNI is a foreign function interface that enables bidi-
rectional interoperation between Java and native applications.
Figure 1(a) shows Java code that has an entrypoint of a
JNI program, and Figure 1(b) shows C code compiled to
a native library Hello.so . In Java, a class HelloJNI has
two Java methods, main andname , and a native method
foo declared with the native keyword. The native method
is linked with a C function Java_HelloJNI_foo , when
executing the System.loadLibrary method at line 2. When
the program runs, the main method calls the native method
foo at line 5. Then, the JVM transfers the program control
to the entry of the linked C function Java_HelloJNI_foo .
In C code, the function Java_HelloJNI_foo calls the Java
1709method name via a sequence of three JNI function calls. At
line 6 in Figure 1(b), the C code obtains a Java method ID by
calling get_name_id deﬁned at line 1. The function calls the
GetObjectClass JNI function that takes a JNIEnv pointer
and a Java object and returns class information of the Java
object. Then, it calls GetMethodID to obtain a Java method
ID using the class information, a method name, and a method
signature. Using the method ID and the Java object, it calls the
Java method name via the CallObjectMethod JNI function.
B. Unspeciﬁed Cases and the JNI Debug Feature
Because JVMs do not validate argument values at run-time
due to its performance overhead, the unspeciﬁed cases may
lead to unexpected behaviors or even security vulnerabilities
like memory corruption. Figure 1(c) shows one unspeciﬁed
case for the JNI function CallObjectMethod . The function
Java_HelloJNI_foo gets an ID of the Java method name
via the get_name_id function as the same as (b). However,
at line 4, it tries to call the Java method name using a Java
character array object created at line 3 instead of the Java
object propagated from Java. The JNI speciﬁcation describes
the behavior of CallObjectMethod as follow [8]:
NativeType Call<type>Method(JNIEnv *env,
jobject obj, jmethodID methodID, ...);
Methods from these three families of operations are
used to call a Java instance method from a native
method.themethodID must be derived from the
real class of obj, not from one of its superclasses.
However, in the example, because the method ID is derived
from HelloJNI while a class of this is a character array,
its behavior is not speciﬁed, which can cause problems on
mainstream JVMs. For example, calling CallObjectMethod
at line 4 triggers a segmentation fault on the HotSpot JVM,
but executes normally on the OpenJ9 JVM producing a wrong
result. After normal execution, the variable nhas a string value
[Cat line 5 in (a), instead of HelloJNI , which is wrong in
the Java semantics, because a this object in a Java method
must be an instance of a class having the method.
To prevent segmentation faults or abnormal executions from
JVMs due to the unspeciﬁed JNI interoperation semantics,
the JNI provides a debug feature, the -Xcheck:jni option, but
it does not guarantee to ﬁnd all problems and its semantics
depends on the implementation on JVMs. The -Xcheck:jni
option enables JVMs to validate arguments passed to JNI
functions [7]. If argument values are not valid, JVMs stop
execution and report errors or warnings. For example, when
executing the example in Figure 1(c) on the OpenJ9 JVM with
the -Xcheck:jni option enabled, the JVM detects the invalid
argument and throws an exception with the error message: JNI
error in CallObjectMethod/CallObjectMethodV:
Ineligible receiver . However, because the debuggability
highly relies on JVMs, invalid interoperation in JNI programs
may still remain undiscovered after the debugging process,
which degrades the quality of JNI programs.
In this paper, we leverage unspeciﬁed cases to evaluate the
quality of the -Xcheck:jni option on mainstream JVMs. We be-lieve that unspeciﬁed cases are useful resources to evaluate the
-Xcheck:jni option since developers might have missed them
because they are not described in the speciﬁcation.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overview
To evaluate the quality of the -Xcheck:jni option, we
test JVMs with unspeciﬁed cases that are semi-automatically
extracted from the JNI speciﬁcation. Figure 2 presents an
overview of our testing approach consisting of two phases.
In the JNI Unspec. Code Generation Phase , JUSTG ENex-
tracts unspeciﬁed cases from the JNI speciﬁcation and gen-
erates test programs that provoke the behaviors of the un-
speciﬁed cases. Since the speciﬁcation is written in a natural
language that is not suitable for automated processing, our
ﬁrst step is to deﬁne a domain speciﬁc language (DSL) and
to manually transform the semantics in the speciﬁcation to a
mechanized speciﬁcation in the DSL. Then, Unspec. Extractor
discovers unspeciﬁed cases from the mechanized speciﬁcation
by utilizing an SMT solver. It encodes the mechanized speci-
ﬁcation as logical formula in a way that the SMT solver can
recognize, and leverages the SMT solver to determine whether
a formula is unsatisﬁable. If the formula is satisﬁable, the
SMT solver generates a counterexample of such a case. The
counterexample denotes an unspeciﬁed case with a possible
argument combination. Similar to CounterExample-Guided
Abstraction Reﬁnement (CEGAR) [9], Unspec. Extractor up-
dates the speciﬁcation by adding the identiﬁed unspeciﬁed
case, and repeats the above process until the formula becomes
unsatisﬁable. Among various SMT solvers, we used Z3 [10].
For each unspeciﬁed case, Test Code Generator automatically
generates a sequence of valid JNI function calls that triggers
the behavior of the unspeciﬁed case. Then, it composes the
JNI function calls with a Java and C template code that we
deﬁned.
In the JVM Testing Phase , we execute the generated test
programs on mainstream JVMs with the -Xcheck:jni option
enabled. Because different JVMs may produce different re-
sults, we manually inspect the test results and analyze the
capability of the debug feature of each JVM, and identify
potential hazards due to the lack of validation from JVMs.
B. JNI Speciﬁcation in a Domain Speciﬁc Language
For automatic processing of the JNI speciﬁcation, we deﬁne
a simple DSL to describe the behaviors of JNI functions.
Because the expected behaviors of JNI functions are deﬁned
in Chapter 4 of the JNI speciﬁcation [8], we manually trans-
formed them to a mechanized speciﬁcation expressed in the
DSL. Since the JNI function behaviors are written in a well-
structured phrases using speciﬁc patterns, manually converting
them to the DSL is considerably straightforward.
Figure 3 presents the DSL syntax. A speciﬁcation sis a
sequence of type declarations typedeft, a sequence of reﬁne-
ment predicate declarations refinedef t@p, and a sequence
of JNI function speciﬁcation d. Typestdenote types in the
1710Fig. 2: Overall structure of JVM testing with unspeciﬁed cases
rule{
type void SetIntArrayRegion(JNIEnv *, jintArray, jsize, jsize, jint *)
spec void SetIntArrayRegion(JNIEnv *, jintArray@NotNULL, jsize@ValidIndex, jsize@ValidIndex,
jint *@NotNULL)
unspec void SetIntArrayRegion(JNIEnv *, jintArray@isNULL, jsize@ValidIndex, jsize@ValidIndex,
jint *@NotNULL)
...
}Fig. 4: Example JNI function speciﬁcation in DSL
s:= typedeftrefinedef t@pd
d:= rule ftypet F(t) t[@r]?F(t[@r]?)g
:= spec junspec
r:=pjr^r
Fig. 3: Domain speciﬁc language to deﬁne the JNI semantics
C programming language including primitive types and pre-
deﬁned types for the JNI in jni.h . A reﬁnement predicate
pdenotes a predicate name, which returns whether an input
satisﬁes its condition. A reﬁnement type [11] t@pdenotes a
set of values that have the type tand satisfy the reﬁnement
predicatep. For example, a set of all negative integer values
is denoted as int@isNegative where isNegative is
a predicate returning whether an input is a negative integer.
A JNI function speciﬁcation dconsists of a JNI function
descriptor and a sequence of reﬁned function descriptors. A
JNI function descriptor typet F(t) denotes a return type t,
a JNI function name F, and a sequence of parameter types t.
A reﬁned function descriptor  t[@r]?F(t[@r]?)denotes an
optionally reﬁned return type t[@r]?, a JNI function name F,
and a sequence of optionally reﬁned parameter types t[@r]?
whereis either spec orunspec . A reﬁnement ris a
reﬁnement predicate por its conjunctions. For our research,
we deﬁned 38 types and 105 reﬁnement types [12], [13]. To
distinguish function descriptors JVMs do not verify return
values of JNI functions, but because we use return types in
test code generation as described in Section III-D, we include
return types in reﬁnement types. speciﬁed in the speciﬁcation
and those constructed while ﬁnding unspeciﬁed cases using
the SMT solver, we use spec for the former and unspec forthe latter.
Figure 4 shows an example JNI function speciﬁcation
in DSL. The JNI function SetIntArrayRegion takes a
JNI environment pointer JNIEnv *, a Java array of integers
jintArray , an integer value representing the start index of
an array jsize , an integer value indicating the number of
elements to be copied jsize , and the source buffer ( jint *).
The function copies a speciﬁed number of elements from
the source buffer to the Java array. According to the JNI
speciﬁcation, the Java array must not be NULL , the start
index and the number of elements must be greater than or
equal to zero, and the source buffer must not be NULL as
well. We transform the above speciﬁcation in the DSL as
thespec statement with reﬁnement predicates representing
the conditions for valid argument values. In this example,
NotNULL denotes that input values should not be NULL , and
ValideIndex denotes that input values must be greater than
or equal to zero. In addition to the spec statement, various
unspec statements are automatically generated in the process
of ﬁnding unspeciﬁed cases of the JNI function as we discuss
in the next subsection.
C. Finding Unspeciﬁed Behaviors with an SMT Solver
We leverage the Z3 SMT solver version 4.8.1 to ﬁnd
unspeciﬁed cases automatically from the mechanized JNI
speciﬁcation. To use the SMT solver, we convert the unspec-
iﬁed case ﬁnding problem to an SAT problem. For example,
for a JNI function speciﬁcation spect1@r1F(t2@r2), we
extract a boolean formula as follows: is there a reﬁned type
xthat is matched with the type t2but is not covered by
the speciﬁcation t2@r2? When the formula is satisﬁable,
the SMT solver produces an example satisﬁable cases; the
1711produced example is an unspeciﬁed case. Then, we update the
boolean formula including the unspeciﬁed case to ﬁnd another
unspeciﬁed case. We repeat the process to ﬁnd unspeciﬁed
cases until the boolean formula is not satisﬁable, which means
that no more unspeciﬁed cases exist.
1) Bit vector representation for JNI function speciﬁcation:
We use bit vectors to represent each JNI function speciﬁcation
in a boolean formula so that the SMT solver can manipulate
it. A JNI function speciﬁcation consists of a possibly reﬁned
return type, a function name, and a list of possibly reﬁned
parameter types. Since only the parameters determine the
behavior of the JNI function, we can encode a JNI function
speciﬁcation into a list of bit vectors where each bit vector
represents each possibly reﬁned parameter type.
Deﬁnition 1 (Bit vector representation):
(Type) Each typetis mapped to a unique bit vector
representation Bt.
(Reﬁnement predicate) For each reﬁned type t@r, each
reﬁnement predicate pinris mapped to a unique bit
vectorBpwhose on-bits do not overlap with other bit
vectors representing reﬁnement predicates of t.
(Reﬁnement) For a reﬁnement r=p1^:::^pn, its bit
vector representation is Br=Bp1jBpnwherejis the
bitwise OR operator.
(JNI function speciﬁcation) For a JNI function speciﬁca-
tiont1@r1F(t2@r2;:::;t n@rn), its bit vector represen-
tation is ((Bt2,Br2), ..., (Btn,Brn)) whereBtiandBri
are bit vector representations of tiandri, respectively.
One challenge for the bit vector representation is to deﬁne
subtype relations among types. While C does not have any
subtype relations between types, JNI reference types have a
type hierarchy that corresponds to the Java type hierarchy [14].
For example, because jstring is a subtype of jobject ,
a JNI function that takes a jobject argument can take a
jstring value as well.
We deﬁne a subtype relation (<:t) between two bit vectors
using the bitwise AND operator &. For the previous example,
we encode jobject andjstring into two different bit
vectors,BtoandBts, which satisfy Bto&Bts=Bto.
Deﬁnition 2 (Subtype relation): Assume that t1is a subtype
oft2andBt1andBt2are bit vector representations of t1and
t2, respectively. Then, a subtype relation Bt1<:tBt2is valid.
The subtype relation is equivalent to a boolean expression,
Bt1&Bt2=Bt2.
Similarly, we also deﬁne a subreﬁnement relation (<:r) be-
tween two bit vectors representing reﬁnements. A reﬁnement
r1is a subreﬁnement of another reﬁnement r2, when all the
reﬁnement predicates in r1are included in r2.
Deﬁnition 3 (Subreﬁnement relation): Assume that r1is a
subreﬁnement of r2andBr1andBr2are bit vector repre-
sentations of r1andr2, respectively. Then, a subreﬁnement
relationBr1<:rBr2is valid. The subreﬁnement relation is
equivalent to a boolean expression, Br1&Br2=Br2.
2) Satisﬁability for unspeciﬁed case ﬁnding: Using encoded
JNI function speciﬁcations, we convert each JNI function spec-
iﬁcation to a boolean formula to ﬁnd unspeciﬁed cases. Onecomplexity is that because most JNI functions take multiple
parameters, we should consider many parameter combinations.
For example, if a JNI function takes ﬁve parameters and
each parameter has ten reﬁned types, the number of possible
parameter combinations is 105, which is a huge search space.
For practicality, we handle each parameter independently to
reduce the search space. For a JNI function Fwithnparam-
eters, we make nfunctionsF1;;FnwhereFitakes only
thei-th parameter of F. Then, each function Figets converted
to a boolean formula, and the SMT solver ﬁnds unspeciﬁed
cases for each boolean formula independently. This approach
may miss some unspeciﬁed cases that are caused only by a
combination of multiple parameters. However, our experiments
showed that because most unspeciﬁed cases are due to a single
parameter, few such cases are missing.
After deﬁning four auxiliary deﬁnitions, we deﬁne a boolean
formula to check the satisﬁability of a JNI function parameter
using the auxiliary deﬁnitions. Note that we now consider only
such JNI functions that take one parameter.
Deﬁnition 4 (Complete reﬁnement): For each type t, its
complete reﬁnement bit vector is Bt
cthat is a conjunction of
all the reﬁnement predicates of t.
Deﬁnition 5 (Validity of reﬁned type): A bit vector rep-
resentation of a reﬁned type ( Btx,Brx) is valid for a type
t, ifBtx<:tBtandBrx<:rBt
c. A logical predicate
valid ((Btx;Brx);t)istrue only when ( Btx,Brx) isvalid for
the typet.
Deﬁnition 6 (Equivalent type satisiﬁability): A bit vector
representation of a reﬁned type ( Btx,Brx) is equivalent
type satisﬁable to another bit vector representation ( Bty,
Bry), iffBtx=BtyandBrx<:rBry. A logical predicate
sateq((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry))istrue only when ( Btx,Brx)
isequivalent type satisﬁable to (Bty,Bry).
Deﬁnition 7 (Subtype satisiﬁability): A bit vector rep-
resentation of a reﬁned type ( Btx,Brx) is subtype sat-
isﬁable to another bit vector representation ( Bty,Bry),
iffBtx<:tBtyandBtx6=Bty. A logical predicate
satsub((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry))istrue only when ( Btx,Brx)
issubtype satisﬁable to (Bty,Bry).
Using the auxiliary deﬁnitions, we deﬁne a boolean formula
for the parameter satisiﬁability solved by the SMT solver.
Assume that a JNI function declaration is t1F(t2)and the bit
vector representation of its speciﬁcation is ( Bty,Bry). Then,
we can deﬁne its satisﬁability problem as follows:
9(Btx;Brx): valid ((Btx;Brx);t2)!
:(sateq((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry))
_satsub((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry)))
The formula represents that there is a valid parameter ( Btx,
Brx) that is matched with the JNI function parameter type
t2but not covered by the speciﬁcation ( Bty,Bry). When
the SMT solver concludes that this formula is satisﬁable, it
produces an example such as ( Btz,Brz) as a result repre-
senting an unspeciﬁed case that is not covered by the current
1712speciﬁcation. Then, we record the unspeciﬁed case and update
the formula by adding it as follows:
9(Btx;Brx): valid ((Btx;Brx);t2)!
:( (sateq((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry))
_satsub((Btx;Brx);(Bty;Bry)))
_(sateq((Btx;Brx);(Btz;Brz))
_satsub((Btx;Brx);(Btz;Brz))))
Thus, in the next iteration, the SMT solver tries to ﬁnd
another unspeciﬁed case except for ones discovered previously.
When the SMT solver fails to ﬁnd more unspeciﬁed cases, it
concludes that the formula is not satisﬁable, implying that the
updated speciﬁcation covers all the valid parameters.
D. Test Case Generation and Testing on JVMs
One difﬁculty in the test code generation phase is to
generate valid test code. As described in Section II, in JNI
programs, C code leverages a sequence of JNI function calls
to interact with Java modules. To investigate behaviors caused
by unspeciﬁed cases, generated test code should contain JNI
function call chains that do not introduce run-time errors
caused by other factors such as invalid arguments, unintended
unspeciﬁed cases, and so on. Random test generation is widely
used, but it is not suitable for our purpose; it produces too
many wrong JNI function call chains that cause run-time errors
unrelated to unspeciﬁed cases.
The Test Code Generator utilizes both “a JNI function
mapping table” and “template code” to generate valid test
code. Firstly, it constructs a mapping table by matching each
reﬁned parameter type of JNI functions with a reﬁned return
type of other JNI functions. For example, if a ﬁrst reﬁned
parameter type of a JNI function foo is matched with a reﬁned
return type of another JNI function bar, the mapping bar
!foo@1 is added to the table; it denotes that the return
value of bar can be used for the ﬁrst argument of foo.
JNI functions often take values of primitive types such as
integers and character arrays as arguments, and some primitive
types may not have matching JNI functions that have them as
return types. Therefore, for primitive types, we manually write
template code that consists of functions that return values of
primitive types according to reﬁned parameter types. With the
mapping table and the template code, Test Code Generator
generates valid C test code for unspeciﬁed cases by building
valid JNI function call chains and propagating valid arguments
for reﬁned parameter types. We compile the generated C test
code and link it with Java modules we developed to build
executable JNI test programs. Note that we focus on only C
test code while JNI supports both C and C++ because all the
mainstream JVMs handle the JNI interoperation for C and
C++ in the same way.
For testing on multiple JVMs, we install each JVM on an
individual Docker container [15] and execute the generated
test code on each container. Because different JVMs print
execution results in different formats, we develop a result
parser for each JVM to translate its execution result to a uniﬁedTABLE I: Evaluation results of the -Xcheck:jni option on ﬁve
JVMs for 34,990 unspeciﬁed cases
Category HotSpot OpenJ9 Zulu Corretto GraalVM
Misbehave 4,922 445 4,918 4,918 4,918
SegFault 1,050 567 1,050 1,050 1,010
Exception 24,338 23,377 24,339 24,339 24,339
Validation 4,680 10,601 4,683 4,683 4,723
format. Then, Test Result Assembler classiﬁes the execution
results into four categories: Misbehave ,SegFault ,Exception
and Validation . The Misbehave category represents that test
code terminates normally without any warnings or errors.
Since behaviors of unspeciﬁed cases are not deﬁned, each JVM
may produce different execution result from one another for
an unspeciﬁed case. The SegFault and Exception categories
represent that test code causes a segmentation fault and an
exception thrown, respectively, and the Validation category
represents that test code terminates with an error or a warning
produced by the debug feature as its validation result. In
addition, Test Result Assembler compares the execution results
of the JVMs to identify different debugging capabilities of the
JVMs.
IV. E VALUATION OF THE JNI D EBUG FEATURE ON JVM S
A. Evaluation Results for Unspeciﬁed Cases
To evaluate the debug capability of mainstream JVMs,
we chose ﬁve JVMs based-on their popularity [16]: Oracle’s
Hotspot, IBM’s OpenJ9, Azul’s Zulu, Amazon’s Corretto, and
Oracle’s GraalVM. Among various Java versions, we chose
Java 11, since its popularity is ranked the second following
Java 8 and all ﬁve JVMs have implementations for Java 11.
Table I shows the categorized evaluation results on the ﬁve
JVMs for the test programs. JUSTG ENgenerated 34,990 test
programs for unspeciﬁed cases from the JNI speciﬁcation
within 403 seconds. As Table I indicates, the evaluation
results are very similar between JVMs except for OpenJ9,
because they are variants of OpenJDK. Even though they have
similar evaluation results, we believe that analyzing them is
signiﬁcant because different vendors support them. OpenJ9
validated much more unspeciﬁed cases than the others, but
it validated only 30.3% of the unspeciﬁed cases. The other
JVMs validated only 13.4%. In most cases, when JVMs do
not validate unspeciﬁed cases, they let test programs terminate
with exceptions. Throwing exceptions may be helpful for
developers diagnose the problems, but segmentation faults may
not be useful to point out where the problems occur. Moreover,
misbehaviors may make the problems undiscovered, which can
lead to unexpected behaviors.
In the following subsections, we report our empirical study
results for unspeciﬁed cases in the categories of misbehaviors
and segmentation faults. In addition, we discuss the differences
in the debug capability of the JVMs, the unspeciﬁed cases that
were not validated by all of the JVMs, and threats to validity.
1713B. Category: Misbehave
We manually investigated the unspeciﬁed cases in the
Misbehave category. Since there are many unspeciﬁed cases
as shown in Table I, it is impractical to investigate them
all. Instead, we chose one unspeciﬁed case for each param-
eter of JNI functions. In addition, for JNI function families
that provide the same functionality for different types such
asCallVoidMethod ,CallIntMethod , and so on, we
randomly selected one of them. Finally, we manually investi-
gated 132 unspeciﬁed cases for Hotspot, Zulu, Correctto, and
GraalVM, but only 17 cases for OpenJ9 because it has a small
number of Misbehave cases.
1) In All the JVMs: We found two cases where all ﬁve
JVMs failed to identify unspeciﬁed cases.
Finding 1:Error handling using return values of JNI
functions is not reliable.
Some JNI functions return v alues that indicate the success
or failure of their e xecution, butthey may not return correct
results. One example isRegisterNative that re gisters
nativ e functions. According to thespeciﬁcation, the function
should tak e apositiv e number of nati vefunctions, and return
0 on success and a negativevalue on failure. Ho wever,all
ﬁve JVMs failed to validate the case when the functi on tak es
no nati vefunctions. Moreo ver, in such cases, while OpenJ9
returns -1, the other JVMs return 0indicating the execution
success. Thus, relying on return v alues of JNI functions to
handle e xecution failures is not reliable.
Finding 2:Deleted references are not completely
validated.
Using deleted objects may lead to une xpected beha viors, b ut
JVMs do not v alidate it completely e ven with the debug
feature enabled. Forinstance, GetObjectRefType receiv es
a Javaobject and returns the reference type of the object.
One of our test code passed a deleted Java object as an
argument toGetObjectRefType , which is an unspec-
iﬁed case. Even though the JNI speciﬁcation states that
GetObjectRefType should not use deleted objects, we
found that the function returns the object type as a local
reference on OpenJ9, while the other JVMs successfully detect
the ca se. W e reported the problem to IBM and it is no w ﬁx ed.
On the contrary, when a deleted object is stored in an array
using SetObjectArrayElement , OpenJ9 detects this case
butthe other JVMs cannot detect it. Thus, all the VMs failed
to validate them completely.
2) In four JVMs: Wereport six cases where all JVMs
except OpenJ9 f ailed to identify unspeciﬁed cases.
Finding 3:Methods may be treated as constructors.
According to the JNI speciﬁcation, the name of constructors
should be <init> . However,our test code re vealed that when
we call GetMethodID with a method whose name is NULL ,
the functi on returns the method ID of a constructor on all
JVMs e xcept for OpenJ9. W e found out that the JVMs returnthe method ID of a constructor only if there is a constructor
that satisﬁe s the method signature passed to GetMethodID
as a fourth ar gument.
Finding 4:Java objects may be incorrectly initialized.
InJNI programs, nativ e code can create Java objects using
NewObjectV . Whi le the speciﬁcation states that the method
ID of a constructor should be passed to NewObjectV , all
JVMs e xcept OpenJ9 cannot detect such cases when the
method ID of a non-constructor is used and simply create an
object using the non-constructor .
Finding 5:Native code may call Java methods with
ill-typed Java objects.
We observ ed se veral unspeciﬁed cases where nati vecode call
a Javamethod with a Javaobject that has a different type from
what the method e xpects. One such an example is calling a
Java method with a receiv er object of an incorrect type using
CallNonvirtualIntMethod . All JVMs e xcept OpenJ9
cannot detect such cases. Even though Ja vaprovides strong
type checking, nativ e code can break its type system.
Finding 6:Array elements may be updated with values
of incompatible types.
We observ ed another case that JNI programs break the Java
type system. TheReleaseBooleanArrayElements JNI
function tak es a Java array object as a second argument,
and a pointer to array elements as a third ar gument. If
this function takes 0 as its fourth argument, it copies the
values of the pointer to the Ja vaarray object and frees the
memory pointed by the pointer. According to the speciﬁcation,
the pointer used by ReleaseBooleanArrayElements
must be deriv ed by theGetBooleanArrayElements
function. Ho wever,one of our test code passed a pointer
that is deriv ed by theGetIntArrayElements function to
ReleaseBooleanArrayElements , and all JVMs except
OpenJ9 could not detect it and copied the values of the pointer
to the Java array object with an incompatible type.
Finding 7:JNI functions may change return values of
Java methods.
While nativ e code should use CallIntMethod to call
Java methods that return integers, our test code in voked
CallIntMethod with a Javamethod that returns v alues of
typeFloat , which was detected only by OpenJ9. In all the
other JVMs, the return value of the Java method wasunexpect-
edly changed. Forexample, when a Java method returns 3.5f
of type Flot , the nativ e code invoking CallIntMethod
returned 1080033280, which is very different from 3.5f.
Finding 8:An object can be popped from a local
reference frame even when no local reference frame
exists on the stack.
ThePopLocalFrame JNIfunction tak es a local reference
object, pops offthe current local reference frame, and re-
turns a local reference in the frame for the gi ven object.
1714However, we found that if a global reference is passed
toPopLocalFrame , the JVMs except for OpenJ9 behave
abnormally: i) the global reference object was returned when
the function is supposed to return local reference objects only,
and ii) the object was returned even when no local reference
frame exists on the stack.
3) Only in OpenJ9: We found four cases where only
OpenJ9 failed to identify unspeciﬁed cases. We reported them
all to IBM, and they are all ﬁxed2.
Finding 9:Invalid Java objects can be constructed with
incorrect class names, and they lead to segmentation
faults in subsequent JNI function calls.
TheFindClass JNI function tak es a fully-qualiﬁed class
name and returns a class object, butOpenJ9 constructs Java
class objects even with incorrect cl ass names. Our test code
called FindClass with an incorrect class name, and OpenJ9
constructed a class object and returned it tonativ e code without
anyerror or warning. Howe ver, once the JNI program uses the
class object, it results in a segmentation fault.
Finding 10:Local references can be created with a
negative capacity.
According to the speciﬁcation, EnsureLocalCapacity
should tak e the capacity of a local reference, which must
not be negative. Ho wever,our auto-generated test code called
EnsureLocalCapacity with -5 for the capacity, which
was OpenJ9 did not detect. OpenJ9 silently generated a new
local reference object without anyerror or warning.
Finding 11:Invalid JNI function calls may be silently
ignored.
We observ ed that OpenJ9 sometimes silently ignore unspeci-
ﬁed JNI function calls. One such an example is to change the
value of a static ﬁeld of an object using SetObjectField ,
which should change the value of only non-static ﬁelds.
OpenJ9 did not catch this unspeciﬁed case b ut silently ignored
the ille galoperation.
Finding 12: JNI Programs may not terminate.
We found one bug in the debug feature of OpenJ9
that caused JNI programs to not terminate. When our
test code releases NULL as array elements using the
Release<type>ArrayElements JNI function, the code
does not terminate because of a deadlock between mul-
tiple threads. One thread holds a VM access and tries
to enter MemMonitor , while the other thread already in
MemMonitor tries to acquire the VM access to exit JVM.
As we discussed, IBM ﬁxed the b ug after our report.
C. Cate gory: Se gFault
In addition to abnormal behavi ors described so far,we
observed that unspeciﬁed cases can cause se gmentation f aults
due to the lack of validation from the -Xcheck:jni option.
2https://github.com/sjmini/justgen/blob/main/README.md.The root cause of the se gmentation f aults is accessing ille gal
memory locations, and attack ers can exploit such defects to
hijack the control ﬂo ws of the programs [17]. Therefore, we
consider them as potential security vulnerabilities.
Table I sho ws the number of unspeciﬁed cases that caused
segmentation faults for each JVM. As the table sho ws, 567
unspeciﬁed cases provoked segmentation faults in OpenJ9,
1,011 cases in GraaalVM, and 1,051 cases in the other JVMs.
Wemanually in vestig ated them to understand which properties
were not validated, and T able II summarizes the results.
Wecategorized the se gmentation f aults into four reasons:
Type Check ,NULL Chec k,Liveness Chec k, and Releasability
Check . For OpenJ9, the lack ofNULL Check is the main reason
with 74.5% of se gmentation f aults. F or the other JVMs, the
primary cause of the se gmentation f aults is the lack of Type
Check; 76.1% of the segmentation faults on HotSpot, Zulu,
and Corretto, and 75.2% on GraalVM are due to missing
type checks. The second major reason for se gmentation f aults
on OpenJ9 is missing Liveness Check. Especially, when JNI
functions use deleted references, only OpenJ9 cannot detect
them, which amounts to 11.8% of the se gmentation f aults on
OpenJ9. Moreo ver, we also observ ed unspeciﬁed cases where
unreleasable arrays are released by JNI functions such as
ReleaseCharArrayElements . Due to the space limitation,
we pro vide detailed inform ation on each unspeciﬁed case in
a companion report [18]. Wefound that these unspeciﬁed
cases can be detected only by OpenJ9, and the other JVMs
throw segmentation faults. Wereported the segmentation fault
problems to JVM v endors and 415 unspeciﬁed cases ha vebeen
ﬁxed so far and more ﬁx es are on their way.
Another interesting point we found is that HotSpot, Zulu,
and Corretto have the same number of se gmentation f aults. Our
analysis on these cases concluded that the -Xcheck:jni option
of these JVMs v alidate the same properties. On the other hand,
OpenJ9 beha vesquite dif ferent from the other JVMs. Ov erall,
the -Xcheck:jni option on OpenJ9 v alidates more properties
than the other JVMs. In the next subsection, we further analyze
the dif ferences between JVMs.
D. Dif ferences between JVMs
Wenow compare the debug capability of ﬁve JVMs. As
discussed in the pre vious subsect ion, the debug capability of
OpenJ9 is different from that of the other JVMs. On the
contrary, the other four JVMs show similar deb ug capability .
Our e valuation results sho w that there are 6,499 unspeciﬁed
cases that OpenJ9 v alidates correctly , but HotSpot misses.
Conv ersely, there are 578 unspeciﬁed cases that HotSpot
validates, butOpenJ9 misses. Forthose 6,499 and 578 un-
speciﬁed case, we chose representativ e case as we did in
Section IV -B and manually in vestig ated them to understand
the deb ug capability of Hotspot and OpenJ9. The analysis
results are summarized in Table III, where Oindicates that
the -Xcheck:jni option of the JVM properly v alidates the
unspeciﬁed case, andXindicates that the JVM does not
validate the unspeciﬁed case. The table clearly sho ws which
unspeciﬁed cases can or cannot be validated by HotSpot and
1715TABLE II: Root causes of segmentation faults
Root Causes Unspeciﬁed Cases HotSpot OpenJ9 Zulu Corretto GraalVM
Type CheckCall ill-typed objects’ methods 720 0 720 720 680
Deﬁne classes with ill-typed classloaders 0 40 0 0 0
Use reﬂection with ill-typed objects 80 38 80 80 80
NULL CheckCall methods with NULL arguments 30 30 30 30 30
Call methods using a NULL method ID 0 372 0 0 0
Access ﬁelds using a NULL ﬁeld ID 18 18 18 18 18
Get ﬁelds of a NULL object 0 1 0 0 0
Get ﬁeld/method IDs using a NULL signature 166 0 166 166 166
Get ﬁeld/method IDs and classes from a NULL object 29 0 29 29 29
Get strings into a NULL destination buffer 1 1 1 1 1
Liveness CheckCall objects’ methods using deleted references 0 60 0 0 0
Compare types between a live and a deleted reference 0 3 0 0 0
Set ﬁelds with deleted references 0 1 0 0 0
Deﬁne classes with deleted a reference name 0 1 0 0 0
Get ﬁeld/method IDs using a deleted reference 0 2 0 0 0
Releasability Check Release unreleasable arrays 6 0 6 6 6
Total 1,050 567 1,050 1,050 1,010
TABLE III: Debug capability of Hotspot and OpenJ9
Causes Unspeciﬁed Cases Hot J9
TypeDeﬁne classes with wrong typed classloaders O X
Get classes using a wrong class descriptor O X
Throw exceptions using non-throwable objects O X
Call methods with unmatched return types X O
Create objects with array classes X O
Use reﬂection for ﬁelds using wrong typed objects X O
NULLIniailize objects using a NULL method ID O X
Get ﬁelds of a NULL object O X
Call methods of a NULL object X O
Call methods using a NULL method ID O X
Get ﬁeld/method IDs of a NULL object X O
Get ﬁeld/method IDs using a NULL signature X O
Get ﬁeld/method IDs using a NULL name X O
Release a NULL string X O
LivenessGet types from deleted references O X
Put deleted references into an array X O
Call objects’ methods using deleted references O X
Compare types between a live and a deleted reference O X
Pop a local frame from an empty frame stack X O
ModiﬁerAccess non-static ﬁelds using a static ﬁeld ID O X
Access static ﬁelds with a non-static ﬁeld ID O X
Call private methods of super classes X O
Negative
IntegerSet a negative capacity of local frames O X
Access a negative index of arrays X O
Constructor Initialize objects using non-constructor methods X O
Releasability Release unreleasable arrays X O
OpenJ9. It shows three new causes: Modiﬁer ,Negative Integer ,
andConstructor . The Modiﬁer cause denotes when JVMs do
not check the correct use of modiﬁers such as static , and
public . For example, such a case when a JNI function uses
astatic ﬁeld ID where a non-static ﬁeld ID is expected
belongs to the Modiﬁer cause. OpenJ9 cannot validated them
whereas Hotspot can. The Negative Integer problem is when
a negative number is used where a non-negative number is
expected. For instance, we found that OpenJ9 cannot identify
creation of a local frame with a negative capacity, while
Hotspot validates it. We also observed an inverse case. OpenJ9TABLE IV: Unspeciﬁed cases not validated by JVMs
Causes Unspeciﬁed Cases
NULL CheckCall methods with a NULL argument list
Access static ﬁelds using a NULL ﬁeld ID
Copy a string value into a NULL buffer
Size CheckPush a zero-sized local frame into a frame stack
Register zero number of native functions
Type Check Use reﬂection for methods using wrong typed objects
throws an error message when accessing a negative index of
array, but Hotspot cannot validate it. The Constructor problem
is initialization of Java objects with non-constructor functions.
OpenJ9 detects the problem when a non-constructor method
ID is used to create a Java object, but Hotspot cannot.
We found no unspeciﬁed cases that HotSpot validates, but
Zulu, Corretto, and GraalVM misses. However, we found three
unspeciﬁed cases that Zulu and Corretto validate, but HotSpot
misses. Similarly, we found 43 unspeciﬁed cases that GraalVM
validates, but HotSpot misses. We manually investigated all
those 3 and 43 unspeciﬁed cases, and our analysis revealed
that they are due to the use of deleted objects and ill-typed
objects, respectively.
Our evaluation results show that the debug features of differ-
ent JVMs check different properties, and therefore validating
JNI programs on multiple JVMs especially OpenJ9 and one of
the others would be desirable. We provide detailed description
of each unspeciﬁed case in a companion report [18].
E. No Validation from Any JVMs
We observed that 23,880 unspeciﬁed cases are not validated
by any JVMs. Among them, all JVMs throw exceptions for
23,367 cases, but no JVMs throw exceptions for the remaining
513 cases. We believe that they are problematic cases because
even the -Xcheck:jni option cannot validate them on any
JVMs. We further analyzed them to understand what properties
1716are not validated by any JVMs. The analysis results are
summarized in Table IV.
As shown in the table, their root causes have three cate-
gories. The ﬁrst category is missing NULL check. We found
that a large number of cases are due to the missing NULL check
ofjvalue . It seems that no JVMs properly validate argument
lists like jvalue . Because dereferencing null values may
cause signiﬁcant errors, we believe that all JVMs should
validate them. The other two categories are missing size check
and type check. For example, the FromReflectedMethod
JNI function expects to receive an object of type
java.lang.reflect.Method/Constructor . If it re-
ceives an object of different type, JVMs should throw
an error. However, no JVMs validates this property. It is
particularly strange that OpenJ9 does not validate such a
case because it throws an error for similar cases. For in-
stance, the FromReflectedField JNI function does not
receive an object of type java.lang.reflect.Field ,
OpenJ9 throws an error with the following message: Argu-
ment #2 is not a subclass of java/lang/reﬂect/Field . OpenJ9
should throw an error with an appropriate message for the
FromReflectedMethod function as well.
F . Threats to Validity
To evaluate the quality of the -Xcheck:jni option on main-
stream JVMs, we leveraged unspeciﬁed cases. We adopted
a systematic and automated approach to ﬁnd unspeciﬁed
cases from the JNI speciﬁcation. The only manual part in
ﬁnding unspeciﬁed cases is transforming the JNI speciﬁcation
into our DSL. Manual transformation may contain human
errors leading to incorrect transformation. However, we believe
that our transformation is correct because we considered
only Chapter 4 of the JNI speciﬁcation, which is written in
a well-structured style using speciﬁc patterns. Furthermore,
we manually investigated automatically produced results by
JUSTG EN. Our manual investigation conﬁrmed that the re-
sults are accurate, which indicates that the JNI speciﬁcation is
correctly transformed. The results of our manual evaluation are
trustworthy because external reviewers such as JVM vendors
validated them as well. Note that if the speciﬁcation is written
in a structural way like the JavaScript speciﬁcation, it may be
possible to make JUSTGen fully automatic [19].
Finally, because the transformed speciﬁcation in the DSL is
publicly available, researchers can reuse and validate it. Note
that JUSTG ENdoes not prove the correctness of -Xcheck:jni
implementations, but tests them, which may lead to false
positives and false negatives.
V. R ELATED WORK
JVM Veriﬁcation . Testing JVMs to ensure that they work
consistently with each other is crucial to support Java’s
slogan “Write Once Run Anywhere.” The existing research
proposed methodologies to automatically generate test cases
for veriﬁcation of JVMs. Sirer and Bershad [20] developed
lava, a domain speciﬁc language for specifying productiongrammars to generate test cases for a JVM. They demon-
strated the effectiveness of lava when it is used with other
testing techniques by showing high code and value coverage
achievements. Yoshikawa et al. [21] implemented a generator
for Java classes that is ﬁnite and executable on the Java runtime
environment. Similarly, Chen et al. [22] introduced classfuzz,
which generates invalid Java classes to reveal defects in the
startup processes of JVMs. classfuzz leverages predeﬁned
mutation operators to mutate seeding Java classes and Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling to select appropriate
mutation operators. On the other hand, classming [23] also
proposed by Chen et al generates executable Java classes in
order to verify execution engines of JVMs. classming also
leverages mutation operators to change the control and data
ﬂows of bytecode to generate semantically different test cases.
Freund and Mitchell [24] introduced a type system to generate
Java classes that can test an implementation of a bytecode
veriﬁer.
Even though the above research can generate efﬁcient test
cases for verifying startup processes, execution engines, and a
bytecode veriﬁer of JVMs, they are not suitable for verifying
implementations of JNI interoperations on JVMs. Indeed, no
research exists that proposes an efﬁcient technique to generate
test cases for testing JNI interoperations.
JNI Veriﬁcation Researchers have tried to improve the safety
and reliability of JNI programs. Several papers address the
discrepancies in exception handling of Java and native code.
The exceptions from native code of JNI programs do not get
handled by JVMs immediately, but they are handled by JVMs
only after the native code ﬁnishes its execution. Such different
semantics can lead to mishandling of exceptions in JNI pro-
grams. Li and Tan [25] proposed a static analysis framework
that examines exceptions and identiﬁes bugs in JNI programs.
Tan [26] proposed an operational semantics for a core of
the JNI. The work includes the formal semantics of handling
shared heap during cross-language function calls, exception
handling, and garbage collection. Because programs written
in C may be unsafe due to the lack of type system while
programs written in Java are type-safe, native code written in
C may make JNI programs unsafe. To ensure type safety of JNI
programs, Tan et al. [27] proposed SafeJNI. Tan and Croft [28]
also performed an empirical study of native codes in JDK.
Leveraging a large number of native code in JDK with various
static analysis techniques and manual inspection, the authors
identiﬁed new bugs and security issues in the native code of
JDK. Gu et al. [29] demonstrated another security issues in JNI
programs. They introduced the JGRE attack and proposed a
defense mechanism. Wei et al. [30] proposed a static analysis
framework that can analyze JNI programs. They introduced
JN-SAF that performs an inter-language dataﬂow analysis to
ﬁnd security ﬂaws in JNI programs. Lee et al. [31] devised
a static analysis technique utilizing both modular and whole
program analyses to analyze multilingual programs. Using the
technique, they proposed a static analyzer that detects possible
programmer errors in JNI interoperation.
1717Even though the existing research attempted to improve
the safety and reliability of JNI programs, none of them
systematically studied the unspeciﬁed behaviors in the JNI
speciﬁcation and their actual implementations on mainstream
JVMs.
VI. C ONCLUSION
JVMs provide a powerful run-time debug feature, the
-Xcheck:jni option, for developers to detect interoperation
bugs in JNI programs. However, some bugs may remain
unidentiﬁed even after intensive testing, due to the insufﬁcient
validation capability of the debug feature. In this paper, we
present a semi-automated approach to evaluate the validation
capability and impacts of the -Xcheck:jni option on various
JVMs. From the JNI speciﬁcation, we manually translated the
core functionality of JNI functions to our DSL, JUSTG EN
automatically discovers unspeciﬁed cases and generates test
code executing the cases. Then, we execute the test code on
ﬁve mainstream JVMs and categorize the execution results to
assess their validation capability. In our empirical evaluation,
JUSTG ENdiscovered 34,990 unspeciﬁed cases that the JNI
speciﬁcation does not cover. We identiﬁed that 5,972 unspec-
iﬁed cases could not be validated by Hotspot’s debug feature,
5,968 by Zulu and Corretto, 5,928 by GraalVM, and 1,012 by
OpenJ9. These unspeciﬁed cases can cause ciritical run-time
errors due to violation of the Java type system and memory
corruption. We reported the validation issues of the debug
feature to corresponding JVM vendors with 792 unspeciﬁed
cases, and 563 cases among them have been ﬁxed and the
remaining ones are planned to be ﬁxed. We believe that our
study improves the validation capability of the -Xcheck:jni
option and the quality of JNI programs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) (Grants NRF-2017R1A2B3012020 and
2017M3C4A7068177).
REFERENCES
[1] Oracle, “Java SE HotSpot at a Glance,” https://www.oracle.com/
technetwork/java/javase/tech/index-jsp-136373.html, 2019.
[2] Eclipse, “OpenJ9,” https://www.eclipse.org/openj9/, 2020.
[3] Azul System, “Azul Zing,” https://www.azul.com/products/zing/, 2020.
[4] Oracle, “GraalVM,” https://www.graalvm.org/, 2020.
[5] ——, “Java SE Documentation - JNI Design Overview,” https://docs.
oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/specs/jni/design.html, 2018.
[6] IBM, “Troubleshooting: JNI Checklist,” https://www.ibm.com/support/
pages/troubleshooting-jni-checklist, 2020.
[7] Oracle, “The -Xcheck:jni Option,” https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/
technotes/guides/troubleshoot/clopts002.html, 2020.
[8] ——, “Java SE Documentation - JNI Functions,” https://docs.oracle.
com/en/java/javase/11/docs/specs/jni/functions.html, 2018.
[9] E. Clarke, O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y . Lu, and H. Veith, “Counterexample-
guided Abstraction Reﬁnement,” in International Conference on Com-
puter Aided Veriﬁcation . Springer, 2000, pp. 154–169.
[10] Microsoft Research, “The Z3 Theorem Prover,” https://github.com/
Z3Prover/z3, 2020.
[11] T. Freeman and F. Pfenning, “Reﬁnement Types for ML,” in Proceedings
of the ACM SIGPLAN 1991 Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation , 1991, pp. 268–277.
[12] Sungjae Hwang, “JNI Speciﬁcation Expressed in Our DSL,” https://
github.com/sjmini/justgen/blob/main/test/rule, 2021.[13] ——, “Explanation of Reﬁnements,” https://github.com/sjmini/justgen/
blob/main/test/reﬁne meaning, 2021.
[14] Oracle, “Java SE Documentation - JNI Types and Data Structures,” https:
//docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/specs/jni/types.html, 2018.
[15] Docker Inc., “Docker,” https://www.docker.com/, 2020.
[16] JReBel, “2020 Java Technology Report,” https://www.jrebel.com/blog/
2020-java-technology-report, 2020.
[17] OWASP, “Buffer Overﬂow,” https : / / owasp . org / www-community /
vulnerabilities/Buffer Overﬂow, 2020.
[18] Sungjae Hwang Sungho Lee, Jihoon Kim, Sukyoung Ryu,
“A Study of Unspeciﬁed Cases in the JNI Speciﬁcation,”
https://github.com/sjmini/justgen/blob/main/supplementary/, 2021.
[19] J. Park, J. Park, S. An, and S. Ryu, “Jiset: Javascript ir-based semantics
extraction toolchain,” in 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 647–658.
[20] E. G. Sirer and B. N. Bershad, “Using Production Grammars in Software
Testing,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 1999.
[21] T. Yoshikawa, K. Shimura, and T. Ozawa, “Random Program Generator
for Java JIT Compiler Test System,” in Third International Conference
on Quality Software, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 2003, pp. 20–23.
[22] Y . Chen, T. Su, C. Sun, Z. Su, and J. Zhao, “Coverage-directed
Differential Testing of JVM Implementations,” in Proceedings of the
37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation , 2016, pp. 85–99.
[23] Y . Chen, T. Su, and Z. Su, “Deep Differential Testing of JVM Implemen-
tations,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1257–1268.
[24] S. N. Freund and J. C. Mitchell, “A Type System for the Java Bytecode
Language and Veriﬁer,” Journal of Automated Reasoning , vol. 30, no.
3-4, pp. 271–321, 2003.
[25] S. Li and G. Tan, “Finding Bugs in Exceptional Situations of JNI
Programs,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security , 2009, pp. 442–452.
[26] G. Tan, “JNI Light: An Operational Model for the Core JNI,” in Asian
Symposium on Programming Languages and Systems . Springer, 2010,
pp. 114–130.
[27] G. Tan, A. W. Appel, S. Chakradhar, A. Raghunathan, S. Ravi, and
D. Wang, “Safe Java Native Interface,” in Proceedings of IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Secure Software Engineering , vol. 97. Citeseer,
2006, p. 106.
[28] G. Tan and J. Croft, “An Empirical Security Study of the Native Code
in the JDK.” in Usenix Security Symposium , 2008, pp. 365–378.
[29] Y . Gu, K. Sun, P. Su, Q. Li, Y . Lu, L. Ying, and D. Feng, “JGRE:
An Analysis of JNI Global Reference Exhaustion Vulnerabilities in
Android,” in 2017 47th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 427–438.
[30] F. Wei, X. Lin, X. Ou, T. Chen, and X. Zhang, “JN-SAF: Precise
and Efﬁcient NDK/JNI-aware Inter-anguage Static Analysis Framework
for Security Vetting of Android Applications with Native Code,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , 2018, pp. 1137–1150.
[31] S. Lee, H. Lee, and S. Ryu, “Broadening horizons of multilingual
static analysis: Semantic summary extraction from c code for jni
program analysis,” in 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 127–137.
1718