An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering
He Zhang
hezhang@nju.edu.cn
State Key Laboratory of
Novel Software Technology,
Software Institute, Nanjing University
ChinaXin Zhou
job@wetist.com
State Key Laboratory of
Novel Software Technology,
Software Institute, Nanjing University
ChinaXin Huang
njuhx16@qq.com
State Key Laboratory of
Novel Software Technology,
Software Institute, Nanjing University
China
Huang Huang
njufrankhuang@gmail.com
State Key Laboratory of
Novel Software Technology,
Software Institute, Nanjing University
ChinaMuhammad Ali Babar
ali.babar@adelaide.edu.au
School of Computer Science,
University of Adelaide
Australia
ABSTRACT
Context : Following on other scientific disciplines, such as health
sciences, the use of Grey Literature (GL) has become widespread in
Software Engineering (SE) research. Whilst the number of papers
incorporating GL in SE is increasing, there is little empirically
known about different aspects of the use of GL in SE research.
Method : We used a mixed-methods approach for this research. We
carried out a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) of the use of GL
in SE, and surveyed the authors of the selected papers included in
the SLR (as GL users) and the invited experts in SE community on
the use of GL in SE research. Results : We systematically selected
and reviewed 102 SE secondary studies that incorporate GL in
SE research, from which we identified two groups based on their
reporting: 1) 76 reviews only claim their use of GL; 2) 26 reviews
report the results by including GL. We also obtained 20 replies from
the GL users and 24 replies from the invited SE experts. Conclusion :
There is no common understanding of the meaning of GL in SE.
Researchers define the scopes and the definitions of GL in a variety
of ways. We found five main reasons of using GL in SE research. The
findings have enabled us to propose a conceptual model for how
GL works in SE research lifecycle. There is an apparent need for
research to develop guidelines for using GL in SE and for assessing
quality of GL. The current work can provide a panorama of the
state-of-the-art of using GL in SE for the follow-up research, as to
determine the important position of GL in SE research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7121-6/20/05. . .$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380336KEYWORDS
Grey literature; systematic (literature) review; survey; evidence-
based software engineering; empirical software engineering.
ACM Reference Format:
He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar.
2020. An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature in Software
Engineering. In 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
’20), May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea. ACM, Seoul, Korea, 13pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380336
1 INTRODUCTION
Grey Literature (GL) is considered an important source of informa-
tion in several scientific fields such as health sciences [ 6,54]. Dif-
ferent from white literature (or academic publications), GL covers a
wide range of non-conventional documents, for instance, technical
reports, theses and official documents [ 47,50,61] that report recent
research or practice results [ 24,48]. GL reports can be much more
detailed and comprehensive as there is no publisher-enforced limi-
tation on length. Researchers and practitioners can report negative
or no effect of particular treatments in GL, some of the aspects that
may not be acceptable in the peer-reviewed literature [9].
In a growing area like Software Engineering (SE), a huge amount
of GL is being produced everyday that become instantly available
on the Internet [ 7]. Compared with academic literature, GL reports
are usually quite broad in their coverage and analytics but perhaps
relatively low in their quality [ 2]. Hence, traditionally the inclusion
of GL in SE research has not been a widely accepted practice. How-
ever, it is being recognized that GL can provide timely and broad
perspective on different emerging topics that may be relevant and
important to SE research and practice. This increasing realization
of the importance of GL in SE has encouraged many researchers to
consider GL as evidence in their research [60].
Whilst the number of SE research efforts incorporating GL is
increasing, there is little effort invested in developing methodolog-
ical support for conducting research with GL. It is important to
systematically review the state-of-the-art of the use of GL in SE and
empirically explore the views of the SE researchers for developing
an evidence-based body of knowledge and call for guidelines on
14222020 IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
the use of GL in SE research and practice. Towards this goal, we
decided to carry out a study using a mixed-methods approach. We
conducted a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) to investigate how
SE researchers are using GL. Based on the results of the SLR, we
designed two survey questionnaires for gathering more relevant
data from both the GL users and SE experts in this community. We
invited 502 community experts, i.e., members of program commit-
tees of important SE conferences, for participating in the survey of
this study.
This work aimed at systematically reviewing the use of GL in SE
and empirically exploring SE researchers’ views on GL. Given the
aim of this study is to help improve the use of GL in SE research by
empirically obtaining and synthesizing the relevant information
from secondary (i.e. review) as well as primary (i.e. survey) sources,
we avoid to criticize the reviewed studies or their authors by all
means. Our contributions are four-fold: 1) obtaining an overview
on the community’s understanding of the possible definitions of
GL in SE; 2) investigating the motivations for the use of GL from
the perspectives of both literature users and community experts; 3)
proposing a conceptual model for how SE researchers work with
GL in research lifecycle; and 4) identifying the major challenges
of the use of GL in SE with some possible solutions. Our study’s
findings are expected to raise the awareness about the current use
of Grey Literature (GL) in Software Engineering (SE) and advocate
the importance of guidelines for supporting its use in SE. Our effort
would also contribute to the methodological improvements in SE.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
This section introduces the background of GL and briefs the re-
search related to GL in SE and other disciplines.
2.1 Grey Literature
The most widely used definition of GL, aka. Luxembourg definition
of GL, was proposed at the Third International Conference on Grey
Literature (ICGL). As per this definition, GL is the information pro-
duced on all levels of government, academia, business, and industry
in electronic and print formats not controlled by commercial pub-
lishing. This definition has been extended to ‘the literature which is
not formally published in sources such as books or journal articles ’ or
‘not formally part of traditional publishing cycles ’ in some reviews
(e.g., [25, 35]).
To promote GL, an organization called Grey Literature Network
Service (GreyNet)1is dedicated to research, publication, open ac-
cess, education, and public awareness to GL. As of August 2019, the
database2of this organization contains a total of one million grey
studies including the proceedings of ICGL3and International Jour-
nal on Grey Literature (IJGL)4. Figure 1shows the top 5 subjects
of the studies (GL) in these databases.
2.2 Grey Literature in Research
In addition to ICGL and IJGL, GL is also used as a supplement to
white literature in many academic research works [ 54]. Richard et
1http://www.greynet.org/
2http://www.opengrey.eu/
3http://www.textrelease.com/proceedingsaccess.html
4http://www.textrelease.com/journalaccess.html
SubjectsSocial
scienceBiological
and medical
sciencePhysics Mechanical
and industrialComputer
scienceOthers401260
253800
99029
7426264282291802
100200300400(K)Figure 1: Top 5 subjects of grey literature in GreyNet
al. state that GL comes from a complex landscape of information
artifacts generated in the course of real-life practices [ 3]. Assessing
this material requires time and complicated trade-offs whose ap-
propriateness varies according to a study’s context. However, GL
can help bring a practical point of view to academic conversation.
Many studies in the medical field use GL. Mallett et al. [ 38] found
51% of Cochrane systematic reviews included GL. The main source
of GL in these reviews is unpublished information supplementing
the published journal articles reporting trials. GL is also widely
used in educational studies and social sciences. Petrosino et al. [ 49]
reviewed the randomized experiments in crime reduction, around
one third of which came from GL such as governmental documents,
dissertations, and technical reports. Table 1captures some of the
concerns of GL reported in the reviewed studies.
Table 1: Concerns of grey literature in research
Concerns A brief description Studies
Scope This kind of researches discusses the definition of grey literature,
its specific content and some characteristics of grey literature.[8, 29, 35, 37,
53,56]
Search Efficient searching of grey literature has always been a hot topic
in this field.[14, 25, 27, 28,
52, 54]
Analysis This part contains how to solve the structural difference between
grey literature and traditional literature.[10, 13, 23, 38,
39]
Evaluation The focus of this section is how to solve the quality problem of
grey literature.[17, 20, 25, 37]
Effects The effects mainly refers to the effects of grey literature on re-
search results or conclusions[15, 19, 38, 41,
53]
Quenby et al. [ 37] discuss the challenges and benefits of search-
ing GL for systematic (literature) reviews. They thought it is impor-
tant to include the details of the used GL in a review for advancing
the research methodology. Sally et al. [ 53], Norsaremah et al. [ 55],
and McHugh et al. [ 43] point out that using GL in SLRs can help
overcome some of the problems of publication bias.
It has been reported that researchers face challenges in deciding
how to search GL [ 25]. Rainer and Williams[ 52] proposed a heuristic
keyword-based guide for searching the relevant GL. Their guide
covers several points such as keywords of the topic, advanced search
settings, types of keywords, quality criteria as additional keywords,
keyword-based sampling and measurements.
Conn et al. [ 13] propose that meta-analysis should include GL to
fully reflect the existing evidence base. Their proposal was based on
their observations that for the results of the published studies with
peer-review, whether the findings were statistically significant or
not, or biased against the null hypothesis, is the difference between
published and unpublished literature.
1423An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
It is difficult for researchers to evaluate GL. Rosa and Roberta [ 17]
applied citation analysis of GL to calculate its influence. They con-
clude that a careful consideration of the parameters is required to
assess the impact of GL on the traditional literature in different
disciplines.
Most research efforts included GL together with traditional lit-
erature whilst some research works consider GL only (e.g., [ 42]).
Rothstein et al. [ 53] thought GL are only in an auxiliary position.
The effects of GL on results and conclusions are limited to supple-
ment the traditional literature.
2.3 Grey Literature and Software Engineering
Internet provides researchers and individuals with platforms and
tools to produce, publish, and evaluate scientific information [ 56].
Most SE researchers and professionals are actively producing and
sharing their experiences on the Internet [ 26,32] (e.g., free online
books, blogs, and QA forums). As a result, the amount of GL in SE
is rapidly growing despite the findings shown in Figure 1do not
reflect this trend. This may imply that the use of GL in SE is far less
than that in social sciences and medicine.
'White'
literature1st tier: books,
magazines, government
report, white papers2nd tier: annual reports,news articles, videos,
QA sites, Wiki articles3rd tier: blogs,
presentations, emails,
tweets
Figure 2: ‘Grey scales’ of literature
Recently SE researchers have started paying more attention to
GL. According to grey material classification [ 33], Shpilko et al. [ 3]
proposed a model about GL. They thought that the literature can be
divided into four categories (grey scales) according to the difference
in scope (shown in Figure 2). The innermost layer is ‘white ’ litera-
ture, which makes up only a very small part of the literature, out
of which GL can be divided into three layers (scales). The higher
(outer) the level, the more the quantity of literature and the more
difficult to control. The first scale, which contains books, maga-
zines, government reports, and white papers, is the most official
category in GL. Annual reports, news articles, videos, QA sites
and Wiki articles are located in the second scale, which has some
limitations such as requiring users to have at least 50 reputation
to comment. The third (outmost) scale is completely out of control
because everyone has access to blogs, presentations, tweets, and
emails.SE is a practical (practitioner-oriented) field, in which synthesiz-
ing and combing research and practice turn to be very important.
Garousi [ 21] et al. discussed Multivocal Literature Reviews (MLR)
and pointed out that GL is essential and useful in SE research.
In [22], they also combined the existing SLR guidelines in SE, some
MLR guidelines from other disciplines and their own experience
in conducting MLR to provide an initial proposal of the guidelines
for incorporating GL in secondary studies in SE, which contains
planning, conducting, and reporting three phases with 14 specific
recommendations.
3 RESEARCH METHOD
In this section, we elaborate the mixed-methods research design
employed in this study with its processes as depicted in Figure 3.
3.1 Research Questions
As the objective of this work is to “empirically explore the views
of the SE researchers” about GL, we setup our Research Questions
(RQs) to investigate the use of GL in research only. This study aims
at addressing the following research questions:
RQ1. What is grey literature in the view of SE researchers?
RQ2. Why do SE researchers consider grey literature in research?
RQ3. How does grey literature work in SE research?
RQ1aims to present the researchers’ understanding of the defi-
nition of GL in SE. RQ2steers our investigation of the purpose of
using GL in SE research. The answer to RQ3may help understand
how SE researchers work with GL in their research.
In order to develop the detailed instructions of the study pro-
tocols, a pilot study was first conducted on 50 literature reviews
including GL in the beginning of 2019. From the pilot, we found
that many reviews fail to provide the reasons and the processes
of using GL in their studies, nor did many authors mention the
potential influences of including GL on the results and conclusions
of their studies. Given the findings from the pilot and other anec-
dotal evidence, we decided to empirically investigate the use of GL
by applying a mixed-methods approach, i.e. surveying literature
reviews and SE researchers.
An SLR is expected to enable us to extract and synthesize the
data from secondary studies to report the current use of GL. An
opinion survey involving both the GL users and SE experts is ex-
pected to explore the community’s attitudes towards GL in SE. The
data gathered from the two methods would supplement to each
other and help form a holistic understanding of the state, trend,
and challenges of using GL in SE. The differences between GL and
academic literature arouse our interest. In the process of synthesiz-
ing GL, the secondary studies systematically collects and displays
evidence, which can reflect the major concerns (scope, search, anal-
ysis, evaluation, and effects, cf. Table 1) of GL. They may secure
the extraction of important data relevant to GL for analysis and
synthesis to answer the RQs.
This study was undertaken from the beginning of 2019 and
carried out in two stages, a literature review (SLR) and an opinion
survey. The review stage followed the SLR guidelines in SE [ 34], and
the survey stage followed the survey guidelines [ 30]. The research
team consists of three student researchers (two PhD candidates
and one master by research student) and their supervisors. All the
1424ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
research students have gained extensive knowledge and experience
in Empirical Software Engineering (ESE) in general and in SLRs
with GL in particular from their previous research projects.
3.2 Literature Review
In the review stage, we searched literature reviews (secondary
studies) with GL published in SE for analysis and synthesis.
3.2.1 Search Strategy. As there is no dedicated venue publishing
research including GL in SE, only the automated search was ap-
plied in the review stage. By using the search string as follows,
the secondary studies including GL were thoroughly searched at
the four major publishers’ digital libraries in SE, i.e. ACM Digital
Library, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect, and SpringerLink. Since it is
difficult to determine the exact year when SE researchers started
to incorporate GL in research, the starting year of the automatic
search is not set (open). The search was redone at the end of June
to capture more relevant studies published by the middle of 2019.
(((("Multi* review") OR "Multi* literature") OR "Gray
Literature") OR "Grey Literature") AND "Software
Engineering"
Table 2: Search libraries and results
Digital library to search # retrieved results # selected studies
ACM DL 8 3
IEEE Xplorer 129 36
SpringerLink 152 25
Science Direct 172 38
Table 2lists the retrieved search results per digital library and
the numbers of the selected studies after applying the inclusion and
exclusion criteria (shown in Table 3). We merely include the “white
literature” incorporating GL as the review scope at this stage, which
may help avoid introducing much noise. We observed that GL as
one type of literature is reviewed in some secondary studies, i.e. a
wide range of GL can be included in single literature review while
one primary study may prefer to include specific but limited types
of GL. The scope of GL included in the secondary studies in SE
would be able to illustrate the current state of the use of GL in their
studied topics and the understanding of these review authors on
the roles of GL in research. For these considerations, we decided to
only include literature reviews, especially MLRs (a type of literature
review that contains GL), for research at this stage.
Table 3: Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
IN-1 The paper is a secondary study
IN-2 The paper includes grey literature or claims it is a multivocal literature review
IN-3 The full-text of the paper can be accessible
Exclusion criteria
EX-1 The paper is not written in English
EX-2 The paper is explicitly short reviews, position reviews, and editorials
EX-3 The paper is grey literature
3.2.2 Study Selection.
Each of the three student researchers (reviewers) read all the
papers retrieved from the automated search. The initial selection of
the studies (reviews) including GL was performed by checking thefields of title-keywords-abstract and excluding those irrelevant to
GL from our study. The remaining reviews were further indepen-
dently checked against the inclusion/exclusion criteria by carefully
reading the full text of each paper. The individual’s selection re-
sults were later cross-checked with others’ outputs collectively.
Any disagreement was discussed in the daily meetings scheduled
during this study. If a disagreement could not be solved in the daily
meetings, it was escalated to the research supervisors and domain
experts for advice and final decision. The study search and selection
took approximately one month.
3.2.3 Data Extraction.
To record and collect the data for answering our research ques-
tions, we designed some data items (as shown in Table 4) which
were extracted from the included reviews. The column ‘ RQ’ indi-
cates the research questions that are expected to be answered with
the extracted data items. Three student researchers were involved
in the data extraction.
TheDI2shows the definition of the GL declared by the GL users
in the reviews, which can help further analyze the state of the
definition of GL in SE. The DI3can help understand the distribution
of the type of GL in SE. These two extraction items provide evidence
for RQ1. The purpose of designing DI4is to obtain the reason why
the GL users including GL to provide evidence for RQ2. DI5-DI8
can provide evidence for RQ3 from four aspects: the research stage,
source, collection and analysis method of the GL. The researchers
read the full text of all the identified reviews and extracted the data
(stored in spreadsheets) first independently by following the review
protocol. The extracted data was later cross-checked together after
the independent extractions. Any disagreements were resolved in
the consensus meetings or by consulting their supervisors.
Table 4: Data extraction items
Code RQ Question word Data item
DI1 - - Year
DI2 1 What The definition of grey literature
DI3 1 What The type of grey literature
DI4 2 Why Why to choose to use grey literature?
DI5 2, 3 How What are the roles of grey literature?
DI6 3 How The search source of grey literature
DI7 3 How How is data collected and analyzed?
DI8 3 How What specific techniques and practices are used?
DI9 - - The Sample size of grey literature
3.3 Opinion Survey
In the survey stage, we seek more detailed information specific to
the understanding and the use of GL in research by a means of ques-
tionnaires to both the GL users and SE experts in this community.
3.3.1 Target Invitees and Sampling Frame.
The survey instrument was designed from the respondent’s per-
spective, which requires a clear identification of the population and
target invitees [ 44]. We hence chose the purposive sampling frame
in this case.
Our target invitees are composed by the GL users of all the in-
cluded reviews and the SE experts respected in the community.
Because some of the reviews provide no detail on the use of GL, we
decided to survey the GL users of all the identified reviews via email
1425An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Pilot study on
grey literature
Systematic reviewReview protocol Review team
Survey protocol
Survey for grey literature users
Survey for experts
102 reviews
considering grey literature
Survey questions
for grey literature
users
Survey questions
for expertsGrey literature
users
Experts102 included reviews
RRD (6+20) RLD (14+62)
Reviews with Rich Detail
about grey literatureReviews with Little Detail
about grey literature
102 included reviews
SRU (6+14) SNU (80)
Survey No-reply from
grey literature Users
SRE (24)
502 software engineering research expertsSurvey Reply
from ExpertsSurvey No-reply
from ExpertsBased on included reviews
Based on software engineering researchersSRUR (6) SRUL (14)
Survey Reply from
grey literature UsersSRU from Rich
detailed reviewsSRU from Littledetailed reviewsAuthors of
the 102 reivews
Research questionsabout grey literature
grey literatureUsers DeclinedUD (2)
ED (11)Experts Declined
SNE (368) ~~ENA (99) ~Experts Not Available
Figure 3: Research process of this study
to further gather the details for analysis. We also invited in total
of 502 community experts to respond to the other questionnaire;
these experts were selected from the program committees of the
high quality relevant SE conferences in the past three years (2017-
2019): International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE),
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement (ESEM), and International Conference on Evaluation
and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE). Because GL could
be used in any topics of SE research, we considered the candidates
to invite from the members of general high-quality conferences
in SE to maintain the representatives’ diversity, instead from the
conferences on a subfield of SE. Among these venues, we further
decided to invite members of ICSE/ESEM/EASE, who also pay sig-
nificant emphasis on methodological aspects of conducting and
reporting SE research. Note that although two authors of this paper
have served the above committees for years, they were excluded
from the invitees to avoid introducing possible researcher’s bias.
3.3.2 Questionnaire Design.
Combining the results of the pilot study with the question words
of GL ( whom, where, when what, why andhow), we designed two
questionnaires respectively for the GL users and the SE experts
(shown in Table 5). Both two questionnaires contain the six question
words. For the GL users and the SE experts, we have already known
‘whom’ they are and for the GL users, we also know the context
they used GL from the reviewed studies, which could be considered
as ‘when’ and ‘where’. The design of the questionnaire for experts
does not need to consider the context of “using grey literature”. We
designed seven questions to inquire about their attitudes towards
grey literature. Two of the questions inquire about attitudes toward
grey literature ( SQE 1,SQE 6) are also applicable to GL users ( SQU 1,
SQU 3). The design of GL users’ questionnaire does need to consider
the context of “using grey literature”. Therefore, the eight questions
(SQU 2,SQU 4-SQU 10) we designed about “the reasons for using grey
literature” or “how to use grey literature”, are different from thequestions for expert’s attitude ( SQE 2-SQE 5,SQE 7). They all need
to be answered by the GL users in combination with the context.
The SE experts’ responses to these questions purported not only to
enable us to understand the respondents’ views on the use of GL, but
also to provide useful suggestions for using GL in SE. The GL users’
responses to these questions could enhance our understanding of
how they used GL in research.
3.3.3 Questionnaire Administration.
We distributed the invitations to participate in the survey via
emails, which gave the reply period of two weeks for each sector of
invitees. The invitees with no reply received were gently reminded
of the survey one week after the first round invitations. In the
process of issuing the questionnaire for the GL users, we first tried
to communicate with the first author of each paper. If no response
in the survey period (two weeks), we tried to further contact the
other co-authors. In distributing the invitations to SE experts to
their survey, once any reply from an expert was received (either
a decline to reply or an automatic reply for unavailability), we
immediately stop sending the next round of email (reminder) to the
particular expert.
3.4 Data Synthesis and Analysis
We applied quantitative as well as qualitative data analysis and syn-
thesis methods for answering all the three research questions. The
questionnaire for the GL users were raised for detailed information
of their experiences with using GL in the included reviews, which
is different from the questionnaire for the SE experts’ opinions
about GL in research. Hence, we combined the data extracted from
the included reviews and the replies from the GL users to their
questionnaire ( RRD,RLDandSRU) together for synthesis. While the
replies to the questionnaire for the SE experts ( SRE) were analyzed
separately. The two data sets were analyzed and synthesized inde-
pendently except SQ1−3, which are general common questions for
both the GL users and the SE experts. Further details of the specific
1426ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
Table 5: Questions in survey
Identical questions
SQ1 W hat What is your definition of grey literature in SE?
SQ2 How How can grey literature contribute to planning future research?
SQu3 W hyWhy did you consider adding grey literature to the data set of
your research?SQe3−1 W hy Should grey literature be included as a source of evidence in SE? And Why?
SQe3−2 W hy Are you willing to include grey literature as an evidence source in your
research? And in what condition you may include grey literature?
Questions only for the grey literature users of the reviews Questions only for the community experts
SQu4 How What are your concerns and guidelines of using grey literature in research?
Why?SQe4 W hen &At what stage you may introduce grey literature in your research?
(e.g., to realize the background, to design research, or use as a data
source in research)SQu5 How What sources (e.g., databases or libraries) did/do you use to search grey
literature? Why?W here
SQu6 How What specific search strategies for grey literature were applied in your re-
search? How to obtain reliable grey literature?
SQe5 How How to obtain reliable grey literature for research? SQu7 How Did you conduct data analysis and synthesis of grey literature separate from
academic literature? And why?
SQu8 How Did you have a separate quality assessment of grey literature in your re-
search? If so, how is it different from the quality assessment of academic
literature? If not, why no separate assessment of grey literature? SQe6 HowWhat do you think are the challenges or barriers of using grey
literature for SE research?SQu9 How Was grey literature used to evaluate conclusions?
SQu10 How How does the grey literature affect the conclusions?
“u” is the shorthand for “grey literature user”. “e” is the shorthand for “expert”.
uses of qualitative synthesis and analysis methods is provided in
the online study protocols.
ForRQ1, the data extracted from the included reviews and the
replies from SQ1were combined for synthesis. The qualitative
description of the definitions of GL were coded and grouped, and
descriptive statistics was applied for analysis. We presented the
numeric results in the form of charts as well as the dimensions of
GL’s definitions emerging from the coding.
ForRQ2, the data from the included reviews and the replies to
SQ3(SQu3,SQe3−1andSQe3−2) were used. Grounded Theory was
adopted to identify the reasons for why SE researchers use GL in
research. The data was labeled, such as “following guidelines ”, “no
enough data ”, through multiple iterations of coding. After constant
comparison, the “themes” (reasons) progressively emerged. For
example, we first identified the sentences containing “reasons for
including grey literature”, then we labeled those sentences, such
as “for emerging technologies (e.g., GraphQL), grey literature tends
to provide a better coverage of relevant documents than traditional
literature ” could be labelled it as “emerging technologies can obtain
more relevant documents from GL”, “grey literature provide a high
level of coverage of the SLR topic ” could be labelled it as “GL can
highly cover SLR topic ” , “there is need to consider this grey literature
as number of peer-reviewed studies is limited ” could be labelled
it as “GL contains more non-peer reviewed reseach ”. We encoded
the label that we just set up, such as “obtain more documents ”,
“highly cover ”, “contain more research ”. After constant comparison
on higher abstraction level, We found that these three labels could
be aggregated into one label, the “extend more related research ”
(reasons) progressively emerged.
ForRQ3, the extracted data from the included reviews and the
replies to SQu4-SQu10provide the information about how SE re-
searchers used GL as a source of evidence in their research. The
replies to SQe4provide the community experts’ choices of includ-
ing GL in SE research. Techniques like aggregative coding (from
Grounded Theory ) was adopted to synthesize the data for RQ3.
Since the replies to SQe5andSQe6convey the domain experts’
subjective and diverse opinions, we keep them in comparison with
the guidelines from other disciplines for discussion (Section 6), in
which we summarize the current state-of-the-art of the use of GL in
SE and propose some major challenges in front of the community.4 RESULTS
This section describes the overall results from the literature review
and opinion survey. We identified 102 secondary studies (reviews)5
including GL in SE that were published by June, 2019. Figure 4
shows the distribution of these included reviews over years, and
the shadow areas indicate the reviews reporting rich detail of the
use of GL ( RRD). In recent years, the growing trend of the reviews in
SE incorporating GL turns to be significant. In particular, there are
72 reviews published after 2014, which is more than twice before
2014. This indicates that SE researchers have been increasingly
realizing and leveraging the potential value of GL.
Figure 4: Distribution of reviews with GL over years
Among them, we observed that not all the reviews report their
process of using GL in detail. Specifically, most of the included
reviews only claim the coverage of GL in their papers without
information on the sample size of the included GL, how the GL
was used and so on. To effectively analyze the data from these 102
reviews, two groups were identified: 1) 76 reviews that merely claim
the coverage GL in their search, and 2) 26 reviews that report the
detailed results of the included GL, e.g., sample size.
On surveying the GL users, we received the replies from the
authors of 22 included reviews, resulting in a response rate at 21.6%
(22/102), two of which were finally removed from the analysis
5The study protocols (review & survey) and the complete list of the included studies are
available at http://softeng.nju.edu.cn/tech_reports/TR-19-005-GreyLiterature-EN.pdf.
1427An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Number
2019 2018 2017
Technical Track255075100 96
53101
5091
62Number
2019 2018 2017255075100
73
3062
2383
23Number
2019 2018 2017255075100
466085
Industry TrackICSE ESEM EASE
Figure 5: Distribution of the invitees
due to the data quality issues. On surveying the SE experts, in
response to 502 invitations to the questionnaire (the distribution
shown in Figure 5), 57 undelivered emails were bounced back and
42 automatic replies were received for the unavailability during
the survey period. After two rounds of emails (invitations and
reminders) we received 35 valid replies, reaching a response rate
at 8.7% (35/403), among which 11 replies (with kind decline or
incomplete data) were further excluded from the analysis. In the
end, the replies from the authors of 20 included reviews and 24 SE
experts were used as inputs to the analysis.
5 ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS
Based on the extracted data from the included reviews ( RRD&RLD)
as well as the replies from the GL users ( SRU) and SE experts ( SRE),
the findings are generated from the analysis and synthesis to answer
the research questions.
5.1 Definitions of Grey Literature ( RQ1)
A definition of GL is the starting point of any research that is willing
to use GL. It reflects how SE researchers understand GL. RQ1aims
to present what GL is from SE researchers’ perspectives. To answer
RQ1, we used descriptive statistics to combine and synthesize the
data about the possible definitions from RRDandRLD, and the replies
toSQ1(SRU andSRE).
TypeTechnical
reportWhite
paperBlog Book/book
chapterThesis27
17
979 102030
Figure 6: Major types of grey literature
We identified five major types of GL (as shown in Figure 6) from
41 reviews (all reviews in RRDand 15 relevant reviews in RLD) that
specifically described the types of GL they used:
(1)Technical report : 65.9% (27/41) of the reviews considered
technical report as GL. Usually, they use Google Scholar
(14/27) and SEI (6/27) to search the relevant technical reports.
(2)White paper : 41.5% (17/41) of the reviews regarded white
paper as GL. Most of them (13/17) were considered in combi-
nation with technical reports. In addition to these 17 reviewsthat consider the white papers, 2 more reviews mentioned
government reports as GL as well.
(3)Blog: 22% (9/41) of the reviews took blogs into account when
considering GL. In reviews considering blogs as GL, websites
(4/9) and work-in-progress (2/9) are also common options.
(4)Book/book chapter : Also 22.0% (9/41) of the reviews included
book as GL. Like white paper, book/book chapter mostly
(8/9) appears with technical report.
(5)Thesis : 17.1% (7/41) of the reviews included PhD or Master
theses as GL.
Most (87.8%) of the reviews (36/41) mentioned at least one of the
five types of GL. These types of GL are often used in combination
in the included reviews. We found 61.1% (22/36) of the reviews
included two types of GL (e.g., technical report and thesis [12],tech-
nical report and white paper [31]). One review [ 16] included relevant
white papers, technical reports, thesis, work-in-progress, and books to
investigate state-of-the-art of testing practices. For some emerg-
ing topics (e.g., DevSecOps) in SE, blogs are used as GL as well. For
example, Håvard et al. [ 45] reported they used Google search to
find white papers, blogs and articles in their research on DevSecOps.
It is observed that although there exist so many types of GL, a
preliminary consensus on GL in SE emerge from the data, i.e. “grey
literature is produced in some way, but has not yet been peer-reviewed
in academic venue ”, which is supported by 70% of the GL users (14
inSRU) and 75% of the SE experts (18 in SRE).
However, there is no commonly accepted definition of GL yet in
SE. An expert addresses his understanding of GL in his reply to our
inquiry: ‘There are many shades of grey literature, it is not easy to
draw any clear lines. ’ Based on the replies to SQ1(SRUandSRE), the
different perspectives of SE researchers on GL can be reflected to
three major dimensions: accessibility, quality control, and expertise.
•Accessibility refers to whether the content is widely avail-
able. In SRUandSRE, we found that seven replies mentioned
about the public documents but no reply specifically stated
that GL includes private documents.
•Quality control depends on who provides the content. Nine
replies in SRUandSREmentioned about organization and
individuals and 77.8% (7/9) of them only considered organi-
zational documents as GL.
•Expertise focuses on the authority of the content producers.
Nine replies in SRUandSREthought scientific background
should be considered when identifying GL. Only one reply
indicated non-scientific source of evidence as GL.
Based on our findings, three abstract definitions of GL in SE can
be compiled in this three-dimensional perspective:
Def1. Grey literature could be any publicly available material
that can be directly obtained and not published in peer-reviewed
venues.
Def2. Grey literature could be any information provided by or-
ganizations without peer review.
Def3. Grey literature could be from a scientific background/author
and with a scientific purpose but not a peer-reviewed document.
5.2 Reasons for Including Grey Literature ( RQ2)
RQ2aims at reporting why SE researchers consider GL. To answer
RQ2, we synthesized the extracted data from the included reviews
1428ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
and the replies to SQ3(SQu3,SQe3−1andSQe3−2) using Grounded
Theory.
Table 6shows that 87.5% of the SE experts (21 in SRE) agreed
that GL should be included in SE as evidence source, and 79.2% of
these experts (19 in SRE) indicated that they were willing to include
GL as an evidence source in their research. There are 23.5% of the
the reviews (20 in RRDand 4 relevant reviews in RLD) explained
why they chose GL and 20 GL users (in SRU) replied to SQ3. After
removing seven duplicate data (cf. Section 4), a total of 37 (44-7)
data points provide the reasons for including GL in their research.
Table 6: Replies to some survey questions
Survey question # ofYes # ofNo
As a source of evidence ( SQe3−1) 21 3
Willing to include grey literature ( SQe3−2) 19 5
Separate data analysis and synthesis ( SQu7) 6 14
Separate quality assessment ( SQu8) 2 18
To evaluate the conclusions ( SQu9) 5 15
We synthesized five main factors from the 37 data points, which
are “ to seek more related research (12/37)", “ to avoid publica-
tion bias (9/37)", “ to compare different perspectives between re-
searchers and practitioners (5/37)", “ to understand the views
of the practitioner’s community (5/37)", and “ to explore un-
charted research areas (3/37)", as shown in Figure 7.
Views of the
practitioner
community
Different
perspectivesUncharted areas
Publication
bias
Related
researches
Grey
literautre
Figure 7: Reasons for including grey literature
To seek (extend) more related research .Six reviews (three in
RRDand three in RLD) and six replies (in SRU) expressed the need
to improve the level of assurance regarding the coverage of the
relevant literature by including GL. When migrating API clients to
GraphQL in practical study, Brito et al. mentioned: “for emerging
technologies (e.g., GraphQL), grey literature tends to provide a bet-
ter coverage of relevant documents than traditional literature ” [11].
Three experts noted that the mainstream publications often lack
replication studies, which are often hidden in GL. Yet being able to
replicate (or not) an outcome is valuable in itself. Another expert
expressed: “Original, but failed research may also be interesting. For
researchers who want to try a new method, they should want to know
what other people have already tried, which is seldom published.”To avoid publication bias .An expert expounded his views in
his reply to us: “some reproducible work are published on arXiv.org
mainly for timely reasons can help avoid publication bias.” He pointed
out that such work should be included as evidence sources even
though they might not have been verified by the community. But
taken the essence of their reproducibility into account, such evi-
dence sources could be objectively examined as correct or incorrect
afterwards. Salleh et al. proposed “need to include searching of gray
literature such as theses, dissertations, and technical reports " in their
pair programming for CS/SE teaching in higher education [55].
To compare different perspectives between researchers and
practitioners .One review (in RRD) reports that “grey literature is a
major input, especially in SE, where practitioners may face problems
that scholars don’t know ”. The practitioner’s experience should be
targeted and contextualized to detect potential researcher’s bias or
“too narrow questions” [ 18]. Therefore, GL can be a good represen-
tative of the state-of-the-practice. Meanwhile, four replies (in SRU)
indicate that “grey literature can also be used to verify the results of
academic literature, to know if there exist any gap between the infor-
mation coming from (academic) literature and industry ”. The proper
use of GL can help bridge the gap between the scientific studies
and the practices and views from industry. GL tends to be realistic
and report real practice, but may not be largely reliable or clearly
presented. Academic research is expected to be methodologically
sound and well presented but may be less relevant and of limited
value in guiding industrial activity.
To understand the views of the practitioner’s community .
The views of the practitioner’s community would be at the forefront
and of the hot topics of SE practices. Two GL users mentioned
multi-vocal literature is sometimes ahead of academic literature.
Practitioners provide very useful reports and share experiences
with research (e.g., in the areas of cloud computing, big data, and
IoT). For instance, Matalongaa et al. “undertook a search of the gray
literature to understand how the industry is testing context-aware
software ” [40]. Three replies considered that individual GL items
may be biased or not trustworthy, but the aggregated results can help
them accurately understand the views of the practitioner’s community
to learn the forefront and the hot topics of SE. Hence they are willing
to choose GL as another source of qualitative information for their
own research.
To explore uncharted research areas .Two respondents pre-
sented their views that GL can be valuable to shed light on yet
uncharted areas of SE research and practice, especially when such
areas “are seeing massive industrial adoption ”. In general, GL evolves
faster than the peer-reviewed literature. While discussing the pains
and gains of their research on microservices, Soldani et al indicate,
“grey literature is proved to help determining the state-of-practice on
emerging topics in software engineering (and in many other fields) ” [57].
5.3 Grey Literature in Research Lifecycle ( RQ3)
RQ3aims to understand how SE researchers work with GL in their
research. To answer RQ3, we used Grounded Theory to analyze and
synthesize the replies to SQu4–SQu10inSRU, and the replies to
SQe4inSRE. The data about the operations on GL in RRDandRLD
is presented by descriptive statistics with illustrative examples.
1429An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
A research lifecycle adapted from [ 59] (Figure 8) can cover the
use of GL in the five research phases, i.e. proposing idea, searching
GL,evaluating GL, using GL, and reporting findings.
Search Evaluate Use
 Ideas FindingsOperations on grey literature
New things from grey literature
Grey
literature
Figure 8: GL in research lifecycle
Generating new ideas from GL .As a GL user mentioned: “they
(grey literature) are useful and can inspire research for further explo-
ration ”. GL can help bridge the gap between academic state-of-the-
art and industrial state-of-practice, hence allowing to identify novel
research directions and/or to establish which research directions
should be prioritized to drive the follow-up research phases, which
is also mentioned in three replies (2/20 in SRUand 1/24 in SRE). Ten
replies (6/20 in SRUand 4/24 in SRE) suggest another effect of GL
in this stage that GL may catch the trends, the actual problems and
interests of science and society.
Searching GL on website and electronic database .In Figure 9,
apart from Google and Google Scholar, SEI website is another com-
mon source for GL. The DBLP database routinely indexes ArXiv
publications, however, which appears to be a constitute the biggest
chunk of today’s GL in SE (except theses).
Web search
engine
(e.g. google)Google
scholarSEI
websitearXiv SAFe
website2421
6
23102030
Hacker
newsSpringer
book11
Figure 9: Distribution of databases for searching GL
Keywords-based search and snowballing are the main search
strategies for GL. In general, one can use keywords in searching
industry websites, analyze the returns, and apply snowballing for
the results again. The common use of snowballing can attribute to
the cited GL in the published studies that prefers to have higher
quality. However 25% (5/20 in SRU) of the GL users are not conscious
of using any particularly strategy. They just rely on their own
intuition to choose suitable search string for the target, which may
lead to continuous trials and be error-prone.
Search tools and strategies are often used together to achieve a
relatively more complete search result of GL. One GL user “used
forward snowballing to find articles about software maintainability
prediction and metrics and searched them through Google Scholar ”.
For instance, Google Scholar in combination with snowballing areused to search the GL about text classification in [ 5] and the GL
about mutation testing in [36].
Evaluating GL in research .Table 6shows that 90% (18/20 in
SRU) of the GL users did not apply separate quality assessment for
GL, but 79.2% of the SE experts (19/24 in SRE) thought this process
should be included. Similarly, most GL users (14/20 in SRU) neither
applied separate data analysis and synthesis for GL.
The difficulties of evaluating GL (e.g., lack of guidelines on GL)
leads to the rare evaluation of GL in SE. One GL user indicated
that during their study on pair programming, “they were willing
to evaluate GL but had no specific quality assessment frameworks ”.
Al-Baik et al. [ 4] report that they had no clear criteria to assess the
quality of the GL in their study about the Kanban approach.
Forming and evaluating conclusions with GL .From our sur-
vey, 25% (5/20 in SRU) of the GL users used GL to evaluate their
conclusions in their studies whereas 75% (15/20 in SRU) of them
formed their conclusions from traditional literature together with
GL. The GL users who agreed to use GL in evaluating conclusions
claimed that they put the GL in the equal position to the traditional
literature. However, one GL user offered a different view, “after a
proper quality assessment, it (grey literature) should not make any
difference, except that the most recent grey literature might contribute
to an assessment of latest trends ”.
Table 7: Replies to SQu10
Effect on conclusions Observations
Providing similar evidence with academic literature 15 (75%)
Providing different evidence from academic literature 4 (20%)
Identifying gap between academia and industry .GL may
not provide any new findings regarding research questions but
it can be used to find whether there exist any gap between the
information coming from academia and industry. In particular, with
the exception of one review that is solely based on GL, 21.1% of
GL users (4/19 in SRU) thought GL is able to offer the perspective
different from academic literature (Table 7). As examples, one GL
user claimed: “we used grey literature to identify the gap between
state-of-the-art and state-of-the-practice of maturity models”. Putta
et al. [ 51] also reported that the business benefits derived from
using frameworks would be mentioned only in the GL.
6 DISCUSSION
Our study has provided evidence that there exist different under-
standing of the use of GL in SE research. We presented the current
state-of-the-art of GL in SE. Taking the invited experts’ opinions
from the replies to SQe5andSQe6and the findings in our research
(cf. Section 5) into consideration, we further propose the major
challenges of using GL in SE research and discuss the possible
solutions.
6.1 State-of-the-art of Grey Literature in SE
We observe that the use of GL in formal research has started gain-
ing acceptance, albeit slowly, but it would need more time before
GL can widely be recognized as an important source of potential
1430ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
evidence in SE research. The absence of a commonly accepted def-
inition of GL in SE (as mentioned in Section 5.1) indicates a sign
of “not mature”. Without a commonly accepted definition, misun-
derstanding may influence the use of GL in SE. Focusing on the
quality, different definitions can be identified in the replies from
the users and the experts. It is claimed that GL should be included
as a source of evidence when there is a reasonable amount of lit-
erature with good quality. In order to cover GL in their research,
researchers tried to define a limited scope which can ensure the
good quality of their included GL to some extent. Some researchers
advocate to include good quality in the definition of GL, like “Grey
literature in Computer Science (including Software Engineering) are
internally (not externally) quality-checked Research Reports (or Tech-
nical Reports) which are published either by universities, or by leading
Industrial ‘players’ (such as IBM, Microsoft) and which can be clearly
identified by * Author, * Report Number, * Year of Publication. ” Such
definitions overlook the timeliness of GL, i.e., grey data relevant to
very recent research may be missed. To emphasize the timeliness of
GL, some researchers have tried to extend the scope of GL to web
content like blogs. For instance, Tripathi et al. included web pages
for more information on the startup ecosystem [ 58]. Discussion on
the frontier of GL exists in some other disciplines like Public Health
as well. Whether the definition of GL should be extended to include
more “grey data” from web content such as blogs and tweets was
argued [ 7]. When it comes to SE, web content can cover much more
‘grey data’ because of the open communities like Github. This may
imply that web content could be the next frontier of GL in SE.
We have identified five main reasons for using GL in SE when
answering RQ2. Five reviews (one in RRDand four in RPD) claim
that they decided to consider adding GL in their respective reviews
based on the guidelines for conducting SLR in SE. Four replies (in
SRU) mentioned that they followed the guidelines [ 34] to cover GL
in their studies. Whereas it should be noted that the SLR guidelines
do not provide instructive advice on how to use GL. Nurdiani et al.
included both web materials and peer-reviewed literature to iden-
tify agile maturity models [ 46] but without reporting any detailed
reasoning for including GL in their review, rather they suffice to
state that they followed the SLR guidelines.
We also observed that the most common way of getting GL in
the reviewed papers is snowballing, which includes authors snow-
balling and backward snowballing. This can ensure the quality of
GL to some extent; one assumption can be that authors known for
high quality research can find and produce GL with good quality.
Whilst there is a risk that researchers only adopting snowballing
may miss some GL, which is not associated with highly reputed au-
thors, the improvement to this approach may provide a systematic
support for including GL in SE research.
Although the use of GL is not commonly accepted as a source
of evidence, many researchers used GL during different stages of
research that is an important indication of the potential value of
GL in formal research efforts. An expert expounded his views in
his reply to us:“GL can be as important as academic literature at any
stage of research." However, GL is not evenly used in all the research
stages in SE. We generally identified several stages of research that
may include GL: to realize the background, to design research, and to
use as a data source. Using GL to realize the background is commonly
recognized by the invited SE experts. Most of the valid replies fromthe invited experts claim that the GL can help them understand their
studied area and identify the potential problems. On the other hand,
the GL can only be included as a source of evidence conditionally
while a few invited experts never use GL as a source of evidence.
6.2 Challenges of Using Grey Literature in SE
Whilst researchers in SE adopted many trials on how to use GL in
SE, we identified some major challenges.
Different understanding on the definition of GL. Definition of GL
is the beginning of the use of GL. The strictest scope of GL from
the replies is limited to the documents coming from a scientific
background or authors and with a scientific purpose, but that have
not undergone peer review. In the contrast, we got definitions
which include any material unpublished (e.g., proprietary technical
documents, personal communications) or proper archiving (e.g.,
blogs, forum discussions, news reports, Gartner reports) as well.
SE researchers can draw some guidelines from other disciplines.
For example, Abanda et al. [ 1] included content from YouTube and
blogs for investigating the use of building information modeling
systems. Without a common definition which is recognized by most
SE researchers, the GL cannot be used systematically.
Paucity of ways of obtaining reliable GL. Four ways of obtaining
GL can be identified [ 24,27]: 1) GL databases; 2) customized Google
search engines; 3) targeted websites; and 4) snowballing. We ob-
served many sources that list GL producing organizations in the
health sciences, e.g., HSRIC6, Medline Plus Organizations7and
Public Health Topic Pages8. There is a paucity of reliable sources
for GL in SE. One of the most important source of GL in SE is
ArXiv publications that are enlisted by DBLP. As shown in Fig-
ure9, Google search engine, Google Scholar, reputable institutes
like CMU-SEI are commonly used for searching GL in SE. Many of
the participants of our survey indicated that good reputation is the
most useful (maybe the only) criteria of choosing a source of GL.
Despite being widely used for sourcing GL, snowballing is known
to be a relatively passive way that may miss some recent research.
Difficulty in quality assessment. Different types of GL and the lack
of standardization make it hard to evaluate the quality of GL [ 60].
This can make the use of GL costly, which may prevent researchers
from using GL in their research. Without a standardized way of
quality assessment of GL, its use may be a threat to the validity.
Noise in GL. Given GL may not be written for academic purposes,
it is difficult to identify the useful and trustworthy context for the
included GL. Without easy reproduction and verification from GL,
it would be challenging to build common trust on using GL.
Uncertain availability of GL. Different from white literature, GL
may vanish quickly. This means it may be impossible to double-
check or repeat the results if the cited GL are not properly long-
term-archived. Unless there is a iron-cast guarantee that the GL
like technical reports will remain available in well-curated archives,
the citation of GL can be in a risk.
These challenges highlight the need and potential value of the
availability suitable guidelines for supporting the use of GL in SE.
To those who need GL with good quality, they can include GL which
6https://hsric.nlm.nih.gov/hsric_public/
7https://medlineplus.gov/organizations/all_organizations.html
8https://phpartners.org/ph_public/
1431An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
is close to white literature, e.g., dissertations and theses. To those
who need enough information on the topics becoming popular,
more levels of GL can be consulted, e.g., blogs and presentations.
Moreover, the availability of guidelines can be useful in assessing
the quality of GL for inclusion in research. Different criteria of
quality assessment can be designed for different levels of GL. There
are many databases of GL in some other disciplines like Medicine.
Considering the current state that there are not many databases
of GL in SE, a list of potential and available sources of GL may
be necessary and beneficial to the community. Natural Language
processing (NLP) may be useful to reduce the noise in GL.
6.3 Limitations
We have identified some limitations of this study. We strove to
mitigate the potential impacts of the identified limitations.
Because secondary studies can better reflect the five concerns
(scope, search, analysis, evaluation, effects) of GL, we selected sec-
ondary studies for this research that were expected to help syn-
thesize the current status of the use of GL in SE. After trials, we
found it is difficult to formulate a reasonable search string to effec-
tively cover as many primary studies including GL in SE as possible.
Hence we did not consider primary studies with GL at this stage.
As the objective of this work is to “empirically explore SE re-
searchers’ views” about GL, we setup our Research Questions (RQs)
to investigate the use of GL in research only. Accordingly, we merely
include the “white literature” with GL as the review scope at this
stage, which also helps avoid introducing much noise.
In determining the scope of the invited SE experts, we selected
the program committee members of the three important confer-
ences (ICSE/ESEM/EASE) in SE. Because GL could be used in any
topics of SE research, we considered the candidates to invite from
the members of general high-quality conferences in SE to main-
tain the representatives’ diversity, instead from the conferences
on a subfield of SE. Among these venues, we further decided to
invite members of ICSE/ESEM/EASE, who also pay significant em-
phasis on methodological aspects of conducting and reporting SE
research. We believe that our selected population was sufficiently
representative of the SE researchers who can be considered experts
on the research topics. The findings based on their responses can
contribute to an evidence-based understanding of the use of GL in
SE as well as to raise community-wide awareness about the needs
for methodological support to the use of GL in SE research.
For the questionnaire of GL users, we not only contacted the
first authors of the reviews (the response rate at 13.7%), but also
continued to contact other co-authors if without the first author’s
reply. The response rate was raised to 21.6% (22/102). We invited
502 SE experts, from the program committees of the important SE
conferences (excluding two authors of this study), for participating
in our survey. The response rates are 3.9% (13/337) for ICSE, 8.5%
(11/130) for ESEM, and 8.5% (10/118) for EASE. The response rates
of the community of empirical software engineering (ESEM, EASE)
are higher than that of ICSE, which implies that the empiricists in
SE are more likely to use grey literature so that they have a stronger
interest to answer the questionnaires. The findings from the survey
can benefit the SE research community in general, as well as the
application of GL in empirical research in particular.7 CONCLUSIONS
GL has shown the potential to become an important component in
SE research. Whilst it has become important source of information
in industry settings, GL can also be an effective supplement to white
literature for research. However, the lack of systematic guidance
for conducting GL research leads to the hazy state of its use in SE.
To provide a framework for assessing GL in SE and a clear set of
recommendations/guidelines for using GL in SE is the next task we
need to focus on.
Garousi et al.[ 22] proposed guidelines for including GL in sec-
ondary studies in SE based on some MLR guidelines in other fields
and SLR guidelines in SE. Their work provides SE researchers with
a preliminary understanding of the use of GL at the methodological
level. Compared to their work, this study aims to establish a sys-
tematic and evidence-based understanding of the state-of-the-art
of the use of GL in SE research. This work also contribute to the ef-
forts aimed at providing methodological support for the systematic
use of GL in SE research by analyzing and synthesizing the data
extracted from 102 reviews, which claimed that they considered
GL, and the data from the survey of the GL users (the authors of
the reviews) and the invited SE research experts.
Based on the findings from the data analysis and synthesis, we
have identified 3 abstract definitions in terms of accessibility, qual-
ity control andexpertise, and 5 major types of GL: technical report,
white paper, blog, book/book chapter, and thesis. It is noticed that
SE researchers considered including GL mainly because they are
intended to: 1) avoid publication bias; 2) seek (extend) more related
research; 3) explore uncharted area in SE; 4) compare different per-
spectives between researchers and practitioners; and 5) understand
views of the practitioner’s community.
Combining expert opinions with our reviews, we propose a
conceptual model for how GL works in the SE research lifecycle. The
conceptual model includes five phases: generating idea, searching
GL, evaluating GL, using GL, and reporting findings. In general,
GL can help researchers develop new ideas, identify new research
questions, and discover new findings. We have also identified some
characteristics of the three operations on GL in SE.
Whilst our findings may raise the awareness about the current
state of the use of GL in SE, our effort also contributes to the
methodological improvement in empirical software engineering.
We also discuss some major challenges associated with using GL
in SE research. Thinking about these challenges may also help SE
researchers to make decision on the use GL in their research.
As our study focuses on the secondary studies including GL in
SE at this stage, one potential way of furthering this research is
to extend its scope to more primary studies that use GL as one of
their evidence sources for research. We also plan to conduct further
research based on the data from GL for gaining deeper insights into
as well as improvements for the use of GL in SE research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No.61572251).
1432ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea He Zhang, Xin Zhou, Xin Huang, Huang Huang, and Muhammad Ali Babar
REFERENCES
[1]F. Henry Abanda, C. Vidalakis, Akponanabofa Henry Oti, and Joseph H.M. Tah.
2015. A critical analysis of Building Information Modelling systems used in
construction projects. Advances in Engineering Software 90 (2015), 183–201.
[2]Jean Adams, Frances C. Hillier-Brown, Helen J. Moore, Amelia A. Lake, Vera
Araujo-Soares, Martin White, and Carolyn Summerbell. 2016. Searching and
synthesising ‘grey literature’ and ‘grey information’ in public health: critical
reflections on three case studies. Systematic Reviews 5, 1 (2016), 164.
[3]Richard J. Adams, Palie Smart, and Anne Sigismund Huff. 2017. Shades of grey:
guidelines for working with the grey literature in systematic reviews for manage-
ment and organizational studies. International Journal of Management Reviews 19,
4 (2017), 432–454.
[4]Osama Al-Baik and James Miller. 2015. The kanban approach, between agility
and leanness: a systematic review. Empirical Software Engineering 20, 6 (2015),
1861–1897.
[5]Waleed Alabbas, Haider M. Al-Khateeb, and Ali Mansour. 2016. Arabic text classi-
fication methods: Systematic literature review of primary studies. In Proceedings
of the 4th IEEE International Colloquium on Information Science and Technology.
IEEE, 361–367.
[6]Vilma Alberani, Paola de Castro Pietrangeli, and Anna Maria Rossi Mazza. 1990.
The use of grey literature in health sciences: a preliminary survey. Bulletin of the
Medical Library Association 78, 4 (1990), 358.
[7]Marcus Banks. 2009. Blog posts and tweets: the next frontier for grey literature.
InGrey literature in library and information studies. De Gruyter.
[8]Marcus A. Banks. 2006. Towards a continuum of scholarship: the eventual collapse
of the distinction between grey and non-grey literature. Publishing Research
Quarterly 22, 1 (2006), 4–11.
[9]Sarah P. Bellefontaine and Catherine M. Lee. 2014. Between Black and White:
Examining Grey Literature in Meta-analyses of Psychological Research. Journal
of Child and Family Studies 23, 8 (2014), 1378–1388.
[10] Sally C. Brailsford, Paul Robert Harper, Brijesh Patel, and Martin Pitt. 2009. An
analysis of the academic literature on simulation and modelling in health care.
Journal of Simulation 3, 3 (2009), 130–140.
[11] Gleison Brito, Thais Mombach, and Marco Tulio Valente. 2019. Migrating to
GraphQL: A Practical Assessment. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International
Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering. IEEE, 140–150.
[12] Marcus Ciolkowski. 2009. What do we know about perspective-based reading? An
approach for quantitative aggregation in software engineering. In Proceedings of the
Third International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement,
ESEM 2009, October 15-16, 2009, Lake Buena Vista, Florida, USA. 133–144.
[13] Vicki S. Conn, Jeffrey C. Valentine, Harris M. Cooper, and Marilyn J. Rantz. 2003.
Grey literature in meta-analyses. Nursing Research 52, 4 (2003), 256–261.
[14] Alison M. Cook, Ilora G. Finlay, Adrian G.K. Edwards, Kerenza Hood, Irene J.
Higginson, Danielle M. Goodwin, Charles E. Normand, and Hannah-Rose Douglas.
2001. Efficiency of searching the grey literature in palliative care. Journal of Pain
and Symptom Management 22, 3 (2001), 797–801.
[15] Ruth Cordes. 2004. Is grey literature ever used? Using citation analysis to measure
the impact of GESAMP, an international marine scientific advisory body. Canadian
Journal of Information and Library Science 28, 1 (2004), 49–69.
[16] Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto, Ivan do Carmo Machado, John D. Mc-
Gregor, Eduardo Santana de Almeida, and Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira. 2011.
A systematic mapping study of software product lines testing. Information &
Software Technology 53, 5 (2011), 407–423.
[17] Rosa Di Cesare and Roberta Ruggieri. 2006. The evaluation of grey literature
using bibliometric indicators: A methodological proposal. (2006), 57–63.
[18] Oscar Díaz, Jeremías P. Contell, and John R. Venable. 2017. Strategic Reading in
Design Science: Let Root-Cause Analysis Guide Your Readings. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Designing the Digital Transformation. Springer,
231–246.
[19] Kathel Dunn. 2005. Impact of the inclusion of grey literature on the scholarly
communication patterns of an interdisciplinary specialty. Grey journal 1, 1 (2005),
25–30.
[20] Dominic Farace and Joachim Schöpfel. 2010. Grey literature in library and infor-
mation studies. Walter de Gruyter.
[21] Vahid Garousi, Michael Felderer, and Mika V. Mäntylä. 2016. The need for
multivocal literature reviews in software engineering: complementing systematic
literature reviews with grey literature. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering. ACM, 1–6.
[22] Vahid Garousi, Michael Felderer, and Mika V Mäntylä. 2019. Guidelines for
including grey literature and conducting multivocal literature reviews in software
engineering. Information and Software Technology 106 (2019), 101–121.
[23] Julia Gelfand. 1998. Teaching and exposing grey literature: what the information
profession needs to know-examples from the sciences. Collection building 17, 4
(1998), 159–166.
[24] Dean Giustini. 2012. Finding the hard to finds: Searching for grey literature.
(2012).[25] Dean Giustini and Diane Thompson. 2006. Finding the Hard to Finds: Searching
for Grey (Gray) Literature. Vancouver, UBC: University of British Columbia.
[26] Robert L. Glass. 2006. Software Creativity 2.0. Developer.* Books.
[27] Katelyn Godin, Jackie Stapleton, Sharon I. Kirkpatrick, Rhona M. Hanning, and
Scott T. Leatherdale. 2015. Applying systematic review search methods to the grey
literature: a case study examining guidelines for school-based breakfast programs
in Canada. Systematic Reviews 4, 1 (2015), 138.
[28] Neal R. Haddaway. 2015. The use of web-scraping software in searching for grey
literature. Grey Journal 11, 3 (2015), 186–190.
[29] Neal Robert Haddaway, Alexandra Mary Collins, Deborah Coughlin, and Stuart
Kirk. 2015. The role of Google Scholar in evidence reviews and its applicability to
grey literature searching. PloS One 10, 9 (2015).
[30] Michele Harms. 2004. The Survey Research Handbook.
[31] Ali Idri, Sofia Ouhbi, Jose Luis Fernandezaleman, and Ambrosio Toval. 2012.
A survey of requirements engineering education. In Proceedings of the Global
Engineering Education Conference.
[32] Nicholas A. John. 2013. The social logics of sharing. The Communication Review
16, 3 (2013), 113–131.
[33] Sven Kepes, George C. Banks, Michael McDaniel, and Deborah L. Whetzel. 2012.
Publication bias in the organizational sciences. Organizational Research Methods
15, 4 (2012), 624–662.
[34] Barbara Kitchenham and Stuart Charters. 2007. Guidelines for Performing Sys-
tematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering (version 2.3). Technical Report.
Keele University and University of Durham.
[35] Carol Lefebvre, Eric Manheimer, and Julie Glanville. 2008. Searching for studies.
Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions: Cochrane book series
(2008), 95–150.
[36] Lech Madeyski, Wojciech Orzeszyna, Richard Torkar, and Mariusz Jozala. 2014.
Overcoming the Equivalent Mutant Problem: A Systematic Literature Review
and a Comparative Experiment of Second Order Mutation. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 40, 1 (2014), 23–42.
[37] Quenby Mahood, Dwayne Van Eerd, and Emma Irvin. 2014. Searching for grey
literature for systematic reviews: challenges and benefits. Research Synthesis
Methods 5, 3 (2014), 221–234.
[38] Sue Mallett, Sally Hopewell, and Mike J. Clarke. 2002. Grey literature in systematic
reviews: The first 1000 Cochrane systematic reviews. In Proceedings of the 4th
Symposium on Systematic Reviews: Pushing the Boundaries. 2–4.
[39] José Luis R. Martin, Víctor Pérez, Montse Sacristán, and Enric Álvarez. 2005. Is
grey literature essential for a better control of publication bias in psychiatry? An
example from three meta-analyses of schizophrenia. European Psychiatry 20, 8
(2005), 550–553.
[40] Santiago Matalonga, Felyppe Rodrigues, and Guilherme Horta Travassos. 2017.
Characterizing testing methods for context-aware software systems: Results from
a quasi-systematic literature review. Journal of Systems & Software 131 (2017),
1–21.
[41] Laura McAuley, Peter Tugwell, and David Moher. 2000. Does the inclusion
of grey literature influence estimates of intervention effectiveness reported in
meta-analyses? The Lancet 356, 9237 (2000), 1228–1231.
[42] Yuko McGrath, Mark Bellis, Keith Edmonds, Jim McVeigh, and Harry Sumnall.
2006. Review of grey literature on drug prevention among young people. NICE
London.
[43] Martin McHugh, Oisín Cawley, Fergal McCaffery, Ita Richardson, and Xiaofeng
Wang. 2013. An agile v-model for medical device software development to over-
come the challenges with plan-driven software development lifecycles. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Software Engineering in Health Care .
IEEE Press, 12–19.
[44] Vesh Modi, Nandita Murukutla, World Lung Foudation, Paresh Dave, Tahir Turk,
and World Lung Foundation. 2012. Impact Evaluation of Smoke-Free Mass Media
Campaign On Knowledge, Attitude and Behavior of the Target Audience In India.
InProceedings of the 2012 National Conference on Health Communication Marketing
and Media.
[45] Håvard Myrbakken and Ricardo Colomo Palacios. 2017. DevSecOps: A Multivocal
Literature Review. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Software
Process Improvement and Capability Determination. 17–29.
[46] Indira Nurdiani, Jürgen Börstlerrstler, Samuel Fricker, Kai Petersen, and Pana-
giota Chatzipetrou. 2019. Understanding the order of agile practice introduction:
Comparing agile maturity models and practitioners’ experience. Journal of Systems
& Software 156 (2019), 1 – 20.
[47] Rodney T. Ogawa and Betty Malen. 1991. A Response to Commentaries on
“Towards Rigor in Reviews of Multivocal Literatures...”. Review of Educational
Research 61, 3 (1991), 307–313.
[48] Rodney T. Ogawa and Betty Malen. 1991. Towards rigor in reviews of multivocal
literatures: Applying the exploratory case study method. Review of Educational
Research 61, 3 (1991), 265–286.
[49] Anthony Petrosino, Robert F. Boruch, Cath Rounding, Steve McDonald, and Iain
Chalmers. 2000. The Campbell Collaboration Social, Psychological, Educational
and Criminological Trials Register (C2-SPECTR) to Facilitate the Preparation
1433An Evidence-Based Inquiry into the Use of Grey Literature
in Software Engineering ICSE ’20, May 23–29, 2020, Seoul, Republic of Korea
and Maintenance of Systematic Reviews of Social and Educational Interventions.
Evaluation & Research in Education 14, 3-4 (2000), 206–219.
[50] N.W. Posnett. 1984. Factors affecting the accessibility of nonconventional lit-
erature for use in the United Kingdom and some possible solutions. Library
Acquisitions: Practice & Theory 8, 4 (1984), 275–285.
[51] Abheeshta Putta, Maria Paasivaara, and Casper Lassenius. 2018. Benefits and
Challenges of Adopting the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe): Preliminary Results
from a Multivocal Literature Review. In Proceedings of the 19th International Con-
ference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement. 334–351.
[52] Austen Rainer and Ashley Williams. 2019. Heuristics for improving the rigour and
relevance of grey literature searches for software engineering research. Information
and Software Technology 106 (2019), 231–233.
[53] Hannah R. Rothstein, Alexander J. Sutton, and Michael Borenstein. 2005. Publi-
cation bias in meta-analysis. John Wiley & Sons.
[54] Ahlam A. Saleh, Melissa A. Ratajeski, and Marnie Bertolet. 2014. Grey literature
searching for health sciences systematic reviews: a prospective study of time spent
and resources utilized. Evidence based Library and Information Practice 9, 3 (2014),
28–50.
[55] Norsaremah Salleh, Emilia Mendes, and John Grundy. 2010. Empirical studies of
pair programming for CS/SE teaching in higher education: A systematic literaturereview. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 37, 4 (2010), 509–525.
[56] Joachim Schöpfel. 2006. Observations on the future of grey literature. The Grey
Journal 2, 2 (2006), 67–76.
[57] Jacopo Soldani, Damian Andrew Tamburri, and Willem-Jan van den Heuvel. 2018.
The pains and gains of microservices: A Systematic grey literature review. Journal
of Systems and Software 146 (2018), 215–232.
[58] Nirnaya Tripathi, Pertti Seppänen, Ganesh Boominathan, Markku Oivo, and
Kari Liukkunen. 2019. Insights into startup ecosystems through exploration of
multi-vocal literature. Information & Software Technology 105 (2019), 56–77.
[59] K.T.L. Vaughan, Barrie E. Hayes, Rachel C. Lerner, Karen R. McElfresh, Laura
Pavlech, David Romito, Laurie H. Reeves, and Erin N. Morris. 2013. Development
of the research lifecycle model for library services. Journal of the Medical Library
Association 101, 4 (2013), 310–314.
[60] Affan Yasin and Muhammad Ijlal Hasnain. 2012. On the quality of grey literature
and its use in information synthesis during systematic literature reviews. (2012).
[61] Robert K. Yin. 1991. Advancing Rigorous Methodologies: A Review of “Towards
Rigor in Reviews of Multivocal Literatures...”. Review of Educational Research 61, 3
(1991), 299–305.
1434