Selecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective
Enrique Larios Vargas
Software Improvement Group
The Netherlands
e.lariosvargas@sig.euMaurício Aniche
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
M.FinavaroAniche@tudelft.nlChristoph Treude
University of Adelaide
Australia
christoph.treude@adelaide.edu.au
Magiel Bruntink
Software Improvement Group
The Netherlands
m.bruntink@sig.euGeorgios Gousios
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
G.Gousios@tudelft.nl
ABSTRACT
The selection of third-party libraries is an essential element of vir-
tually any software development project. However, deciding which
libraries to choose is a challenging practical problem. Selecting the
wrong library can severely impact a software project in terms of
cost, time, and development effort, with the severity of the impact
depending on the role of the library in the software architecture,
among others. Despite the importance of following a careful library
selection process, in practice, the selection of third-party libraries is
still conducted in an ad-hoc manner, where dozens of factors play
an influential role in the decision.
In this paper, we study the factors that influence the selection
process of libraries, as perceived by industry developers. To that aim,
we perform a cross-sectional interview study with 16 developers
from 11 different businesses and survey 115 developers that are
involved in the selection of libraries. We systematically devised a
comprehensive set of 26 technical, human, and economic factors
that developers take into consideration when selecting a software
library. Eight of these factors are new to the literature. We explain
each of these factors and how they play a role in the decision. Finally,
we discuss the implications of our work to library maintainers,
potential library users, package manager developers, and empirical
software engineering researchers.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Software development pro-
cess management .
KEYWORDS
software libraries, APIs, library adoption, library selection, empiri-
cal software engineering.
ACM Reference Format:
Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink,
and Georgios Gousios. 2020. Selecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practition-
ers’ Perspective. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint European Software
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7043-1/20/11. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409711Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engi-
neering (ESEC/FSE ’20), November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409711
1 INTRODUCTION
The use of third-party libraries1is a recurrent practice among
practitioners to speed up the development of software systems
and, as a consequence, to reduce its costs [ 20]. Software libraries
provide developers with customized functionality which is useful
while developing software [ 15]. Developers do not need to “reinvent
the wheel”, but rather seek libraries that suit their purpose [22].
The selection of the right library to adopt is a demanding task
for developers. The number of factors that should be taken into
account during the selection process is significant. For example, the
adoption of a library that goes against the existing architectural
decisions of the software system might increase its adoption time;
a library that is easy to use but not performant enough might have
an impact on the quality of the system; a library that has good
documentation and active community, but with which the team has
had a bad experience, might not be the best possible choice. On top
of that, the number of libraries available is overgrowing [ 27]. While
such growth gives developers more options, it also complicates
their selection process.
The process that developers follow to select a software library is
often ad-hoc, and we have no clear evidence that these decisions are
quality-driven [29]. Indeed, different software practitioners might
consider different criteria when choosing a library, e.g., how much
they trust it [ 12], and how popular the library is in its ecosystem [ 16–
18,28]. However, we argue that the lack of a systematic approach
may lead software developers to choose libraries arbitrarily, without
considering the consequences of their decisions .
Being aware of the criteria applied by practitioners and how these
factors affect the selection of third-party libraries would enable po-
tential new users to make systematic decisions, side-stepping biases
that could lead to suboptimal choices [ 2,19]. It would also enable
researchers to improve the state-of-the-art in software engineering
tools. It is vital to have a clear understanding of the actual criteria
and decision process before building tools to assist practitioners.
Our work builds the foundation for an in-depth understanding of
how developers select their libraries. We conjecture that together
with appropriate tools, supported by large-scale data, high trans-
parency, and near-real-time feedback [ 14], practitioners will be
1We use the term “library” to denote frameworks, libraries, and APIs.arXiv:2005.12574v2  [cs.SE]  9 Sep 2020ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
capable of making data-driven (and thus, more assertive) decisions
about which libraries to adopt.
The software engineering research community has been inves-
tigating the selection process of libraries and, more specifically,
the factors that developers take into consideration (e.g., [ 1,4,5,9,
23,27]; see Table 3 for a full list of factors found in related work).
However, the spectrum of factors influencing the decision is, as we
see in the table mentioned above, highly diverse and dependent on
the context, leaving the door open for more research in this area.
In this paper, we aim to understand what are the factors that
influence the library selection process, as perceived by industry
practitioners. We present the results of a cross-sectional interview
study and a survey. We first interviewed 16 software practitioners
from 11 companies in different domains, such as banking, con-
sulting, and oil and gas. We used semi-structured interviews to
collect data about the criteria that software practitioners follow
when selecting libraries. Subsequently, we challenged the interview
findings with an additional 115 participants from the industry and
open source communities.
Our study leads to the following contributions:
(a)A comprehensive set of 26 factors (8 of them being new to the
literature) that influence the selection process of software
libraries, after interviewing 16 developers from different busi-
nesses, and validating them with 115 survey respondents.
(b)A discussion of the implications of our work on library main-
tainers (how they can increase the adoption rate of their
libraries), potential library users (how they can make their
selection process more systematic), package manager devel-
opers (how these tools can support developers in selecting
libraries), and researchers (suggestions for future work).
2 RESEARCH METHOD
The goal of this study is to understand the factors that practi-
tioners take into account when selecting software libraries .
To that aim, our research methodology consisted of a cross-sectional
interview study [ 3] and a survey. Our study design included the
following three steps: (i) conduct semi-structured interviews with
software practitioners involved in the selection of software libraries,
(ii) build and iteratively refine the factors book through several dis-
cussions among the researchers and member checking sessions,
and (iii) conduct a survey to challenge and validate the findings.
In the following sections, we explain our methodology in detail.
Private information from interviewees and companies has been
anonymized. The authors do not have the participants’ authoriza-
tion to make the raw interview scripts available as they contain
private information.
2.1 Interviews
Our first step was to conduct semi-structured interviews. Interview-
based research is appropriate for gathering in-depth descriptions
of experiences, observations, and assessments [ 8]. Semi-structured
interviews, in contrast to entirely structured interviews, tend to
encourage participants to freely share their thoughts and enable
researchers to explore new ideas based on the answers of the inter-
viewee [10].The goal of the interviews was to collect the developers’ sto-
ries, experiences, and challenges on how they decided to select (or
not select) a software library. Our interview guide focused on the
following topics:
(a)the practitioner’s (i.e., the interviewee’s) perception of influ-
ential factors for library selection,
(b)how these factors play an influential role in the selection
process,
(c)the sources of information (e.g., websites, work colleagues)
that are commonly used by practitioners while selecting a
library, and
(d)the challenges that practitioners commonly face in the se-
lection process.
To foster the discussion and make it always about a recent expe-
rience the participants had, we often reminded them to talk about
their most recent experiences in selecting third-party libraries. The
influential factors for library selection emerged out of the stories
that practitioners were telling. We avoided their personal opinions
when disconnected from a real case.
We recruited participants who have been part of software library
selection processes in the past. The initial pool of interviewees came
from convenience sampling: the authors of this paper invited their
industry contacts to join the study. Other participants were then
collected by snowballing (P10, P13, P14, P15, P16). We had strict
selection criteria, where participants should meet the following
conditions: (a) they should have at least four years of experience,
and (b) they had to be intensively involved in the selection of
software libraries.
We conducted interviews until the authors came to an agreement
that theoretical saturation was reached. According to Strauss and
Corbin [ 25], sampling should be discontinued once the already
collected data is considered sufficiently dense, and data collection
no longer generates new information.
In the end, we interviewed 16 software practitioners (the par-
ticipants are identified as P1 – P16 throughout this paper) from 11
different companies that work in 9 different fields. Each interview
lasted around 45 minutes, producing a total of around 15 hours of
recorded audio. The experience of participants in software develop-
ment ranged from 4 to 15 years (median=10 years). In Table 1, we
detail our participants.
We iteratively built a factors book containing the influential
factors mentioned by the interviewees. After each interview, one
of the researchers (the first author of this paper) transcribed the
audio recording and performed open coding of the interview data,
using the MaxQDA software. The open coding process consisted of
understanding the factors that the interviewee takes into account
when selecting a software library and attaching a code to it. Then,
two researchers (the first two authors of the paper) analyzed the
factors that emerged from that participant, compared them with the
findings from previous participants, and refined the factors book.
Finally, we performed member-checking sessions to validate the
factors book with six of the interviewees. Ten participants were
randomly selected and invited for the member-checking stage. Six
of them were available to participate. The goal of member-checking
was to enable participants to analyze the factors book critically andSelecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Interviewee Company Business Company size Role/Function Years of Exp.
P1 C Banking 10000+ Front-End Software Developer 4
P2 B Education 5000+ Software Developer 8
P3 - Research self-employed Scientific developer 4
P4 A Consultancy 100+ Senior Technical Consultant 12
P5 A Consultancy 100+ Head of Software Development Team 15
P6 B E-Learning 50+ Software Developer 8
P7 A Consultancy 100+ Senior Technical Consultant 12
P8 D CRM and Digital Process Automation 5000+ Software Developer 4
P9 E Full stream oil and gas solutions 10000+ Software Developer 7
P10 F Busines to Business Framework 100+ Senior Software Engineer 8
P11 G Automated visual monitoring solutions 50+ Senior Software Engineer 13
P12 H Microscopic Imaging 50+ Senior Scientific Software Engineer 15
P13 I All-in-one mobile travel platform 50+ Senior Software Engineer 14
P14 I All-in-one mobile travel platform 50+ Senior Software Engineer/Solution Architect 10
P15 J Embedded Systems 1000+ Senior Software Engineer 13
P16 K Consultancy 10000+ Software Engineer/Technical Architect 8
Table 1: Profile of our participants (N=16). Companies are anonymized.
to provide feedback. The sessions were conducted in no specific or-
der but according to the availability of our participants. We repeated
this process until we considered the factors book mature enough.
To reach this decision, we also took into account the amount of
feedback received in each member-checking session (similar to
saturation, we stopped when the participants’ feedback was not
producing any new insights). Throughout this process, we devised
ten different versions of the factors book. The first four versions
resulted from four rounds of discussions among the researchers,
and six other versions were generated after each member-checking
session. The final version of the factors book resulted in 26 influ-
ential factors grouped in technical, human, and economic aspects
of the library.
2.2 Survey
We designed a survey to validate the findings obtained from the
interviews. Each question was related to a factor in our factors
book. Participants had to indicate their perception on whether each
factor had low or high influence on the selection process of a library.
Answer options ranged from no influence to high influence, in a
4-points Likert scale (i.e., no influence, low influence, moderate
influence, high influence). We also allowed respondents to answer
“I do not know” or “does not apply”.
To avoid possible confusion from participants, for each of the
factors, we do not show the “raw factor”, but a sentence that explains
it. We refined the sentences by means of pilots with four participants
(these data points were later discarded and are not part of our
results). To complement our list of factors, we also asked survey
participants, through an open-ended question, what other factors
have influenced their selection of libraries, as a strategy to ensure
the quality of the interview data. SurveyGizmo’s estimated time to
answer the survey was seven minutes.
Aiming to recruit industry professionals, we shared the survey
on four social networks: Twitter, LinkedIn, Reddit, and Facebook.
We informed participants that we would reward their answers by
donating a total of 150 Euros, proportionally divided to the threedifferent institutions that participants could choose (Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF), UNICEF, and the Red Cross).
We ran the survey in two different languages (English and Brazil-
ian Portuguese), obtaining 177 responses in total. However, some
participants did not answer all questions which were discarded
from the analysis, leaving a total of 115 complete responses. Our
survey respondents were from 4 different continents (42 from Eu-
rope, 70 from North and South America, 1 from Asia, and 2 from
Oceania). Respondents vary regarding how many years of work
experience they have, with a range between 1 and 30 years of work
experience (median = 9 years). Concerning the type of business
where our respondents work, 34% indicated to be working in web
development, 13% in consulting, 12% in education, 11% in banking
software development, 6% in scientific development, 3% in mobile
development, 2% in open source development, and 19% in others.
Finally, concerning respondents’ role in their software projects, 36%
indicated to be technical lead or software architects, 42% software
developers, 11% researchers, 5% project or product managers, and
6% other roles.
The survey form, the mapping between the survey questions and
the factors in the factors book, as well as the answers we received,
are available in our online appendix [13].
3 RESULTS
We group the aspects that practitioners take into account when
selecting libraries into three categories of factors: (a) technical
(functionality ,quality ,type of project , and release process ), (b) hu-
man ( stakeholders ,organization ,individual , and community ), and
(c) economic factors ( total cost of ownership (TCO) and risk). In
Table 2, we show the entire landscape of factors, interviewees that
mention that factor, and the percentage of survey participants that
indicate certain levels of influence for a given factor when selecting
a library.
In the following, we discuss each of the three categories in detail
(Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3), as well as the role of these factors in the
overall selection process (Section 3.4).ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14 P15 P16 H L+M N R U/P
Technical factors
Software system
Brown- or green-field • • • • • • • • •
 10% 55% 18% ✓ *
Functionality
Size and complexity • • • • • •
 16% 71% 11% P
Fit for purpose • • • • • • • • • •
 36% 52% 7% U
Quality
Alignment w/ architecture • • • • •
 21% 69% 5% U
Usability • • • • • • •
 55% 42% 3% P
Documentation • • • • • • • • • • •
 51% 47% 1% U/P
Security • • • • • • • •
 39% 53% 4% U/P
Performance • • • • •
 32% 63% 5% P
Well tested • • • •
 11% 68% 18% U
Release
Active maintenance • • • • • • • • • • •
 44% 47% 7% U
Maturity and stability • • • • • •
 62% 37% 0% U
Release cycle frequency • • • • •
 3% 74% 22% U
Human factors
Stakeholders
Customers • • •
 7% 30% 54% U/P
Other teams • • • • •
 4% 62% 23% ✓ U/P
Project/product managers • •
 3% 48% 36% ✓ U/P
Development team • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
 30% 57% 7% U/P
Organization
Type of industry • • •
 9% 46% 36% ✓ U/P
Culture and policies • • • • •
 8% 52% 28% ✓ U/P
Management and strategy • •
 8% 47% 35% ✓ U/P
Individual
Self-perception • • •
 16% 69% 12% ✓ U/P
Community
Experience • • • • • • • • •
 23% 63% 9% U/P
Activeness • • • • • • •
 30% 62% 8% U/P
Popularity • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
 30% 59% 10% U/P
Economical factors
Total cost of ownership
Time and budget • • • • • •
 39% 48% 10% U/P
License • • • • • • • • • • • •
 45% 42% 11% U
Risk
Risk assessment • • • • •
 38% 57% 5% ✓ P
Table 2: The 26 factors, per interviewee (P1-P16). Bar plots represent the responses of our 115 survey participants (no influence,
low influence, moderate influence, high influence, and does not apply, respectively). Columns “H” (high influence), “L+M”
(low or moderate influence), and “N” (no influence) indicate their percentage. The percentage of respondents who choose
“NA” (Not Applicable) is not shown in the table. R indicates whether the factor is a new contribution to the existing literature.
U/P indicates whether the factor is evaluated during the U (up-front) or P (prototyping) phase.
3.1 Technical Factors
Practitioners consider three technical aspects when selecting a li-
brary: the characteristics of its releases and release process ,its quality
attributes , and the functionalities it provides . Moreover, as a charac-
teristic of the software that will make use of the library, the project
being a green-field development project (i.e., it starts from scratch,
with no restrictions from existing software or previous architectural
decisions) or a brown-field development project (i.e., it contains con-
straints that could have been imposed by existing software) is also
a technical factor taken into account by practitioners.
3.1.1 The characteristics of the releases and the release pro-
cess of the library. Practitioners explain that every time a new
library is adopted in a project, a new dependency on someone else’s
code is established for the long term. Decision-makers trust in li-
braries that provide positive signs of being active for a long period.Therefore, characteristics that are associated with a library’s re-
lease provide developers with indicators to predict for how long a
library will be alive, i.e., whether the library is actively maintained,
whether it offers long-term support, its maturity and steady evolu-
tion, how often it releases new versions, whether there is a recent
release, and how stable it is.
Theactive maintenance of a library is perceived as a positive sign
by practitioners (P1-P3, P5, P7, P9-P13, P16). A continuous decrease
in a library’s maintenance activity provides indications of a short
life span of the library. For instance, P13 points out that “ If a project
is not active for one year, I would think that is a dead project, and I
will discard it ”. Given that there is not a single way of measuring
whether a library is actively maintained, practitioners rely on dif-
ferent metrics, e.g., by investigating the volume of contributions
in the library’s repository (P1), by exploring how regularly theSelecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
library is updated (P3, P5), by observing if its most recent release
has happened recently (P7, P11, P16), or by seeing whether con-
tributors are actively working on new features or fixing bugs (P9).
In our survey, we note that 44% of the participants perceive that a
library being actively maintained is a highly influential factor in
the selection process. Only 7% consider it not to have any influence
in the selection process (
 ).
The concern for long-term support forces participants to exam-
ine other characteristics such as the maturity and stability of the
library. P6 points out that examing stability is fundamental for un-
derstanding if it is necessary to update the library: “ I care about
stability in the sense if I need to update the library frequently. Because
I don’t want to. Hibernate, for example, you can spend one year using
an old version, and that is ok ”. We observe that participants do not
have a standard way to measure the stability of a library; examining
the volume of bugs identified per release (P10), and whether the
library is getting enough “momentum” (P2, P4, and P12) were some
of the techniques our participants mentioned. 62% of our survey
respondents perceive maturity and stability as a highly influential
factor, and none of the respondents believes this factor does not
have any influence in the selection process (
 ).
The release process itself, in particular, the release frequency of a
library, is also a factor that participants take into account (P1, P4, P7,
P11, P13). In general, we observe that short release cycles serve as
a positive factor for practitioners to select a library. However, how
practitioners take this factor into account might vary according
to the type of library they are about to select. For example, P1
perceives libraries with short release cycles in a positive manner. An
exception is made when the library is considered to be a “big one”,
for example, a complex persistence framework such as Hibernate
(which is “bigger” compared to a “simple” string utils library). In
their words: “ I would trust more in a library which has shorter release
cycles, but if it is a big library I would not prefer it because that means
that I will need to update libraries to a recent version frequently ”.
Moreover, P13 points out that “ As long as they are releasing, one
month, or two months, I think it is better than being updated like in a
year. At least I can see that the project is alive ”. Interestingly, only 3%
of our survey respondents perceive this factor as highly influential.
However, 74% of our respondents consider it as a low/moderate
influential factor (
 ).
3.1.2 The quality attributes of the library. Practitioners af-
firm that quality-related factors are strong determinants to decide
whether to select a library. Given the existence of a large number
of quality attributes, we introduce in this section the characteris-
tics which were strongly emphasized in the interviews. These are
documentation ,usability ,security vulnerabilities ,alignment with the
architecture ,performance , and test coverage .
Documentation is, in general, perceived as a good sign of the
library’s quality. This factor is used in different ways among our
participants. A group of our participants (P2, P3, P6, P7, P9, P10,
P15, P16) examine the documentation up-front to determine if there
are good examples or tutorials that clearly explain how to use the
library. This is not necessarily the official documentation of the
library but also information provided by forums or blog posts which
describe examples of how the library is being used. The presence
of this information helps practitioners to have a first impression ofthe library, in terms of how easy it is to use, and in general, what
the library looks like. On the other hand, other participants (P1 and
P5) emphasize the role of documentation during prototype develop-
ment. For instance, P5 states that “ documentation is something that
plays a role when you are trying to implement a proof of concept, not
before ”. 51% of our survey respondents perceive the quality of the
documentation as a highly influential factor in the selection process,
and 47% consider it a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
Another quality characteristic extensively mentioned among
participants (P2, P3, P7-P9, P11, P16) is usability (i.e., how easy it is
to use the library), which is seen as a positive characteristic in the
selection process. For instance, P11 points out that “ if the library is
very complex to use or causes a lot of overhead, I tend to go for another
candidate ”.Usability is identified as an influential factor by 55% of
our survey respondents who consider it a highly influential factor,
and 42% perceive it as low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
Practitioners (P5, P7, P9, P10, P13) also indicate that they tend
to select libraries with good alignment between the library and
the core technologies used in their project or with a good match
with the overall software architecture. P9 states that “ Compatibility
with the software architecture is a factor that I check during the
prototyping by identifying how easy it is to integrate the library to
my project ”. Moreover, a considerable group of participants (P1, P2,
P6, P7, P10, P12-P15, P16) highlights as well that the selection of
software libraries is limited by the major technology choices made
in the project. P12 mentions that “ If the core of our software is built
using C++, we will use only libraries that support the language, we
are not building wrappers to force the communication ”. 21% of our
survey respondents perceive the alignment between the library and
the architectural decisions and technology stack of their projects
as a highly influential factor in the library selection process, and
69% consider it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
How much a software library is tested is perceived by some prac-
titioners (P1, P10, P11, P15) as a good indicator of the quality of the
library. Practitioners tend to discard libraries with low test coverage.
Moreover, developers also take into account during the selection of
libraries is knowing how often security vulnerabilities occur (P1, P2,
P5, P7, P11, P13, P15, P16). Interestingly, some participants affirm
not to consider this factor up-front. For instance, P15 mentions that
“Checking security vulnerabilities is important, but I do not check it
up-front. [I’d] probably using static analysis tools but they do not
check everything ”. 11% of our survey respondents perceive that test-
ing is a highly influential factor, 68% of our respondents consider it
a low/moderate influential factor, and 18% believe this factor not
to influence the selection process (
 ). Surprisingly, only 39%
of our respondents perceive the security aspects of the library as a
highly influential factor, 53% consider it a low/moderate influential
factor, and only 4% believe it does not play any role in the selection
process (
 ).
Finally, we also observe that performance is considered by prac-
titioners (P2, P8-P9, P12, P15) as a critical quality attribute of a
library. 32% of our survey respondents perceive that performance
is a highly influential factor for the selection of a library, and 63%
consider it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
3.1.3 Functionalities provided by the library. As expected,
practitioners (P1-P5, P7, P8, P10, P13, P15-P16) tend to select li-
braries which offer a good match between their set of functional-
ities and the required features needed in the software. The fit for
purpose factor emerges as an essential criterion when exploring
potential libraries (
 ).
Participants highlight that, besides fit for purpose , it is crucial
to consider the library’s size and complexity . In other words, the
amount of code that the library has and whether the library offers
way more functionalities than the ones needed. Practitioners per-
ceive positively when the library provides the desired functionality
with the least amount of code possible. For instance, P4 highlights
that “ If 99% of the library does something different then it is not a
suitable candidate, so it does what you want, but you pull in too much
junk”. Participant P11 adds that “ If the library requires a lot of ini-
tialization code or even configuration, that can be a blocker in the
selection ”. 16% of our survey respondents perceive size and complex-
ityas a highly influential factor in the selection process (
 ).
3.1.4 Type of project. How developers select libraries depends
on the type of project of the software system under development,
i.e., whether it is a brown- or green-field development .
In the case of a green-field project , the lack of restrictions enforced
by existing software gives practitioners more freedom to make
technological choices. For instance, participants (P1-P6, P11, P13,
and P16) share the opinion that, for new projects, libraries are
continuously adopted on-demand throughout the entire lifespan of
a project. P5 highlights that “ If it is a new project, selecting libraries
is more likely to happen because it might be a new setup or you still
have all the freedom, so let’s try this library or let’s see if we can use
it in this way ”.
In the case of a brown-field project , the selection of a software
library is made upon a pre-existing software infrastructure. Our
participants (P2, P4, P5, and P13) emphasize that, in this situation,
decisions aim to find a suitable library aligned with the existing
architecture. Interestingly, only 10% of our survey respondents
perceive the type of project as a highly influential factor. However,
18% consider it not influential at all when selecting libraries (
 ).
3.2 Human Factors
Human aspects play an essential role in practitioners’ selection
processes. Participants emphasize paying particular attention to
the following factors: their individual perceptions, the community
around the library, the different stakeholders of the project, and
the characteristics of the company/organization where the library
is being developed.
3.2.1 Individual. The practitioners’ personal experiences, per-
ceptions, and knowledge about specific technologies influence their
perception towards a software library. Practitioners (P3, P6, P10)
mention that developers use their perception when selecting li-
braries. For instance, P10 states: “ Our decisions are more based on
emotions. What kind of feeling do we have towards a library? ” How-
ever, P10 also points out that emotions can make such decisions
difficult: “ When the decision is based on emotions or how do people
feel about it, it is sometimes even harder to make people change their
minds ”. 16% of our survey respondents perceive personal feelings asa highly influential factor when selecting libraries, and 69% consider
it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
3.2.2 Community. Practitioners perceive that the community
around a software library plays a positive and influential role in the
selection process. Community is essential in two different contexts:
the group of users who already adopted the library in their projects,
and the group of developers who are maintaining and providing
technical support for the library. These two groups offer useful
input when new potential users are choosing libraries.
Practitioners (P1, P2, P4, P6, P10, P11, P13, P14, P16) consider
theexperience that the community has with a library, in particu-
lar recommendations that other users of the library have (P1, P2,
P4, P13) and what is the overall perception from the community
towards the library (P6, P14). P16 points out that finding people
that are tackling the same problem, and observing how they solved
it with that library helps him reason about whether that library
is the right choice: “ You can’t be the first one having this problem.
So when you search, you often encounter these libraries and often in
web pages made not only by the company/developers creators of the
library but also by the people who explain how they solved a certain
problem using a certain library ”. P10 also wants to know how other
companies (not an “individual”) overcame problems that the library
aims to solve; in other words, the experience that industry has with
that library. 23% of our survey respondents perceive the collective
experience of library users as a highly influential factor when se-
lecting a library, and 63% consider it as a low/moderate influential
factor (
 ).
Most participants (P1, P3-P6, P9-P16) consider the popularity of
a library to be an influential factor. We observe participants relying
on different metrics, such as the number of stars (P3, P9, P11), the
number of downloads (P9, P14), and the number of maven depen-
dencies (P6). P6 emphasizes that “ I always looked to the number
of maven dependencies which also indicates the importance of the
library in its ecosystem. If lots of libraries use this one, it is a stable
one. I think this might be an indication of stability in some way ”.
Interestingly, P1 argues that popularity should also be seen through
the evolution of the library in its different releases, i.e., whether
the library is trending up or down. P1 says: “ If I check the library’s
trends in Google, I can see how frequently people look for it. This is a
good indicator to see if the library’s popularity is rising or not ”. 30%
of our survey respondents perceive the popularity of a library as a
highly influential factor in their selection process, and 59% consider
it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
Besides the library’s community seen from the perspective of
its users, practitioners also pay attention to the characteristics of
the contributors who are maintaining the library. Participants (P3,
P7-P10, P14, P15) perceive an active community supporting the
library in a positive way. For instance, P15 emphasizes that high
responsiveness to issues and questions on Stack Overflow is a good
indicator of an active community who supports the library. Some
interviewees (P3, P7, P10, P12) also indicate that they consider it
critical to know the number of contributors to the library, i.e., the
size of the community behind the library. P10 points out that if the
library has a significant impact on the project, it is also crucial to
have people in the team to support the library if it gets deprecated:
“Does the library have a big impact in your project? [If] yes, then youSelecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
need a team to support it. Otherwise, if the library is for some reason
deprecated, that would represent a big risk. As a consequence, you get
a piece of your application that you can not easily replace ”. 30% of
our survey respondents perceive an active community supporting
the library as a highly influential factor, and 62% consider it as a
low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
3.2.3 Stakeholders. Our interviews show that several stakehold-
ers (i.e., the team, developers, project and product managers, exter-
nal teams in the organization, and customers) might play a role in
the selection process of software libraries.
The selection of software libraries often starts with the initiative
of asoftware developer . Most of our interviewees (P1, P4-P16) agree
that the choice of libraries is influenced by the opinions of the
software development team . 30% of our survey respondents also
perceive this factor as a highly influential factor, and 57% consider
it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ). We observe that
having people in the team who faced a similar problem and/or had
an experience using the library before saves time and facilitates the
selection.
However, software developers often do not have the authority
or knowledge to decide which library to choose. Thus, the opinions
formed by the software development team members move up in the
chain. For example, we observe cases where a software architect or
a technical lead had to approve a selection decision in the case of
potential risks. In the words of P7: “ If it is a framework decision, the
software architect or technical lead should be involved ”.
A few participants (P9, P12, P16) highlights that in some excep-
tional cases, the product manager and/or the project manager might
also influence the selection process. P16 exemplifies that, in some
particular cases, the involvement of the project manager is required:
“The project manager usually will be involved because when you use a
library, there is also a certain kind of knowledge that you need about
using the library. You have to learn how to incorporate it; you have
to see whether it fits in your solution, etc. But, there are some costs
involved in using the library which the software team might not be
aware of. These costs might also influence the maintainability of the
product ”. In contrast, only 3% of our survey respondents perceive
the roles of product project managers as highly influential factors
in the selection of libraries. However, 36% consider these roles do
not influence the selection process (
 ).
Besides the software development team, practitioners (P1, P2, P8,
P10, P15) perceive that other teams within the organization might
influence the final decision. For instance, P1 indicates that in the
context of financial systems, new libraries should pass through a
rigorous inspection before being used by software teams. In this
case, a security team is often in charge of this inspection. They
will check if the library is secure and meets all the requirements
and policies of the organization. The organization might encourage
software development teams to select libraries which belong to
their software artifacts catalogue. However, if a new library is
preferred, the team should provide strong arguments to support the
requirement. In this case, the security team might have to inspect
the library and finally approve its selection. Interestingly, only
4% of our survey respondents consider other teams as a highly
influential factor, while 23% consider this factor does not influence
the selection process (
 ).Finally, practitioners (P2, P14, P16) perceive that customers can
also play an influential role in the library selection process in some
cases. Customers regularly demand new features and services which
have a significant impact on the software that provides those ser-
vices. P16 exemplified “ Customers might have a large set of demands
regarding security, privacy, etc. To incorporate a library within the
project, we have to prove that the library meets all the requirements
set by the customer ”. Additionally, P14 points out that customers
might request to know how the library is managing customers’
sensitive data. P14 states: “ We do business to business software. So
there might be some customers who want to know how we handle the
open-source projects regarding data protection ”. Interestingly, only
7% of our survey respondents consider customers as a highly influ-
ential factor in the selection process, while 54% perceive customers
do not influence all (
 ).
3.2.4 The organization. The organization (i.e., the company that
the developers work for) itself plays a role in how software libraries
are selected. The role of the management in technology decisions,
the maturity of the process of library selection, the organization’s
culture and policies, and the type of industry are key factors that
influence the process of library selection.
A few participants (P10, P11) have been in situations where the
management and the strategy of the company played an influential
role in the selection of a library. P11 says: “ Sometimes the company
makes strategic decisions and adopts a specific platform and that limits
developers to use only compatible libraries or even a particular set of
commercial libraries ”. However, only 8% of our survey respondents
perceive the management and the strategy of the company as a
highly influential factor in the selection process, and 47% consider it
as a low/moderate influential factor. 35% of our respondents believe
it has no influence in the selection process at all (
 ).
The organizations’ culture and policies may also play an influ-
ential role when selecting libraries. We observe two different per-
spectives. In cases where the selection of libraries is not a fully-
formalized process, practitioners (P1, P10, P14-P16) highlight that
the organization might emphasize policies that software teams
need to follow, e.g., policies regarding privacy and information
protection. P10 states: “ Although we don’t have a formal process for
selecting libraries, we have very high standards for security. There
are strict rules and inspections ”. In this case, a standard policy may
include management of information, storage location, and time and
security of the data transmission. 8% of our survey respondents
perceive this factor as a highly influential factor, and 52% consider
it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ). However, other com-
panies (as noted by P5, P10, P16) already have a mature process in
place to select libraries, which naturally plays a role in the selection
process. In the case of our interviewees, these mature processes
are operationalized employing standard peer review processes (P5),
strict procedures for security inspections while selecting libraries
(P10), and following specific protocols for data protection (P16). P16
exemplifies “ In our company, for each project, we have one person re-
sponsible for everything related to information protection. So for each
external component that we introduce to the project, it’s investigated
how this component affects our data privacy policies. It’s a standard
procedure ”.ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
Finally, the type of industry (e.g., banking, oil and gas) that the
software system under development belongs to plays an influential
role when selecting libraries (P11, P14, P16). For instance, P14 high-
lights that in the case of business to business software development,
customers need to be aware of how libraries manage sensitive in-
formation. On the other hand, only 9% of our survey respondents
consider that the type of industry highly influences them when
selecting libraries (
 ).
3.3 Economic Factors
Software practitioners consider it crucial also to evaluate economic
factors, such as total cost of ownership (TCO) and risks during the
library selection process.
3.3.1 Total cost of ownership (TCO). .The cost of owning a
software library that is about to be selected is an important factor
that our participants consider. For instance, the library’s license , the
time and budget available in case it is necessary to select a commer-
cial library, the time in case there is the possibility to develop the
feature in-house instead of choosing a library, and the maintenance
costs associated with using a library.
The license of the software library is a crucial factor (P1, P2, P4,
P5, P8-P10, P12-P16). P1 highlights how critical it is to have the
rights to patch the library in case of bugs or security vulnerability
issues: “ The license would influence my decision, but that would
depend on the use case. Because if I need to apply a security fix, for
example, it would be nice if we can change it ourselves. Especially if
the library is not frequent in release cycles ”. Furthermore, P13 points
out that the license sometimes is a business decision. It becomes
an investment, especially when the decision is to select payware.
P15 also suggests not to use a GPLv3 license if the aim is to develop
commercial software2. Moreover, P16 emphasizes that it is vital
to know if the customer plans to sell the solution as a product. If
so, it is critical to guarantee that customers can incorporate all the
source code under their name. In the case of proprietary libraries,
it is sometimes a requirement to be able also to customize the code.
Thus, the library’s license should allow it. License is perceived as
a highly influential factor by 45% of our survey respondents, and
42% consider it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
The time and budget available are also considered an essential
factor. The possibility of choosing a commercial library is only an
option if there is budget available (P9, P10, P14-P16). P10 exemplifies
“We will choose a proprietary license if it saves us time, risks, and
we have money for it ”. Budget and time also play a role when the
team decides to build the desired feature by themselves instead of
choosing third-party libraries. P14 asks himself: “ How much does it
cost to build the desired functionality by ourselves instead of using a
library? ” 39% of our survey respondents perceive this factor as a
highly influential factor in the selection process, and 48% consider
it as a low/moderate influential factor (
 ).
3.3.2 Risk. The possible risks that a library might introduce to the
software system, primarily affecting budget and development time,
is also an essential factor that practitioners take into consideration
(P2, P4, P10, P11, P14), also perceived as a highly influential factor
2A GPLv3 license forces developers to open their software as well, a situation not
desired in this type of business.by 38% of our survey respondents. Only 5% consider the risk to
have no influence on the selection process (
 ).
For example, P2 says that, at her/his company, basic risk assess-
ments include the time needed to integrate the third-party code
into the project, and an estimate of how long the library would
be available in the future: “ How much development time is it going
to cost me to integrate it in my project? And then also, how likely
is the library to stay available in the future? ”. P10 also exemplifies
“By using a library ready-to-use, proven, I’m avoiding risks and re-
ducing the time for its integration to the project ”. P14 mentions that,
in her/his case, libraries that are already integrated into the main
framework of her/his company are less risky, and therefore, more
likely to be selected.
The presence of an organization behind the library provides
practitioners (P1, P5, P8-P10, P14, P16) with a good perception of
trustworthiness of the library. Indeed, participants associate the
existence of a supporting organization with lower risk. For instance,
P16 emphasizes that “ My decision would be influenced if there is a
company behind the library. For example, there are libraries where
Microsoft provides help as a major stakeholder so I’ll use them ”.
3.4 The role of the factors in the selection
process
Throughout the interviews, participants explained not only which
factors they take into consideration, but also in “what moment”
that happens. And while we observe that these factors can emerge
at any time during the process, some factors are often taken into
account more at some stages than others. In this section, we map
the factors mentioned above with the stage in which they become
relevant (which we also show in Table 2, column U/P).
As expected, most of our participants (P1, P4, P6, P7, P9-P12, P15,
P16) highlight that they follow an ad-hoc approach unless organi-
zations introduce strict policies in the adoption of third-party code
in their software projects (P2, P7, P10, P15). Nevertheless, we are
able to generalize their decision process into two main steps: (i) the
up-front selection, and (ii) the prototyping stage. The up-front se-
lection step happens when developers are researching the existing
libraries that are out there. Libraries that are positively evaluated
at this step become candidate libraries; others are discarded. De-
velopers take the candidate libraries which they then take to the
next step: the prototype stage. In this step, practitioners evaluate
the libraries by developing proofs-of-concept. The best candidate
out of the prototyping stage is then selected.3
Regarding the boundaries of the decision space, according to
our participants, the first factor taken into account is the type of
project . Our interviewees point out that green-field development
projects provide them with absolute freedom of choice. According
to them, at this point, given that the first technology choices are
still occurring (e.g. frameworks, programming language, databases,
etc.), practitioners have more freedom to experiment and try out
new libraries. On the contrary, others also state that brown-field
3While our description makes the selection process to resemble a linear process, in
practice, developers perform several iterations, i.e., research, find candidates, prototype,
repeat until they are satisfied with the chosen library.Selecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
development introduces constraints imposed by the dominant ar-
chitectural framework or its major components. Thus, any library
selected should fit the existing technological stack of the project.
At the up-front stage, practitioners highlight that most of the
human factors influence them when selecting libraries. However,
at this point, these factors emerge as strong determinants: prac-
titioners’ individual experience and perception of the library, the
community experience of the library users, the popularity of the
library, and how responsive the community is in providing support
and fixing bugs. Concerning technical aspects, practitioners also
point out that, at this stage, they pay more attention to the maturity
and stability , the quality of the documentation , and whether the
library is actively maintained . Additionally, regarding the economic
characteristics of the library, practitioners emphasize that at this
stage, the type of license plays a critical role in the selection process,
followed by time and budget .
Atprototyping stage, human factors also play a critical role. If
practitioners do not have enough experience or familiarity with
the technologies associated with the library, they tend to gather
theknowledge of their immediate community (e.g. teammates or
colleagues), or feedback from external users as well. Concerning
technical aspects of the library, practitioners take usability and the
quality of the documentation more into account. Indeed, participants
note that, while usability and documentation can be somewhat eval-
uated at the up-front stage, they better experience them during the
prototyping stage. At this stage, practitioners also tend to evalu-
ate the impact of the library on the overall architecture . Common
criteria used at this level are performance andsecurity . It is worth
mentioning that economic factors play a significant role at this
stage. After performing a risk assessment of a candidate library, and
depending on the time and budget available in the organization, the
decision space can include the selection of a paid version of the
library, the development of the required feature by themselves, or
the outsourcing of the development of the feature.
4 RELATED WORK
In Table 3, we show the key factors that emerged in related research
on the selection process of software libraries. Some of the factors
that we observe in our work are inline with the existing current
body of knowledge.
More specifically, the factors associated with usability (e.g., learn-
ability, size and complexity, understandability, readability, simplic-
ity, documentation, ease of integration, etc.), performance , and popu-
larity have been highlighted in different studies [ 1,4,5,9,21,23,24,
27] as the most influential factors when practitioners select libraries.
The literature also emphasizes the significant role of factors associ-
ated with the maintainability of the library (e.g., release frequency,
issue response time and issue closing time, last modification date,
community size), how well the software library is tested , as well as
itslicense compatibility.
Our study reveals the importance of factors that were, so far, not
known to our community (in Table 2, we mark all the new factors
with a checkmark). Concerning technical factors, our study high-
lights the role of the type of project of the software system under
development. Being a software project in the context of a green-
field or brown-field development affects the freedom of choice (i.e.,Paper Factors
de la Mora and Nadi [4, 5] popularity, release frequency, issue response time
and issue closing time, backwards compatibility,
performance and security, last modification date,
last discussed on stack overflow, documentation,
functionality, easy of use
Pano et al. [23] performance, size, automatization, learnability,
complexity, understandability, competitor analy-
sis, collegial advice, community size, community
responsiveness, suitability, updates, modularity, iso-
lation, extensibility, cost, customer, developer, team,
team leader
Xu et al. [27] libraries well maintained, well tested, meets the
requirements, actively developed, update cadence,
popularity, respected developers, widely adopted,
used by other projects, exposure on Stack Overflow,
documentation readability, clearness of the code,
stability, size or complexity, license compatibility,
ease of integration
Hora and Valente [9] popularity
Abdalkareem et al. [1] well implemented and tested, well maintained code,
readability, performance, security, license compati-
bility
Piccioni et al. [24] usability, documentation
Myers and Stylos [21] usability (learnability, simplicity, consistency)
Gizas et al. [6] performance
Table 3: Key factors in the process of selecting software li-
braries that have emerged in the previous literature.
the decision space). Concerning human factors, another aspect not
known to current literature is the influential role of some stakehold-
ers within the organization (e.g., product and project managers, and
other teams). In the context of organizational factors, practitioners
perceive the type of industry, as well as the company’s culture
and policies and management and strategy as influential factors.
The developer’s self-perception towards a library also seems to
influence the selection process. Finally, regarding economic factors ,
unlike other studies, practitioners also pointed out the role that a
risk assessment plays in the decision when selecting a library.
Interestingly, for most of the new factors we introduce, mostly
regarding the role of organization and stakeholders to the process,
we observe that survey respondents did not fully perceive them as
highly influential. The role of customers, for example, is considered
to be not influential by 54% of the survey respondents. Or, the type
of project (being a brown- or a green-field project), while survey
respondents perceive it to play a low/moderate role in the process,
only 10% believe it has a high influence. We argue that this indicates
the importance of the context, i.e., industry, where the decision
is made. Our interviewees work for various types of industries,
ranging from banking, gas and oil, to consulting and research.
When looking at the related work, we observe participants com-
ing from different backgrounds; however, the type of industry that
they work in is not clear. As examples, in work from de la Mora
and Nadi [ 4,5], participants come from GitHub and Stack Over-
flow (besides 49% of them being students); in the work of Pano et
al. [23], participants come from different company sizes (ranging
from small to large), but there is no indication as to which industry
they are in. We, therefore, conjecture that the types of industry
that we studied explain the new factors we found as well as that
they did not generalize well in the survey. Future research should
understand more deeply the role of industry in the selection process
of software libraries.ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
We also see works that focus on specific programming lan-
guages or software ecosystems (e.g. JavaScript [ 23], Android and
Python [ 27], Java [ 9], Nodejs [ 1]). The work of Pano et al. [ 23],
which we discuss above, focuses solely on JavaScript frameworks
(frameworks only, not all types of possible software libraries). We
did not control for a programming language or software ecosys-
tem or type of library in our work. Such a design decision in our
study enables us to devise a broader and more generic set of factors.
However, we agree that similar to the industry context; different
programming languages might have specific factors, which should
be explored in future work.
Finally, we observed in the literature that the Unified Theory of
Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) proposed by Venkatesh
et al. [ 26] has been extensively adopted to explain the acceptance
of technology by users. They highlight seven constructs as direct
determinants of behavioral intention to use technology, namely
performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, facili-
tating conditions, hedonic motivation, price value, and habit. We
note that the 26 factors, highlighted in our study, categorized into
technical, human and economic factors are aligned with a UTAUT
category and reinforce our contribution to the existing literature,
especially regarding the influential role of organizational aspects,
stakeholders experience and users’ self-perception.
5 IMPLICATIONS
In this section, we discuss the implications of our work to library
maintainers, library users, package manager developers, and re-
searchers.
Implications to library maintainers. We observe that practition-
ers often discard libraries with poor documentation, low mainte-
nance activity and/or no long-term support plan, no stable releases,
security vulnerabilities reported but not fixed quickly, and nega-
tive reputation in the community. Interestingly, our findings match
with suggestions provided by Pano et al. [ 23] in their study re-
garding factors and actors leading to the adoption of a JavaScript
framework.
Implications to potential library users. Our work shows that
the number of factors that may play a role in the selection process of
a library is substantial. Software teams following an ad-hoc process
might miss some of them, and a wrongly selected library might
lead to higher maintenance costs and other issues in the future.
Based on the factors we identified, a systematic evaluation of a
library should include the following reasoning: Do I have a positive
experience using this library? What is the overall perception of the
library among its users? Is it a popular library? How active is the
community behind the library providing support and fixing bugs?
How mature and stable is the library? Does the library have proper
documentation? Is the library well-maintained? Does the library
have an appropriate license for my project? Do budget and time
impose any constraints?
We believe that, by taking into account these considerations,
practitioners would be in a better position to make systematic
decisions while selecting libraries.
Implications to package manager developers and the need
for modern package managers. Practitioners do not have accessto appropriate unified infrastructure to support the selection pro-
cess of software libraries. To tackle this situation, our work points
to a possible direction: reinforce the role of package managers in
the ecosystem, turning package managers into a single point of
decision.
Most of the metadata that current package managers offer is
focused on library popularity. Research has shown that having in-
formation available about the elements which affect API popularity
can be beneficial when selecting a library [ 18]. Our work reveals
several other vital quantitative factors that developers usually take
into account in the decision-making process. For instance, main-
tenance activity, release frequency, community size, and quality
aspects of the library are among the most critical factors to identify
if the library is getting momentum. However, in diverse ecosystems,
this information is currently dispersed and not readily available for
decision-makers.
The orchestration role of package managers situates them in an
excellent position to provide library users with the right informa-
tion when selecting a library (single point of decision). We, there-
fore, suggest that modern package managers should be designed
to facilitate the selection process of libraries as well. Through ap-
propriate library metadata aggregation from multiple repositories,
package managers would take the leading role among all informa-
tion sources for exploring software libraries.
Implications to researchers. The factors we have catalogued in
this work complement the ones identified in related work, and they
essentially represent information needs that developers have dur-
ing library selection processes. Our study also exposes the need for
appropriate (near) real-time data-driven feedback among practition-
ers. The rapid evolution and overgrowing number of third-party
libraries push forward the need to investigate and develop inno-
vative tools aligned with these information needs. For example,
we have identified risk assessment as one of the factors involved
in library selection decisions—how can we measure such risk and
possibly develop tools to enable automated risk assessment?
Many of the factors that our study uncovered and that had not
been identified by previous work were human factors . While our
work provides a first categorization of these factors, we believe fu-
ture work is necessary to solidify our understanding of how human
factors impact library selection. In particular, given the wide range
of stakeholders involved, reconciling potentially conflicting views
on the same library selection decision is a significant challenge
which requires further investigation.
5.1 Threats to validity
In the following, we address the validity of this study in the context
of qualitative research [7, 11].
Transferability. Transferability is the degree to which our results
can be transferred to other contexts. Our study is based on semi-
structured interviews collecting the experience of 16 participants
and a validation survey. Given that their experiences, companies,
technology stacks, and business domains varied considerably, the
factors identified in our study should fit most software development
companies. We did not include open source developers in the study,
and therefore, we suggest future research to understand whether
that community considers the factors identified.Selecting Third-Party Libraries: The Practitioners’ Perspective ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Credibility. Credibility is about whether the research findings
are correctly drawn from the original data. We applied four dif-
ferent strategies to ensure credibility: (a) the list of factors was
iteratively developed by two researchers (the first two authors of
this paper)—it is worth noting that a single researcher performed
open coding of the transcribed interview data and to ensure quality,
the researcher listened to each recording two times; (b) the set of
factors and findings were discussed several times between all the
authors of this paper to mitigate bias from the researchers involved
in the study; (c) the factors were corroborated through six-member
checking sessions; and (d) we challenged our qualitative findings
by conducting a survey with 115 participants.
Confirmability. Confirmability is the degree to which other re-
searchers can confirm the findings. We do not have the participants’
(and their employers’) permission to share the transcription of the
interviews. We tried as much as possible to show evidence for each
factor by quoting participants. We make our interview script, survey
form and survey answers available in our online appendix [13].
6 CONCLUSION
The software industry relies heavily on the reuse of third-party
libraries. Choosing the best library is, however, a demanding task
that will only become more complicated, given the ever-growing
complexity of software systems and the number of libraries avail-
able. In this paper, we systematically documented a comprehensive
set of 26 factors for library selection done by practitioners, including
8 factors not previously included in literature. With these factors
documented, practitioners can now start adopting more systematic
approaches to third-party library selection. We foresee the creation
of tools to better integrate prominent factors into the library se-
lection process, in particular for technical factors such as quality
and release factors, as well as for human and economic factors like
community activeness and popularity, risk, and cost of ownership.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank the 16 interviewees for their availability
in this study and the 115 software practitioners who completed
the online survey. This work was partially funded by NWO grant
628.008.001 (CodeFeedr), H2020 grant 825328 (FASTEN), and ARC
grant DE180100153.
REFERENCES
[1]Rabe Abdalkareem, Olivier Nourry, Sultan Wehaibi, Suhaib Mujahid, and Emad
Shihab. 2017. Why Do Developers Use Trivial Packages? An Empirical Case
Study on Npm. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
Software Engineering (Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE 2017) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 385–395. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3106237.3106267
[2]David Arnott. 2005. Cognitive biases and decision support systems development:
a design science approach. Information Systems Journal 16, 1 (2018/09/28 2005),
55–78. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2575.2006.00208.x
[3]John W Creswell. 2013. Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
methods approaches . Sage publications.
[4]Fernando López de la Mora and Sarah Nadi. 2018. An Empirical Study of Metric-
based Comparisons of Software Libraries. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics in Software Engineering (Oulu,
Finland) (PROMISE’18) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3273934.3273937
[5]Fernando López de la Mora and Sarah Nadi. 2018. Which Library Should I
Use?: A Metric-based Comparison of Software Libraries. In Proceedings of the
40th International Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and EmergingResults (Gothenburg, Sweden) (ICSE-NIER ’18) . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 37–40.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3183399.3183418
[6]Andreas Gizas, Sotiris Christodoulou, and Theodore Papatheodorou. 2012. Com-
parative Evaluation of Javascript Frameworks. In Proceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on World Wide Web (Lyon, France) (WWW ’12 Com-
panion) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 513–514.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2187980.2188103
[7]Egon G Guba. 1981. Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic
inquiries. Educational Technology research and development 29, 2 (1981), 75–91.
[8]Harry H. Hiller and Linda Diluzio. 2004. The Interviewee and the Research
Interview: Analysing a Neglected Dimension in Research*. Canadian Review of
Sociology/Revue canadienne de sociologie 41, 1 (2004), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1755-618X.2004.tb02167.x
[9]A. Hora and M. T. Valente. 2015. Apiwave: Keeping track of API popularity and
migration. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME) , Vol. 00. 321–323. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2015.7332478
[10] Siw Elisabeth Hove and Bente Anda. 2005. Experiences from conducting semi-
structured interviews in empirical software engineering research. In Software
metrics, 2005. 11th ieee international symposium . IEEE, 10–pp.
[11] Irene Korstjens and Albine Moser. 2018. Series: Practical guidance to qualitative
research. Part 4: Trustworthiness and publishing. European Journal of General
Practice 24, 1 (2018), 120–124.
[12] R. G. Kula, D. M. German, T. Ishio, and K. Inoue. 2015. Trusting a library: A
study of the latency to adopt the latest Maven release, In 2015 IEEE 22nd Interna-
tional Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER).
2015 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
Reengineering (SANER) , 520–524. https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2015.7081869
[13] Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink,
and Georgios Gousios. 2020. Selecting third-party libraries: The practitioners’
perspective . https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3979446
[14] Enrique Larios Vargas, Joseph Hejderup, Maria Kechagia, Magiel Bruntink, and
Georgios Gousios. 2018. Enabling Real-time Feedback in Software Engineering.
InProceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: New
Ideas and Emerging Results (Gothenburg, Sweden) (ICSE-NIER ’18) . ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 21–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/3183399.3183416
[15] M. Li, W. Wang, P. Wang, S. Wang, D. Wu, J. Liu, R. Xue, and W. Huo. 2017. LibD:
Scalable and Precise Third-Party Library Detection in Android Markets. In 2017
IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . 335–346.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2017.38
[16] Caroline Lima and Andre Hora. 2019. What are the characteristics of popular
APIs? A large-scale study on Java, Android, and 165 libraries. Software Quality
Journal (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-019-09476-z
[17] Yana Momchilova Mileva, Valentin Dallmeier, Martin Burger, and Andreas Zeller.
2009. Mining Trends of Library Usage. In Proceedings of the Joint International
and Annual ERCIM Workshops on Principles of Software Evolution (IWPSE) and
Software Evolution (Evol) Workshops (Amsterdam, The Netherlands) (IWPSE-Evol
’09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 57–62. https://doi.org/10.1145/1595808.1595821
[18] Yana Momchilova Mileva, Valentin Dallmeier, and Andreas Zeller. 2010. Mining
API Popularity. In Testing –Practice and Research Techniques , Leonardo Bottaci and
Gordon Fraser (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 173–180.
[19] Katherine L. Milkman, Dolly Chugh, and Max H. Bazerman. 2009. How Can
Decision Making Be Improved? Perspectives on psychological science : a journal of
the Association for Psychological Science 4 4 (2009), 379–83.
[20] I. J. Mojica, B. Adams, M. Nagappan, S. Dienst, T. Berger, and A. E. Hassan. 2014.
A Large-Scale Empirical Study on Software Reuse in Mobile Apps. IEEE Software
31, 2 (Mar 2014), 78–86. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2013.142
[21] Brad A. Myers and Jeffrey Stylos. 2016. Improving API Usability. Commun. ACM
59, 6 (May 2016), 62–69. https://doi.org/10.1145/2896587
[22] Phuong T. Nguyen, Juri Di Rocco, Davide Di Ruscio, and Massimiliano Di Penta.
2020. CrossRec: Supporting software developers by recommending third-party
libraries. Journal of Systems and Software 161 (2020), 110460. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jss.2019.110460
[23] Amantia Pano, Daniel Graziotin, and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2016. What leads
developers towards the choice of a JavaScript framework? CoRR abs/1605.04303
(2016). arXiv:1605.04303 http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.04303
[24] M. Piccioni, C. A. Furia, and B. Meyer. 2013. An Empirical Study of API Usability.
In2013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
and Measurement . 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2013.14
[25] Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin. 1997. Grounded theory in practice . Sage
Publications, Inc.
[26] Viswanath Venkatesh, James Y. L. Thong, and Xin Xu. 2012. Consumer Ac-
ceptance and Use of Information Technology: Extending the Unified Theory
of Acceptance and Use of Technology. MIS Quarterly 36, 1 (2012), 157–178.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/41410412
[27] Bowen Xu, Le An, Ferdian Thung, Foutse Khomh, and David Lo. 2020. Why rein-
venting the wheels? An empirical study on library reuse and re-implementation.
Empirical Software Engineering 25, 1 (2020), 755–789. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10664-019-09771-0ESEC/FSE ’20, November 8–13, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Enrique Larios Vargas, Maurício Aniche, Christoph Treude, Magiel Bruntink, and Georgios Gousios
[28] Y. Yano, R. G. Kula, T. Ishio, and K. Inoue. 2015. VerXCombo: An Interactive Data
Visualization of Popular Library Version Combinations, In 2015 IEEE 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Program Comprehension. 2015 IEEE 23rd International
Conference on Program Comprehension , 291–294. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC.
2015.43[29] Asimina Zaimi, Apostolos Ampatzoglou, Noni Triantafyllidou, Alexander Chatzi-
georgiou, Androklis Mavridis, Theodore Chaikalis, Ignatios Deligiannis, Pana-
giotis Sfetsos, and Ioannis Stamelos. 2015. An Empirical Study on the Reuse of
Third-Party Libraries in Open-Source Software Development. In Proceedings of
the 7th Balkan Conference on Informatics Conference (Craiova, Romania) (BCI ’15) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Article 4,
8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2801081.2801087