A Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG
with a Lightweight Intervention
Zihan Fang
zihan.fang@vanderbilt.edu
Vanderbilt University
USAMadeline Endres
endremad@umich.edu
University of Michigan
USAThomas Zimmermann
tzimmer@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
USA
Denae Ford
denae@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
USAWestley Weimer
weimerw@umich.edu
University of Michigan
USAKevin Leach
kevin.leach@vanderbilt.edu
Vanderbilt University
USA
Yu Huang
yu.huang@vanderbilt.edu
Vanderbilt University
USA
ABSTRACT
Modern software engineering practice and training increasingly
rely on Open Source Software (OSS). The recent growth in demand
for professional software engineers has led to increased contribu-
tions to, and usage of, OSS. However, there is limited understanding
of the factors affecting how developers, and how new or student
developers in particular, decide which OSS projects to contribute
to, a process critical to OSS sustainability, access, adoption, and
growth. To better understand OSS contributions from the devel-
opers of tomorrow, we conducted a four-year study with 1,361
students investigating the life cycle of their contributions (from
project selection to pull request acceptance). During the study, we
also delivered a lightweight intervention to promote the awareness
of open source projects for social good (OSS4SG), OSS projects that
have positive impacts in other domains. Using both quantitative and
qualitative methods, we analyze student experience reports and the
pull requests they submit. Compared to general OSS projects, we
find significant differences in project selection ( 𝑝<0.0001, effect
size = 0.84), student motivation ( 𝑝<0.01, effect size = 0.13), and
increased pull-request acceptance rates for OSS4SG contributions.
We also find that our intervention correlates with increased student
contributions to OSS4SG ( 𝑝<0.0001 , effect size = 0.38). Finally,
we analyze correlations of factors such as gender or working with
a partner. Our findings may help improve the experience for new
developers participating in OSS4SG and the quality of their contri-
butions. We also hope our work helps educators, project leaders,
and contributors to build a mutually-beneficial framework for the
future growth of OSS4SG.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0327-0/23/12. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616250CCS CONCEPTS
•Software and its engineering →Open source model ;•Human-
centered computing →Empirical studies in HCI .
KEYWORDS
Open Source Software, Social Good, CS Education
ACM Reference Format:
Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley
Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang. 2023. A Four-Year Study of Student
Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’23),
December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616250
1 INTRODUCTION
Open source refers to both the concept and also the practice of
making a program’s source code openly available [ 35]. Since the
concept of open source software (OSS) was first introduced in 1998,
it has grown to involve not only academics and hobbyists, but
also professional software engineers, influencing nearly 78% of US
companies by 2015 [ 55]. Furthermore, in recent years, there has
been significant interest in OSS projects that have the potential to
benefit society in a broader way, such as through humanitarian
efforts in domains like microfinance, healthcare, education, and
disaster relief [ 31,44]. This category of software projects is called
Open Source Software for Social Good (OSS4SG) [31].
At the same time, there has been an increase in the demand
for professional software engineers [ 5], as well as an associated
growth in enrollment in undergraduate programs that prepare stu-
dents for software jobs where OSS is common [ 40]. Ellis et al. claim
that student developers have characteristics which make them par-
ticularly well-suited for participating in OSS [ 15]. In addition, as
many computing students are future developers, how and why
student developers choose OSS projects to contribute to may have
implications for improving OSS sustainability and growth. How-
ever, student contributions to OSS are comparatively understudied.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
There is limited understanding of how students can gain practical
experience with more realistic software engineering tasks [25], as
well as which methods educators can use to motivate students (e.g.,
for recruitment and retention, through the lens of OSS.
Understanding the motivations of new or student developers’
OSS contributions may be of particular import for OSS4SG projects.
Previous work demonstrates that, despite their societal potential,
many OSS4SG projects are inhibited by a lack of advertisement
and awareness among professional developers [ 31]. For example,
Huang et al. found that it was more challenging for contributors
to find OSS4SG projects to work on even though “there are many,
many, many developers that might want to" [31, Sec. III-D].
We hypothesize that one way to increase OSS4SG project aware-
ness is through educational interventions . At many universities,
undergraduate software engineers contribute to OSS projects as
part of a course assignment [ 12,43]. OSS contribution can give stu-
dents practical experience with many software development tasks
such as understanding triaged issue reports, localizing faults in a
legacy code base, reading and writing documentation, testing, and
submitting a formal pull or change request [ 39]. As a result, many
developers may first encounter OSS as undergraduates and such
assignments may be an opportune time to raise OSS4SG awareness.
However, prior studies of OSS in educational contexts focused on
how students and educators useOSS (e.g., studying common mis-
takes in student contributions [ 30]), rather than on how students
choose and learn from OSS projects. Furthermore, there have been
no studies to-date that have investigated the impact that OSS4SG
projects can have on students.
To help close this gap, we present the results of a four-year
study (2018–2022) of OSS contributions from students across eight
semesters of a senior software engineering course at University of
Michigan. As the course final project, students had to contribute to
an OSS project of their choice . To investigate our hypothesis that an
educational intervention can increase OSS4SG contributions, for
the last four semesters, we implemented a lightweight intervention
introducing OSS4SG to students on the course website1. For all
eight semesters, the course content, projects, and homework as-
signments were the same with the exception of intervention-related
text. Additionally, the same two instructors taught the course, and
student computing preparation remained consistent as enrollment
and major declaration policies remained unchanged during the
study period. This consistency permits analysis of trends across
semesters.2
In total, we collected and analyzed 984 reports from 1,361 stu-
dents3contributing to 443 different OSS projects. Our analysis
provides an understanding of the life cycle of student contributions
to OSS in general and to OSS4SG in particular. We also analyzed
the effect of the lightweight intervention on OSS4SG participation.
Following previous work [ 31], we determine which projects are
OSS4SG using the combined criteria of Ovio [ 2] and the Digital
1No requirement or extra credit was applied to students contributing to OSS4SG. Our
Intervention Script is available in the supplementary materials.
2The COVID-19 pandemic occurred one semester prior to the implementation of
the intervention. To validate our analysis considering the effect of the pandemic, we
also analyzed the students’ data prior to and following the onset of COVID-19 (see
Section 6).
3Students were allowed but not required to work in teams of two.Public Goods Alliance (DPGA) [ 1], which is derived from the United
Nation’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals [45].
Inspired by previous work that demonstrate key aspects in OSS
participation [ 10,16,36], we focus on three key phases of the con-
tribution life cycle when contrasting Non-social good (Non-SG)
and OSS4SG projects:
(1)Project selection : Project topic, motivation, pair program-
ming decisions, and the impact of our OSS4SG intervention.
(2)Project experience : Subjective experiences, lessons learned,
and programming languages used.
(3)Community reception : Pull request acceptance rates and
the factors that most influence them.
We find statistically-significant differences at all stages of this
life cycle between students who engage with OSS4SG projects and
those who do not. As some examples, student motivations and
selected project topics are different between Non-SG and OSS4SG;
our lightweight intervention (and to a lesser extent, the COVID-
19 pandemic) influences the degree to which OSS4SG projects are
selected; and pull request contributions to OSS4SG projects are more
likely to be accepted and merged into the main project. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale (in terms of students,
time, and projects) analysis of student OSS4SG contributions.
The main contributions of this paper are:
•The first large-scale study of student OSS contributions (includ-
ing data from 1,361 students over four years).
•An analysis of how the life cycle of student OSS contributions
(project selection, contribution experience, and community re-
ception) differs between OSS4SG and Non-SG projects.
•A set of actionable recommendations and evidence, for educa-
tors and student developers, of which projects may be most
effective for students, and the impact of a lightweight interven-
tion to bring social good to student attention.
Ultimately, we believe OSS, and OSS4SG in particular, are both
morally and pragmatically important: it helps software engineering
as a community to contribute to humanitarian efforts more directly,
and provides an additional avenue for attracting and preparing
students from all backgrounds to succeed in the workforce. The
goal of this research is to learn factors influencing student OSS
contributions in educational settings, as well as with a goal of
encouraging participation in OSS4SG, so that we can better support
future OSS contributions in general. We believe our study also
provides an important first step for leveraging the understudied
potential of open source for social good.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss related work on open source software
and social good (OSS4SG), the intersection of OSS and computing
education, and related educational interventions.
2.1 Open Source Software and Social Good
In recent years, the role played by OSS in key areas such as web
services [ 13] has been the subject of increasingly-prominent discus-
sions. Although some established software companies treat OSS as
a threat [ 4], the more common view is that it generally positively
impacts society, business, education, and research [ 33], and leadsA Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
to a more open society [ 23] because it partially addresses three key
software challenges: cost, time scale, and quality [22].
OSS also changes the way people and organizations develop,
acquire, use, and commercialize software. Ellis et al. emphasizes that
OSS can help increase interest in computing [ 44] and provide career
advancement benefits based on sustained participation [ 46]. As the
OSS landscape has changed, participant motivations for joining
OSS projects have changed as well [ 24]. Software developers are
increasingly deciding to use their technical skills and OSS to benefit
the common good of society [ 31]; computing for social good has
become a common topic in technical circles [ 21], and developers
are more likely to volunteer to write code that improves societal
processes when given the opportunity [ 34]. Simultaneously, there
has also been a growing global political interest in encouraging
OSS usage and access as more policy makers learn how essential
OSS is to our world’s digital infrastructure [42].
The smooth integration of newcomers is critical for the sustain-
ability and growth of OSS projects [ 52]. Approaches such as “Code
for America” and various “Hackathon” events are one way innova-
tive software solutions with a social conscience are encouraged [ 19].
However, unlike OSS focusing on technical development (non-SG),
finding OSS projects with broader societal impact (OSS4SG) to con-
tribute remains a top challenge for developers and OSS4SG has
not yet been well studied by the research community in software
engineering [ 31]. While prior studies explored general OSS contrib-
utor obstacles, none focused on student contributions to OSS4SG
projects. Additionally, no research analyzed and compared devel-
oper disparities in OSS and OSS4SG within an educational context.
In this work, we examine how student developers find and choose
to contribute to OSS4SG projects as a first step to alleviating this
challenge.
2.2 Open Source Software and Education
Open source has been seen as a natural fit for education because it
encourages collaborators to pool resources and expertise so as to
build new ways of solving difficult problems [ 7]. Some institutions
integrate open source development into education [ 12], with the
view that participating in OSS will help students to succeed in their
careers [ 43]. Because of its broad appeal, OSS can help increase
interest in computing [ 17] and it has also been shown to help retain
involvement in computing over the long term [ 51], despite the chal-
lenges students may face when participating in large-scale software
development projects [ 48]. Furthermore, students’ involvement in
large-scale software development projects enhances their academic
curriculum through practical experience in real-life software engi-
neering practices [ 29]. OSS4SG can be particularly appealing for
students [ 12], including those from less-represented backgrounds
(e.g., women students, first-generation students, LBGTQ+ students,
etc.) [14].
However, project selection is a potential risk when using OSS
contributions in CS education. Project selection facilitates if and
how students improve professional skills when contributing to
OSS [ 17,44] — the student’s motivation, perseverance, and ac-
ceptance by the community are inherently related to the project
chosen. Studies are also undertaken to analyze the strategies by
which students can be motivated to engage in OSS [ 50]. In addition,inexperienced student software engineers can also create draw-
backs for projects. Hu et al. delineate 13 common mistakes based on
313 OSS projects that often occur in student contributions (e.g., not
following existing designs, messy pull requests, etc.) [ 30]. Previous
studies have also examined the factors that impact the acceptance
of pull requests, including the quantity of comments received, the
project’s historical background and the developers’ reputation [ 37].
However, no prior research has investigated the acceptance of pull
requests specifically by students and the factors from the students’
perspective that influence the outcomes of their pull requests.
Despite these challenges, it is often believed that maintaining and
developing OSS can help students improve their resumes and their
social and technical skills [ 43]. Large tech companies like Google,
Yahoo, and Facebook have described the benefits of hiring people
involved in the open source community [ 12]. In this study, we pro-
vide initial investigation of Non-SG and OSS4SG contributions by
undergraduate software engineering students who are considered
representative of the forthcoming OSS developers, which has not
been examined in previous research.
2.3 Educational Interventions
Anintervention is a purposeful action by a human agent to create
change [ 41]. Interventions are commonly used in computing and
STEM education to improve programming performance or foster
certain behaviors [ 18]. Controlled experimental design is the pri-
mary method to explore whether such interventions have effects
on specific populations [38].
The integration of social issues into computing curricula to guide
students to be socially-responsible professionals is still a work
in progress [ 28]. Bagli et al. and Goldweber et al. have proposed
interventions related to incorporating social good into computing
curricula [ 26]. The intervention we evaluate in this paper is most
similar to that proposed by Goldweber et al. , where introductory
computing assignments are reframed as social good problems to
motivate students [ 26]. However, rather than modifying internal
course projects, we propose an intervention exposing students to
external OSS4SG projects that are likely to have real world impact.
3 STUDY DESIGN
We investigate the life cycle of student developer submissions to
OSS projects with a focus on how this life cycle differs for contri-
butions to OSS4SG projects compared to standard (i.e., Non-SG)
OSS projects. To do so, we analyze 984 project reports submitted
by 1,361 computer science students (794 working in 397 teams,
567 working alone) in a senior software engineering course at a
large public university. Students were tasked with selecting an OSS
project to contribute to, working on one or more active issues, and
submitting a pull request with the results of their work. These
project reports span eight semesters over four years (2018–2022)
and include contributions to 443 unique OSS projects. We consider
both statistical differences between Non-SG and OSS4SG efforts as
well as the impact of a lightweight intervention (making students
aware of the existence of OSS4SG) starting in 2020.
In the remainder of this section, we detail the contents of our
dataset and discuss the qualitative methods we used to prepare our
data for statistical analysis.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
3.1 Dataset Overview
Our data is collected from students who have enrolled in EECS 481 at
University of Michigan over the past four years. This course follows a
similar model to offerings at other large US institutions, guiding the
student developers to become professional software engineers by
focusing on collaborating in a team, managing complexity, testing
and quality assurance, mitigating risks, staying on time and budget,
requirements elicitation, and so on.
During the semester-long course, students were required to con-
tribute to an open source project. Students had to select an OSS
project of their choice from GitHub, identify an open issue in the
project (typically a bug report or feature request), understand the
local development process, localize and make the desired change,
then submit a pull request. Students documented their experiences
with two written project reports: an initial project plan and a final re-
flection. In the initial report, students identified a project, proposed
a schedule, discussed the project’s build system, and described the
intended defect to fix or feature to add. In the final reflection, stu-
dents had to include: descriptions of how and why they selected the
OSS project and task; the project context; the project governance
(including processes and tools used to coordinate and communicate
among developers); the task attempted; any submitted artifacts (e.g.,
code changes, new documentation, test case reports, etc.); a URL to
any submitted pull requests; the student’s subjective experience;
and recommendations and advice for other students. Extra credit
points were awarded for contributions merged into the project’s
codebase (i.e., pull requests accepted on GitHub) before the end of
the semester. Students could choose to work alone or in pairs.
Our dataset consists of 984 textual project reports as well as
any associated publicly-available pull requests. In addition, course
staff provided the authors “recalled gender”4associated with each
de-identified student (e.g., man, woman, do not recall, etc.). This
was done based on recollections from lectures, office hours, online
meetings, pronouns used by students, roster information, etc. Ulti-
mately the course staff provided gender annotations for 93.9% of
students. Other demographic information, such as race or ethnicity,
could not be collected.
3.2 Intervention
To assess the degree to which a lightweight intervention could
impact student project selection and promote OSS4SG, starting in
the 5th semester (fall of 2020) the project description was updated
to include a short (ten sentence) description of computing for social
good as well as optional links to the DPGA [ 1] and Ovio [ 2] lists and
descriptions of OSS4SG. In addition, the text clarified that choosing
a social good project would have no impact on the assignment
grade. Students were also asked to include a sentence in their final
reports indicating whether they thought their project contributed
to social good, but were again reminded that the answer would not
affect their grade. The exact text of the intervention is available in
the supplementary materials. The first half of our dataset (i.e., the
first four semesters) does not include the intervention, while the
second half does include it (see Table 1). Other than the intervention
4Our original IRB-approved protocol did not explicitly ask for student-reported gender.
As a result, our IRB suggested using recalled gender based on instructor-accessible
information about students.text, course materials were consistent across all eight semesters.
Additionally, the same two instructors taught the class and students
had similar computer science preparation throughout as univer-
sity enrollment and major declaration policies were not changed.
This stability helps minimize confounding variables, and permits
comparison between pre-intervention and intervention semesters.
3.3 Analysis Methodology
Our study protocol was assessed by our local IRB and exempted
from further review (HUM00220536). At a high level, de-identified
project reports were provided to the study team by the course
staff. After preprocessing, the study team conducted a series of
qualitative and quantitative analyses of the reports and associated
pull requests.
Student Report Qualitative Preprocessing : Student reports
were originally in free-form text. Therefore, it was necessary to
manually read and code the reports to extract the data needed for
statistical analysis. To do so, we constructed an initial codebook
with seven categories for the reports using the assignment specifi-
cation as a guideline. For any given report, this coding identified
basic information about the OSS project and tasks picked, why the
students selected this project, their experiences working on the
project, and their advice for future students. The construction of
the codebook was thoroughly reviewed to ensure accuracy and
completeness, with multiple authors (including former course staff)
identifying potential confounding factors and suggesting modifica-
tions. Specifically, the authors used Atlas.ti5, a commonly used
platform for qualitative analysis, to conduct the thematic analysis.
Initially, the first author independently analyzed ten transcripts,
identifying recurring open codes by labeling significant partici-
pant statements. Discussions with co-authors followed to establish
connections, resolving category disagreements through extensive
discourse, transcript review, and refinement. The first author then
labeled data based on the refined code book. Collaboratively, rela-
tionships among codes were identified, leading to organized, mean-
ingful themes. Furthermore, finalizing the codebook was a dynamic
process; Following best practices [ 20], the codebook was modified
whenever the annotator observed a concept that was not yet in-
cluded. The first author reached code-book saturation (i.e., no new
modifications of the codebook) after approximately 500 reports.
These first 500 reports were re-coded with the finalized codebook
by the first author.
To gain confidence in the accuracy of our coding, 50 project
reports were randomly selected and thoroughly re-coded by the
second author. This resulted in 13-14 re-coded high-level categories
per project (or 686 in all). To quantify agreement, we present a
contextualized percentage agreement (as the labels to categories
are not mutually exclusive, we can not use the common Cohen’s
Kappa to calculate agreement); Excluding minor typos, the first and
second authors agreed exactly in 623/686 cases, or 90.8% of the time,
indicating generally high agreement. For non-mutually exclusive
categories, the exact agreement indicates that both authors picked
the same subset of codes as labels for a project. The 10% disagree-
ment was generally caused by the second author including one
or more additional complimentary labels to a multi-label category.
5https://web.atlasti.comA Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
There were only 9 cases (1.3%) where the second author’s coding
was in direct conflict with the first author’s. Once the coding pro-
cess was completed, the remaining authors double-checked 25% of
the coding results and conducted a high-level review of the pull
request section of the qualitative data to ensure its quality and
integrity.
We include our complete codebook in the supplementary materi-
als. However, as a clarifying example, we provide our categorization
of students’ contribution motivations. We identified these five cate-
gories of motivations pointed out by the students in their reports:
•Useful or Helpful : the OSS project would be useful and benefit
human daily lives.
•Active : number of recent issues, pull requests, contributors,
etc.
•Easy to Work On : the organization of the project, the general
difficulty level of the project, students’ familiarity with the
programming language, and the skills required in the project.
•Interest : the interests of the students aligned with the topic of
the project.
•Project Influence : the popularity or impact of the project.
For many categorizations, including this one, multiple tags can
apply simultaneously, resulting in overlap among categories.
Student Pull Request Qualitative Preprocessing : To assess
how student contributions were received by OSS communities,
we also investigated how many of the pull requests have been
accepted and merged. To do so, the authors manually visited all pull
request URLs provided in the project reports. 772 out of 984 reports
contained at least one valid pull request link, and in total there 989
submitted requests (some groups submitted multiple times). For
the remaining 212 reports, either the team did not submit a pull
request (25/212) or did not include a valid link (187/212).
The authors read all pull requests and labeled them as accepted
(e.g., merged or force-merged into the project by project own-
ers/maintainers) or not (e.g., closed and not merged, still open).
To do so, we used a two-phase approach: if the pull request was
marked as Merged in the GitHub interface, we coded it as accepted.
If the pull request was marked as Open or Closed, we manually
inspected the comments and activity (e.g., moving the changes to
a new request, referencing the pull request in another commit, or
other project-specific processes). We did not rely on GitHub’s in-
terface alone as it can underestimate acceptance rates [ 32]. Our
process may still not spot all accepted contributions (e.g., those in-
corporated into later pull requests by non-student developers, etc).
However, we believe we identify most student-written accepted
pull requests, aligning with the educational context of our work.
For each pull request, we also recorded the dates of the pull
request submission and acceptance (if applicable) as well as the cat-
egory of the issue the student was addressing (e.g., bug fix, feature
request, test cases, refactoring, etc.). This pull request annotation
data is used in our analysis of how student OSS contributions are
received by the OSS community.
Project Topic and Social Good Labels : Beyond coding the
student reports and associated pull requests, to conduct our anal-
ysis, we also labeled both the topic of a project and if the project
is qualified as OSS4SG . We used the labels provided by Ovio [ 2] as
general topics of projects. We used labels provided by DPGA [ 1] as
the criteria to determine whether a project qualifies as supportingsocial good. Ovio [ 2] is an authority for matching software develop-
ers with projects; their site includes an explicit list of OSS projects
associated with social good or technology, broadly construed. How-
ever, not all projects from Ovio [ 2] are social good projects per se.
Notably, many computing projects, such as Microsoft’s open source
VSCode editor, would officially fall in the loose Ovio [ 2] categories of
‘industry-innovation-infrastructure ’ or ‘reduced-inequal-
ity’ but do not align with conventional notions of OSS4SG [ 31]
(e.g., VSCode does create infrastructure for industry and could be
used in a social good context, and since it is free it could be seen
as reducing inequality, but it is not inherently or essentially a so-
cial good project by more conventional definitions). Informally,
almost every OSS project could be seen reducing inequality (since
OSS is free to download) and/or as providing innovative infras-
tructure (since it is software), so those tags are not informative in
this context. As a result, we followed best practices [ 20,31] and
used DPGA [ 1] criteria to help determine social good scoping more
precisely; DPGA [ 1] makes use of the United Nation’s 17 Sustain-
able Development Goals which have been found to more closely
align with what computing practitioners mean by the term “social
good” [31, 45].
For our study, after collecting labeled category data for each
project, if a project meets any criterion other than ‘ industry-inno-
vation-infrastructure ’ and ‘ reduced-inequality ,’ it is classi-
fied as OSS4SG. The final classification of each project was cross-
checked by the authors. Our dataset is available and includes all of
the original tags (so researchers can rerun the analysis with those
tags included if desired).
4 ANALYSIS RESULTS
In this section, we discuss the results of our analysis of the lifecycle
of student contributions to OSS. We organize our results around
three key phases of this lifecycle:
•Phase 1 — Project Selection: What projects and topics do stu-
dents choose when electing to contribute to OSS? What
factors determine that decision? Examining developers’ mo-
tivation is crucial for understanding OSS development and
achievements, as highlighted in prior research [ 36]. In this
phase, we analyze the preferences and choices of students
as well as the impact of our intervention promoting the
selection of OSS4SG projects.
•Phase 2 — Contribution Experience: How do students describe
their experiences working on open source projects? Does
this experience differ by project topic? OSS projects play
a crucial role in providing individuals with practical soft-
ware development skills that are often challenging to acquire
through formal education [ 16]. In this phase, we explore stu-
dents’ contribution experiences and the lessons they have
learned.
•Phase 3 — Community Reception: How are student submis-
sions received by the open source community? Understand-
ing the dynamics of collaboration and participation in open
source communities requires recognition of community ac-
ceptance as a vital factor [ 10]. In this phase, we explore
the factors that correlate with whether or not a student-
submitted pull request was ultimately accepted.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
Table 1: Student and report summary. “OSS4SG” counts
reports associated with a social good project while
“Non-SG” counts reports for non-social good projects.
“Intervention” indicates the presence of a light peda-
gogical awareness intervention.
Semester Students Reports OSS4SG Non-SG Intervention
1 95 70 7 63 ✗
2 113 83 12 71 ✗
3 124 105 30 75 ✗
∗4 130 92 28 64 ✗
5 218 163 35 127 ✓
6 249 171 55 116 ✓
7 146 100 37 62 ✓
8 291 200 57 143 ✓
Total 1,361 984 262 722
∗Semester 4 coincided with the onset of COVID-19 (early 2020). See
Section 6.
Table 2: Breakdown of student self-reported motivation cat-
egories for selecting 984 projects (for all OSS projects and
OSS4SG) We find a significant difference of motivation of
selection on Non-SG between SG.
Motivation All Projects OSS4SG OSS4SG(%)
Useful or Helpful 379 116 30.6
Active 179 37 20.7
Easy to Work On 134 31 23.1
Interest 105 31 29.5
Project Influence 57 7 12.3
∗N/A 130 39 30.0
∗Students did not state their motivation of selection in
reports.
In each phase, we directly compare and contrast between OSS4SG
projects and OSS projects that are not explicitly related to social
good (Non-SG OSS). Table 1 summarizes our dataset over the eight
semesters covered by this study, broken down by non-social good
contributions (“Non-SG”) and social good contributions (“OSS4SG”).
4.1 Phase 1 — Project Selection
For this phase, we first give an overview of student motivations and
project topic selection. We also investigate if there are differences
related to student gender or if the student worked alone or in a pair.
We then compare OSS4SG and Non-SG projects across topics and
evaluate our intervention’s effectiveness.
4.1.1 Overview of Student Motivations and Project Topics. Table 2
summarizes the project selection motivations described in student
reports (see Section 3.3 for a description of qualitative methods
used to identify themes and code reports). Notably, while conven-
tional wisdom [ 8] might suggest that many students are looking
for projects that align with their personal interests or that will
be easy, the dominant motivation mentioned for project selectionTable 3: General topics of projects selected by students.
General Topic Projects OSS OSS4SG
Technology 394 394 0
Management and Productivity 210 181 29
Creativity and Entertainment 172 145 27
Education 117 1 116
Society and Culture 68 9 59
Health and Well Being 40 0 40
Science 40 37 3
Civic Tech 34 3 29
Economics 19 5 14
Humanitarian 17 12 5
Environment and Nature 16 0 16
Literature and Journalism 7 5 2
Table 4: Motivation for project selection as a function of
working alone vs. as a pair. We find a significant difference
on students’ motivation of selection between working alone
and working in pairs ( 𝜒2= 10.9,𝑝< 0.05 , Cramer’s V = 0.11).
Motivation Alone In Pairs
Useful or Helpful 218 (42.7%) ↗ 161 (47.0%)
Active 97 (19.0%) ↗ 82 ( 23.9%)
Easy to Work On 85 (16.6%) ↘ 49 (14.3%)
Interest 76 (14.9%) ↘ 29 (8.5%)
Project Influence 35 (6.9%) – 22 (6.4%)
was that the project was Useful or Helpful in some way (to the
student personally or to others). In fact, whether a project was seen
as useful or helpful was cited more than twice as often as the next
most common motivation for choosing a project. While this notion of
“helpful” is not strictly the same as “social good” (see Section 3.3),
our results are consistent with other findings that suggest a broader
humanitarian impact can be a strong motivator for students [ 6].
In addition, a prior investigation revealed gender bias within OSS
communities [ 53], especially for women who are underrepresented
in OSS [54].
However, our results hold for students generally: we find no
evidence that student gender (our dataset’s main demographic label)
influenced the ranking or proportion of these categories ( 𝑝>0.05).
Table 3 summarizes the projects selected by students according
to general topics (see Section 3.3). The most common project topics
areTechnology (e.g., VSCode ) and Management and Productivity
(e.g., Zulip ). As a whole, most students prefer Technology and
Entertainment projects to other topics. In addition, we speculate
that these results may help to identify suitable projects to which
undergraduate students are more likely to express interest.
As shown in Table 4, we also investigated whether or not collabo-
ration impacts project selection. We found a statistically-significant
difference in project selection motivations for students working
alone vs. working in pairs ( 𝜒2= 10.9,𝑝< 0.05, Cramer’s V = 0.11).
Students working in pairs are more likely to prioritize Useful orA Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 5: Motivation for project selection for Non-SG vs.
OSS4SG projects. We find a significant difference on motiva-
tion for selection between Non-SG vs. OSS4SG ( 𝜒2= 13.9,𝑝<
0.01 , Cramer’s V = 0.13).
Motivation Non-SG OSS4SG (262)
Useful or Helpful 263 (41.6%) ↗ 116 (52.3%)
Active 142 (22.5%) ↘ 37 (16.3%)
Easy to Work On 103 (16.3%) ↘ 31 (14.1%)
Interest 74 (11.7%) ↗ 31 (14.1%)
Project Influence 50 (7.9%) ↘ 7 (3.2%)
Helpful orActive projects than are students working alone. We
hypothesize that students working together are more likely to pri-
oritize the project itself (e.g., as a shared choice) than to focus on
their personal suitability or interest for the project ( Easy to Work
On,Interest , etc.). This is important because students may feel
they are not capable of accomplishing as much if working alone,
influencing the type of project they decide to pursue.
By far, the most common motivation cited by students was if the
project was Useful orHelpful , indicating students take personal
or societal impact into account when choosing projects. This
trend was even more pronounced for students who worked in
a pair. The most common project topics were Technology and
Entertainment .
4.1.2 Motivations for Contributing to OSS4SG. Overall, 26.6% of
projects selected by students were classified as Open Source for
Social Good following our methodology (Section 3.3). Critically, we
find that project motivations are significantly different between
Non-SG and OSS4SG projects ( 𝜒2= 13.9,𝑝<0.01, Cramer’s V =
0.13). We conducted a logistic regression analysis on all selection
factors. The results revealed that students’ motivation significantly
contributed to their selecting OSS4SG projects or not ( 𝑝<0.05).
Useful or Helpful is an even more common motivation for OSS4SG,
andInterest is more significant for OSS4SG as well. We hypothesize
that one reason student developers choose to contribute to OSS4SG
is that they attach importance to the personal or global significance
of the contribution ( Useful or Helpful ,Interest ) rather than to the
likelihood of success ( Active ,Easy ). Table 5 summarizes this result.
4.1.3 OSS4SG Project Topics. We investigate topical differences
between selected OSS4SG and Non-SG projects. To analyze this, we
consider topics that overlap between Non-SG and OSS4SG projects;
Figure 1 shows these results. Management and Productivity is
the most popular project topic among students selecting Non-SG
projects, followed by Creativity and Entertainment and then Sci-
ence . By contrast, OSS4SG contributions focused on topics such
asEducation ,Health and Well-Being , and Society and Culture . In
addition, to a lesser degree, OSS4SG project topics touched on Civic
Technology as well as Environment and Nature . These differences
are strongly significant ( 𝜒2=455.5,𝑝<0.0001 , Cramer’s V =
0.84). In a linear regression, we found that topic also significantly
impacts (𝑝<0.0001 ) contributing to Non-SG vs. OSS4SG. These
Figure 1: Topics for student-selected OSS and OSS4SG projects
(note that all projects labeled Technology belong to Non-SG
and all projects labeled Health and Well Being orEnviron-
ment and Nature belong to OSS4SG).
Figure 2: The effect of a lightweight pedagogical intervention
(mentioning social good but not grading on it in any way) on
student project selection.
results align with conventional wisdom [ 8] (e.g., students favoring
OSS4SG focus on topics more likely to benefit society, while stu-
dents favoring Non-SG focus more on personal development), and
they provide concrete guidance for educators and trainers selecting
topics or examples when providing advice about project selection.
4.1.4 Gender Effect and Social Good. As discussed in the overview
of Phase 1, we do not observe a significant difference in topic se-
lection by gender (e.g., men vs. women, men vs. not-identifying-
as-men, etc., 𝑝=0.54—956 men, 319 women, 3 non-binary, and 83
unknown or unreported). In addition, while a greater fraction of
women students contributed to OSS4SG projects than did men, the
effect was not significant ( 𝑝=0.053). However, we draw attentionESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
Table 6: Effect of gender on selecting a Non-SG vs. OSS4SG
project in specific (956 men, 365 women, 3 non-binary).
Gender Non-SG OSS4SG
Men 709 (74.2%) 247 (25.8%)
Women 218 (68.3%) 101 (31.7%)
Non-Binary 3 (100.0%) 0 (0.0%)
to the potential impact of social good aspects in OSS on individuals’
access to and involvement to OSS in general. Gender-related factors
can influence opportunities and contributions within specific fields,
emphasizing the need to consider gender as a relevant aspect in the
study of OSS4SG participation [ 54]. By delving into the interplay
between gender and project selection, we can work towards creat-
ing more inclusive and equitable environments that foster diverse
contributions to OSS community. Moreover, we hope future work
can be conducted to investigate the potential of OSS4SG projects
to stimulate participation of underrepresented minorities in OSS
community.
Table 6 summarizes the proportions of project selection by gen-
der. These results further indicate that our results regarding OSS4SG
project selection generalize regardless of gender.
4.1.5 OSS4SG Intervention Effect. Finally, we investigate whether
our lightweight educational intervention (described in Section 3.2)
impacts student project selection in terms of both direct propor-
tions (are more OSS4SG projects chosen?) and specific topics. The
four pre-intervention semesters include 350 reports, 24% of which
are OSS4SG projects (77 OSS4SG vs. 273 Non-SG). The four post-
interventions semesters have 632 reports, 29% of which are OSS4SG
projects (183 OSS4SG vs. 448 Non-SG). This increase is statistically
significant ( 𝑧=4.4,𝑝<0.0001 , Cohen’sℎ=0.38). As shown in
Figure 2, the intervention resulted in an increase in projects labeled
asEducation ,Creativity and Entertainment andEnvironment and
Nature , with the corresponding reduction coming almost entirely
from Management and Productivity .
These results are important because OSS4SG can interest stu-
dents from a variety of backgrounds and help with longer-term
interest in computing (see Section 2.2). However, educators may be
wary of heavyweight approaches that may be falsely perceived as
“lowering standards” or “sacrificing rigor” (cf. [ 26]). The 5% increase
in uptake from adding ten sentence of awareness intervention is
thus a very promising concrete path forward.
Student motivation and project topic differ significantly be-
tween OSS4SG and Non-SG projects. Additionally, our light-
weight intervention was correlated with increased OSS4SG
project selection. Such an intervention is thus a promising way
for instructors to promote OSS4SG contribution.
4.2 Phase 2 — Contribution Experience
After students select projects, they work on those projects, which
involves both the manipulation of software engineering artifacts
(e.g., source code, documentation) and also interaction with other
developers (e.g., via email, Discord or IRC chats, pull requests, etc.).Table 7: Self-reported experiences from 1,361 students of
contributing to OSS (including both Non-SG and OSS4SG).
Experience Category Count Proportion
Learning a lot 451 45.8%
Feeling stressed and challenged 409 41.6%
Being positive about this experience 371 37.7%
Observing friendliness and responsiveness 241 24.5%
Being a first-time contributor 206 20.9%
Experiencing organized project 157 16.0%
Finding it easy to participate 154 15.6%
Finding similarities with industry work 118 12.0%
Finding issue resolved 84 8.5%
Feeling nervous or fearful 74 7.5%
Recognizing the importance of testing 69 7.0%
Observing unfriendliness or apathy 61 6.2%
Experiencing disorganized project 59 6.0%
Continuing to contribute 49 5.0%
Engaging in pair programming 47 4.8%
Having a terrible experience 16 1.6%
Among the 1,361 students, the most commonly-reported experi-
ence was one of learning a lot and the finding the activity stressful
and challenging , but ultimately positive. An indicate sentence from
a report notes, “ our team gained quite a few insights into real-world
software development practices. Overall, I enjoyed this project and
was able to learn a lot about contributing to an open source project
and was able to apply many of the skills I have learned in class. ”
Around 42% students mentioned the activity to be more stressful
and challenging than they originally expected. As stated by one
student, “ I personally found it incredibly difficult being thrown into
an already existing project with little guidance/background on how it
worked. With every previous school assignment, we were given [. . . ] a
set of starter files or we started an assignment from scratch. ” Despite
these challenges, about 38% of students explicitly stated that their
attitude toward the contribution activity was positive , and only
1.6% found contributing to OSS to be terrible . These results reflect
existing work that suggests incorporating contributions to OSS is
generally well-received by students.
4.2.1 Interactions with OSS Developers. From the perspective of
collaboration, as shown in Table 7, far more students perceived OSS
to be friendly and responsive than unfriendly or not responsive
(24.5% vs. 6.2%). One student contributing to Zulip noted, “ Commu-
nicating with other developers was very straightforward, especially
with the incredibly active [project] channel. There were always op-
portunities to ask questions and get help. The culture of this open
source community is rooted in encouraging input from all, no matter
your skill level. ” We draw particular attention to the comment about
skill level, which aligns with prior work on the appropriateness of
OSS for all students, including those who might have less incoming
preparation (e.g., first-generation or transfer students, etc.).
Table 7 also summarizes students’ self-reported experiences of
contributing to OSS. Around 4.8% of students explicitly described
pair programming as particularly useful. Alternatively, among theA Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
Table 8: Categories of advice offered by students to future
students (including both Non-SG and OSS4SG).
Advice Count Proportion
Start Early 346 35.1%
Take the Assignment Seriously 305 31.0%
Choose a Good Project 174 17.6%
Practice for Future Career 143 14.5%
Communication and Collaboration 72 7.3%
Planning is Important 57 5.8%
Follow Coding Conventions 10 1.0%
379 teams for which we have reports, 12% of teams noted a positive
pair programming interaction. A negative pair programming inter-
action experience was not an identified or present in this dataset.
One team stated, “ We found it was more beneficial for both of us to
instead utilize pair programming for all tasks, as we could bounce
ideas off each other and work more efficiently. ” In addition, very
few students who worked alone suggested that future students
also work alone (see Section 4.2.2). Together, these reported expe-
riences may suggest that students enjoy or benefit from the pair
interactions when approaching a new software project, despite the
communication overhead required in teamwork.
4.2.2 Advice from Student Contributors. We also summarize what
lessons students reported learning from this experience in Table 8.
Most students encouraged others to start early or to take the assign-
ment seriously . However, beyond such general academic advice,
over one-sixth of students specifically gave advice suggesting to
choose a good project . This is particularly relevant to Phase 1 of
the open source contribution lifecycle (Section 4.1.1). For example,
advice to choose a good project may be reflected in the motiva-
tions students report (e.g., Useful or Helpful ) when selecting a
project as well as the projects’ community and organization (e.g.
well-organized code, clear issues, quality documentation, helpful
community). Finally, 14.5% of the advice suggests that contributing
to OSS serves as practice for a future software development career.
4.2.3 Differences in OSS4SG Projects. When comparing student
experiences between Non-SG and OSS4SG, the only statistically-
significant difference centered around the programming language(s)
used in the projects. We find that JavaScript is more common in
student-selected OSS4SG projects than is other languages. This is in
contrast to Non-SG, where languages such as Python and C++ are
more common in student-selected projects. JavaScript is not taught
in introductory courses in the school in question.We hypothesize
that social good projects to which students contribute provide ser-
vices through websites or similar front-ends with straightforward
UIs as indicated by our collected data, both because their audiences
are often more general (e.g., for broad-reaching humanitarian ben-
efits) and also because many OSS4SG projects explicitly focus on
democratizing or publicizing information in an accessible way (e.g.,
making local governance records easier to view [ 31]). While deci-
sions about which languages to cover in CS curricula are nuanced
and multi-faceted [ 56], our findings do provide an additional angle
by which languages may be evaluated, given the desire to admitOSS4SG interactions to appeal to broader audiences as well as im-
pact the community’s accessibility and inclusiveness. Moreover,
this factor can contribute to the improvement of students’ practical
programming skills and equip them for their future professional
paths. As for self-reported experiences, there were no statistically-
significant differences between Non-SG and OSS4SG. However,
there were significant differences in pull request acceptance rates
(i.e., in outcomes), see Section 4.3.
Students report learning from the experience (e.g., because
they advise others to start early andpractice for future career ),
and that it may have helped to improve skills such as time
management. Other than programming language, there are no
significant differences in the reported experiences of Non-SG
and OSS4SG contributors. These results suggest that, regardless
of whether students contribute to Non-SG or OSS4SG projects,
valuable learning outcomes can be realized.
4.3 Phase 3 — Community Reception
In this last phase, we consider how student contributions are viewed
by the OSS community. To do so, we primarily investigate the
reception of the pull requests submitted by students as part of their
projects (see Section 3.3 for more information on how we annotated
and analyzed student pull requests).
We first investigate the percentage of pull requests submitted
by students that were ultimately accepted and merged into the
project. We find that 43.7% (432/989) of pull requests submitted by
students are accepted and merged as of August 2022. While general
statistics about contributions accepted on GitHub are not widely
published, this ratio is significantly lower than the 85% observed in
other studies of non-student-specific pull requests [ 27]. We discuss
this discrepancy further in Section 5.2.
This overall percentage masks the large variation of acceptance
rates on a project-to-project basis. While students submitted pull
requests to 443 projects, only ten projects were submitted to at least
15 times. However, among those projects, pull request acceptance
rates varied widely from 10.5% for Zulip a “team collaboration tool ”,
to 78.9% for Habitica , a “habit building program which treats your
life like a Role Playing Game .” Other popular software infrastructure
projects, such as VSCode andPandas , fall in the middle with 31.0%
and 34.1% respectively. One possible explanation for this variability
is that some projects may be larger and more actively maintained
than others. However, at time of writing, all ten are large and active
projects (regular commits in the last week, over 200 contributors),
so other factors such as community culture or project set-up and
contribution requirements are likely driving this diversity.
4.3.1 Other General Findings for Pull Requests. We also investigate
whether students’ pull request (PR) acceptance rates vary by project
topic (see Section 3.3). Using a 𝜒2-test, we find the acceptance rate
of pull requests varies significantly by project topic ( 𝑝=0.01,
Cramer’s𝑉=0.21). Furthermore, we also collected all the pull
requests from all the GitHub projects involved in this study (i.e.,
443 GitHub Projects, 1,900,681 Pull Requests, 1,363,533 Accepted
Pull Requests) and found no significant difference on PR acceptance
rate by project topics ( 𝑝=0.23) among all the PRs from generalESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
contributors. To understand which factors drive the significant re-
sult among students’ PRs, we analyze standardized residuals from
the𝜒2-test. We find that pull requests to Management and Pro-
ductivity projects are significantly less likely to be accepted than
expected, while pull requests to Creativity and Entertainment and
Education projects are significantly more so. Specifically, 60.5% of
Creativity and Entertainment and 52.2% of Education pull requests
are accepted (17% and 9% above the average of 43.7%) while only
33.9% of Management and Productivity pull requests are accepted
(10% below average). These results are particularly interesting as
they pertain to the Creativity and Entertainment category, a cat-
egory composed primarily of games. We hypothesize that online
games often support a culture of modification and bug fixing that
appreciates contributions from invested participants.
We also investigate factors about the students themselves that
could influence the likelihood that their pull requests are accepted.
In particular, we investigate correlations with student gender and
whether the students worked in a team or alone. We do not find any
evidence of significant differences in pull request acceptance rates
by gender: 45.9% of pull requests submitted by men are accepted
compared to 40.4% of pull requests submitted by women ( 𝑝=0.22).
We did, however, observe evidence that choosing to work on
the pull request alone or with a partner does correlate with pull
request acceptance: pull requests submitted by students who work
alone are significantly more likely to be accepted than are those
from partners ( 𝑝<0.01, Cohen’sℎ=0.17). 47.4% (266/561) of pull
requests submitted by solo students were accepted, compared to
only 38.8% (166/428) of pull request submitted by pairs. Initially,
this result may appear to run contrary to established wisdom on
pair programming [ 9]. However, due to the context of this being ob-
served in student submissions, we hypothesize that this difference is
the result of hidden communication costs between the partners; for
students not trained in pair-programming, it may be these communi-
cation and time management difficulties outweigh the benefit from
working with a partner, at least in the context of a semester-long
software engineering course. We also note that student subjective
experiences (Section 4.2) and advice (Section 4.2.2) both favor pair
programming, suggesting that students prefer the experience, even
if it is less effective for this one outcome. Given the importance
placed on student retention, and thus a desire to avoid a perceived
conflict between what is optimal and what students desire, this
leads to the direct advice to not structure course grades or student
assessments around whether or not pull requests are accepted (and
instead leave them ungraded or as optional extra credit).
44% of student pull requests are accepted and merged. Students
who work alone are significantly more likely to have their pull
requests accepted than are those that work in pairs (47% to
39%,𝑝<0.01, Cohen’sℎ=0.17), a result that may add nuance
to standard considerations of pair programming in an educa-
tional setting. Faculty and instructors are encouraged to avoid
mandatory grading of whether pull requests are accepted.
4.3.2 Pull Requests and Social Good. Finally, we analyze how com-
munity reception of student pull requests differs for OSS4SG projects
compared to Non-SG projects. We find a significant difference be-
tween the pull request acceptance rates. In particular, we find thatpull requests for OSS4SG projects are 13% more likely to be accepted
than those of Non-SG projects (53% or 145/276 vs. 40% or 287/713,
𝑝<0.001, Cohen’sℎ=0.25). Furthermore, we calculated the over-
all acceptance rate of all PRs in all of the GitHub projects involved
in this study (see Section 4.3.1). Our results show that there is no
significant difference between the acceptance rates of Non-SG and
SG projects in general on GitHub (70.6% and 72.4%, respectively)
when using the same methodology. This is particularly interesting
because it might hint that while there is no significant difference
in general PR acceptance rate between non-SG and SG projects
(e.g., we cannot assume it has lower standards in SG projects or
SG projects are easier), students’ contribution to SG projects might
project a higher quality or effort compared to non-SG projects. This
is also relevant in helping students evaluate the impact they may
have when contributing to OSS projects in this setting — that they
may feel more included by OSS4SG communities.
We find these results to be particularly compelling for two
reasons. First, instructors of undergraduate software engineering
courses can simultaneously raise awareness about OSS4SG projects
and communities while indicating the increased likelihood that
their contributions will be well-received and incorporated into such
software projects. As a result, this encourages not only broader par-
ticipation from students finding OSS4SG appealing, but also helps
students learn more about the complete process in OSS projects.
We anticipate that these results will help inform educators about
best practices concerning the discussion of OSS4SG projects.
Student pull requests for social good projects are significantly
more likely to be accepted and merged than pull requests to
Non-SG projects (53% to 40%, 𝑝<0.001, Cohen’sℎ=0.25).
This suggests that educators can truthfully indicate that their
contributions are more likely to be well-received by OSS4SG
communities to promote participation in such projects without
undermining the educational value of using this intervention.
5 DISCUSSION
The findings in the previous section demonstrate that students differ
greatly in their motivations when choosing whether to contribute
to Non-SG or OSS4SG projects, as well as in the project topics they
select. In addition, we find that external factors, such as interven-
tions, can have an impact on student contribution choices. We also
find a nuanced interaction with pair programming as well as a more
direct benefit, in terms of pull request acceptance, for OSS4SG con-
tributions. In this section, we will propose approaches for leading
more future developers to participate in OSS4SG and helping them
find the effective projects and topics for their contributions.
5.1 Leveraging External Guidance
In our four-year study, we find that a lightweight intervention
(based on raising awareness without changing grading) increased
student involvement in OSS4SG by over 5%. Although the commu-
nity is still debating the exact criteria for “social good,” we believe
OSS projects that address people and society, broadly construed,
would benefit from greater exposure and more participating con-
tributors. We encourage instructors of similar classes not only to
make use of such interventions (such as the one proposed hereA Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
or that discussed by Goldweber et al. [26]), but also to use third-
party agencies (e.g., Ovio [ 2], DPGA [ 1], GitHub). For example, to
improve the stability of contributions, we suggest discussing and
linking resources like Ovio [ 2] and DPGA [ 1] in class alongside
lecture materials for ethics and professionalism.
We find that 21% of student developers self-identified as first-
time contributors to OSS. Thus, discussing OSS4SG communities in
class and discussing resources like Ovio [ 2] and DPGA [ 1] can also
have the added effect of awareness for these first-time contributors,
ultimately raising the visibility of OSS4SG projects.
5.2 Improving Student Experiences and
Community Reception
Student experiences will ultimately influence continued contribu-
tions to OSS4SG, so the community culture and organization is
quite important. While we read and coded student reports, many
first-time developers reported struggling to find the source code file
required, or they reported that there was no clear set of contribution
instructions for beginners. Therefore, we recommend organizers
of OSS4SG projects be particularly vigilant about providing sup-
portive scaffolding and documentation for first-time developers. In
addition, in our dataset, many student developers mentioned that
they would be more willing to keep contributing in the future if
they were working with a more friendly and responsive culture.
While we noted a significant difference in pull request acceptance
between Non-SG and OSS4SG projects, less than half of all requests
were ultimately accepted. This rate is lower than that observed in
non-student-specific studies of pull request acceptance [ 27]. This
difference may be due in part to designing our pull request annota-
tion methodology to align with an educational context rather than
to catch all accepted contributions (see section 3.3). However, it
is reasonable that pull requests from students for a course would
have a lower acceptance rate than those of OSS developers at large.
We encourage future investigation both in understanding what
would make student pull requests more likely to be accepted, and
in understanding why pull requests for OSS4SG projects are more
accepted. Increasing the likelihood of accepted pull requests may
contribute to a more positive outcome for student participants.
6 LIMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY
Although we present a number of statistically-significant results
from a dataset of over 1,300 students over eight semesters, our
results may not generalize to all situations. We discuss a few such
threats to validity. First, our four-year study was conducted in a
classroom setting, so the results may not generalize to new develop-
ers in industry. We mitigated this by focusing on senior computer
science students (i.e., who will likely enter the workforce shortly)
engaging in an activity that is seen as more similar to industrial
software engineering than are “toy examples” (although single con-
tributions to GitHub may still not be a perfect match). Second,
similar to previous studies, we lack an official principle or auto-
mated method to determine whether an OSS project is associated
with social good or not [ 31]. We mitigated this threat by making
use of both the Ovio [ 2] and DPGA [ 1] guidelines and follow best
practices as described in Section 3.3, and by making use of multipleseparate annotators (i.e., separate authors) when employing quali-
tative methods. Finally, the partial overlap of our intervention and
the outbreak of COVID-19 is a complication (COVID-19 happened
one semester before intervention was applied). To mitigate this, we
analyzed students’ project selections before and after COVID-19,
finding that the pandemic’s effect weakened over time: for example,
the percentage of Health and Well being projects is 1–3% in the
first three semesters, but jumps to 9% in the fourth semester (when
COVID-19 occurred), then drops back to 5% in the fifth semester
(when the intervention was delivered) and stays low at 1–3% again
after that. We also calculated our statistics with the presence of
COVID-19 as another independent variable potentially impacting
the outcome, and still find that our intervention is statistically sig-
nificant (even when COVID-19 is an explicit factor). These results
give confidence that COVID-19 effects may be minimal compared
to the intervention on students’ contributions. Finally, we want
to point it out that biases might exist in retrospective recall when
assessing students’ motivation [ 11,47], which can also overlap with
an individual’s self-beliefs [49].
7 CONCLUSION
We present an analysis of 984 project reports submitted by 1,361
senior computer science students in a software engineering course.
We investigated how we can train these future developers by ex-
ploring contributions to OSS and OSS4SG projects (in contrast to
Non-SG projects). Our aim is to investigate effective strategies for
fostering and supporting emerging contributors to OSS especially
OSS4SG through educational contexts. We find significant differ-
ences in project selection ( 𝑝<0.0001, effect size = 0.84), reported
student motivation ( 𝑝<0.01, effect size = 0.13), and reception
from software communities. Students who work in pairs are more
likely to choose projects that are Useful and Helpful compared to
students working alone, and students report favorable experiences
with pair programming activities. We also find women are more
likely to select OSS4SG than men. Our lightweight intervention
has a statistically-significant improvement in student social good
selection (𝑝<0.0001, effect size = 0.38). In addition, students con-
tributing to OSS4SG projects are significantly more likely to have
contributions accepted by their communities. Combined with the
fact that there are no significant differences in reported experiences
between Non-SG and OSS4SG contributors, this suggests that we
can raise awareness and appreciation for OSS4SG projects while
retaining valuable educational outcomes. We believe our results can
not only help improve the experience of participating in social good
OSS but also improve the quality of new developers’ contributions.
We hope that educators, OSS project organizers, and contributors
can form a mutually-beneficial framework for developing Open
Source Software for Social Good communities in the future.
8 DATA AVAILABILITY
We make our intervention text, qualitative code books, and statisti-
cal scripts publicly available on Zenodo [ 3].
Our data, with potentially sensitive information (e.g., links to pub-
lic pull requests that are connected to educational assignments
and grades), can’t be public due to IRB restrictions. Interested re-
searchers can contact the first author for data sharing.ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA Zihan Fang, Madeline Endres, Thomas Zimmermann, Denae Ford, Westley Weimer, Kevin Leach, and Yu Huang
REFERENCES
[1] 2023. Digital Public Goods Alliance . https://ovio.org/
[2] 2023. Ovio. https://ovio.org/
[3]2023. Supplementary Material for A Four-Year Study of Student Con-
tributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention . Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8264614
[4]Mohammad AlMarzouq, Li Zheng, Guang Rong, and Varun Grover.
2005. Open source: Concepts, benefits, and challenges. Commu-
nications of the Association for Information Systems 16, 1 (2005), 37.
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.01637
[5]Donald Bagert and Steve Chenoweth. 2005. Future growth of soft-
ware engineering baccalaureate programs in the United States. In 2005
Annual Conference . 10–653. https://doi.org/10.18260/1-2--14753
[6]Angela R Bielefeldt and Nathan E Canney. 2016. Humanitarian aspi-
rations of engineering students: Differences between disciplines and
institutions. Journal of Humanitarian Engineering 4, 1 (2016).
[7]Judith Bishop, Carlos Jensen, Walt Scacchi, and Arfon Smith. 2016.
How to use open source software in education. In Proceedings of the
47th ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education . 321–
322. https://doi.org/10.1145/2839509.2844665
[8]Kevin Buffardi. 2016. Localized open source software projects: Ex-
ploring realism and motivation. In 2016 11th International Conference
on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE) . IEEE, 382–387. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICCSE.2016.7581611
[9]Alistair Cockburn and Laurie Williams. 2000. The costs and benefits of
pair programming. Extreme programming examined 8 (2000), 223–247.
[10] Kevin Crowston and James Howison. 2003. The social structure of
open source software development teams. (2003).
[11] Susan E Cutler, Randy J Larson, and Scott C Bunce. 1996. Ropressive
coping style and the experience and recall of emotion: A naturalistic
study of daily affect. Journal of Personality 64, 2 (1996), 379–405.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00515.x
[12] Gregory DeKoenigsberg. 2008. How successful open source projects
work, and how and why to introduce students to the open source
world. In 2008 21st Conference on Software Engineering Education and
Training . IEEE, 274–276. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSEET.2008.42
[13] Blagoj Delipetrev, Andreja Jonoski, and Dimitri P Solomatine. 2014.
Development of a web application for water resources based on open
source software. Computers & Geosciences 62 (2014), 35–42. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2013.09.012
[14] Sarah Sakha Durva Trivedi. 2019. Women in Tech: How They are
Using Data and Tech for Social Good. https://www.rockefellerfound
ation.org/blog/women-data-tech-social-good/, accessed 2022-08-30.
[15] H Ellis, Ralph A Morelli, and GW Hislop. 2008. Support for educating
software engineers through humanitarian open source projects. In
2008 21st IEEE-CS conference on software engineering education and
training workshop . IEEE, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSEETW.2008.5
[16] Heidi JC Ellis, Gregory W Hislop, Stoney Jackson, and Lori Postner.
2015. Team project experiences in humanitarian free and open source
software (HFOSS). ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE)
15, 4 (2015), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/2684812
[17] Heidi JC Ellis, Gregory W Hislop, Stoney Jackson, and Lori Postner.
2015. Team project experiences in humanitarian free and open source
software (HFOSS). ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE)
15, 4 (2015), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/2684812
[18] Madeline Endres, Madison Fansher, Priti Shah, and Westley Weimer.
2021. To read or to rotate? comparing the effects of technical read-
ing training and spatial skills training on novice programming abil-
ity. In ESEC/FSE ’21: 29th ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineer-
ing, Athens, Greece, August 23-28, 2021 , Diomidis Spinellis, Georgios
Gousios, Marsha Chechik, and Massimiliano Di Penta (Eds.). ACM,
754–766. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468583
[19] Maria Angela Ferrario, Will Simm, Peter Newman, Stephen Forshaw,
and Jon Whittle. 2014. Software engineering for’social good’: integrat-
ing action research, participatory design, and agile development. In
Companion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
Engineering . 520–523. https://doi.org/10.1145/2591062.2591121[20] Casey Fiesler, Jed R Brubaker, Andrea Forte, Shion Guha, Nora Mc-
Donald, and Michael Muller. 2019. Qualitative methods for CSCW:
Challenges and opportunities. In Conference companion publication of
the 2019 on computer supported cooperative work and social computing .
455–460. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311957.3359428
[21] Douglas H Fisher, Jacqueline Cameron, Tamara Clegg, and Stephanie
August. 2018. Integrating social good into CS education. In Proceedings
of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education .
130–131. https://doi.org/10.1145/3159450.3159622
[22] Brian Fitzgerald. 2004. A critical look at open source. Computer 37, 7
(2004), 92–94. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2004.38
[23] Brian Fitzgerald. 2005. Has open source software a future. Perspectives
on free and open source software 1 (2005), 93–106.
[24] Marco Gerosa, Igor Wiese, Bianca Trinkenreich, Georg Link, Gregorio
Robles, Christoph Treude, Igor Steinmacher, and Anita Sarma. 2021.
The shifting sands of motivation: Revisiting what drives contributors
in open source. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 1046–1058. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSE43902.2021.00098
[25] Carlo Ghezzi and Dino Mandrioli. 2005. The challenges of software
engineering education. In International Conference on Software Engi-
neering . Springer, 115–127. https://doi.org/10.1145/1062455.1062578
[26] Michael Goldweber, John Barr, Tony Clear, Renzo Davoli, Samuel
Mann, Elizabeth Patitsas, and Scott Portnoff. 2013. A framework for
enhancing the social good in computing education: a values approach.
ACM Inroads 4, 1 (2013), 58–79. https://doi.org/10.1145/2432596.2432
616
[27] Georgios Gousios, Martin Pinzger, and Arie van Deursen. 2014. An
exploratory study of the pull-based software development model. In
Proceedings of the 36th international conference on software engineering .
345–355. https://doi.org/10.1145/2568225.2568260
[28] Gregory W Hislop and Heidi JC Ellis. 2017. Humanitarian Open Source
Software in Computing Education. Computer 50, 10 (2017), 98–101.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.3641643
[29] Reid Holmes, Meghan Allen, and Michelle Craig. 2018. Dimensions
of experientialism for software engineering education. In Proceedings
of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering Education and Training . 31–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/31
83377.3183380
[30] Zhewei Hu, Yang Song, and Edward F Gehringer. 2018. Open-source
software in class: students’ common mistakes. In Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering
Education and Training . 40–48. https://doi.org/10.1145/3183377.3183
394
[31] Yu Huang, Denae Ford, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2021. Leaving My
Fingerprints: Motivations and Challenges of Contributing to OSS for
Social Good. In 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
Engineering, ICSE 2021, 22-30 May 2021 . IEEE, Madrid, Spain, 1020–1032.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00096
[32] Eirini Kalliamvakou, Georgios Gousios, Kelly Blincoe, Leif Singer,
Daniel M German, and Daniela Damian. 2014. The promises and perils
of mining github. In Proceedings of the 11th working conference on
mining software repositories . 92–101. https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.
2597074
[33] Murtaza Ali Khan and Faizan UrRehman. 2012. Free and open source
software: Evolution, benefits and characteristics. International Journal
of Emerging Trends & technology in Computer Science 1, 3 (2012), 1–7.
[34] Antti Knutas, Victoria Palacin, Giovanni Maccani, Pablo Aragon, An-
nika Wolff, and Lukas Mocek. 2022. Civic Code for Social Change:
Lessons in Civic Tech Grassroots for Software Engineers. IEEE Software
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2022.3179670
[35] Shaheen E Lakhan and Kavita Jhunjhunwala. 2008. Open source
software in education. Educause Quarterly 31, 2 (2008), 32.
[36] Karim R Lakhani and Robert G Wolf. 2003. Why hackers do what
they do: Understanding motivation and effort in free/open source
software projects. Open Source Software Projects (September 2003)
(2003). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.443040
[37] Valentina Lenarduzzi, Vili Nikkola, Nyyti Saarimäki, and Davide Taibi.
2021. Does code quality affect pull request acceptance? an empirical
study. Journal of Systems and Software 171 (2021), 110806. https:A Four-Year Study of Student Contributions to OSS vs. OSS4SG with a Lightweight Intervention ESEC/FSE ’23, December 3–9, 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2020.110806
[38] Mark W Lipsey and David S Cordray. 2000. Evaluation methods for
social intervention. Annual review of psychology 51, 1 (2000), 345–375.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.51.1.345
[39] Ju Long. 2009. Open Source Software Development Experiences on
the Students’ Resumes: Do They Count?-Insights from the Employers’
Perspectives. Journal of Information Technology Education: Research 8,
1 (2009), 229–242. https://doi.org/10.28945/618
[40] Stephanie M Mazerolle and Sarah S Benes. 2014. Factors influencing
senior athletic training students’ preparedness to enter the workforce.
Athletic Training Education Journal 9, 1 (2014), 5–11. https://doi.org/
10.4085/09015
[41] Gerald Midgley. 2000. Systemic intervention. In Systemic intervention .
Springer, 113–133. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-4201-8_6
[42] United States White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
2022. OSTP Issues Guidance to Make Federally Funded Research Freely
Available Without Delay. https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-
updates/2022/08/25/ostp-issues-guidance-to-make-federally-
funded-research-freely-available-without-delay/, accessed 2022-08-
31.
[43] Gustavo Pinto, Clarice Ferreira, Cleice Souza, Igor Steinmacher, and
Paulo Meirelles. 2019. Training software engineers using open-source
software: the students’ perspective. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education
and Training (ICSE-SEET) . IEEE, 147–157. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-
SEET.2019.00024
[44] Lori Postner, Darci Burdge, Stoney Jackson, Heidi Ellis, George Hislop,
and Sean Goggins. 2015. Using humanitarian free and open source
software (HFOSS) to introduce computing for the social good. Acm
Sigcas Computers and Society 45, 2 (2015), 35–35. https://doi.org/10.1
145/2809957.2809967
[45] United Nations Development Programme. [n. d.]. Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals. https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustai
nable-development-goals.html, accessed 2022-08-01.
[46] Huilian Sophie Qiu, Alexander Nolte, Anita Brown, Alexander Sere-
brenik, and Bogdan Vasilescu. 2019. Going farther together: The im-
pact of social capital on sustained participation in open source. In 2019
ieee/acm 41st international conference on software engineering (icse) .
IEEE, 688–699. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00078
[47] Michael Ross. 1989. Relation of implicit theories to the construction
of personal histories. Psychological review 96, 2 (1989), 341. https:
//doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.96.2.341[48] Larissa Salerno, Simone de França Tonhão, Igor Steinmacher, and
Christoph Treude. 2023. Barriers and Self-Efficacy: A Large-Scale Study
on the Impact of OSS Courses on Student Perceptions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.14628 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3587102.3588789
[49] Christie N Scollon, Chu Kim-Prieto, and Ed Diener. 2003. Experience
sampling: Promises and pitfalls, strengths and weaknesses. Journal
of Happiness studies 4, 1 (2003), 5–34. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1023605205115
[50] Jefferson Silva, Igor Wiese, Daniel M German, Christoph Treude,
Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and Igor Steinmacher. 2020. A theory of the
engagement in open source projects via summer of code programs.
InProceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering . 421–431. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409724
[51] Sulayman K Sowe and Ioannis G Stamelos. 2007. Involving software
engineering students in open source software projects: Experiences
from a pilot study. Journal of Information Systems Education 18, 4
(2007), 425. https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/involving-
software-engineering-students-open/docview/200102291/se-2
[52] Igor Steinmacher, Tayana Conte, Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and David
Redmiles. 2015. Social barriers faced by newcomers placing their first
contribution in open source software projects. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social
computing . 1379–1392. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675215
[53] Josh Terrell, Andrew Kofink, Justin Middleton, Clarissa Rainear, Emer-
son R Murphy-Hill, and Chris Parnin. 2016. Gender bias in open source:
Pull request acceptance of women versus men. PeerJ Prepr. 4 (2016),
e1733. https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.1733v1
[54] Bianca Trinkenreich, Igor Wiese, Anita Sarma, Marco Gerosa, and Igor
Steinmacher. 2022. Women’s Participation in Open Source Software:
A Survey of the Literature. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 31, 4,
Article 81 (aug 2022), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510460
[55] Kimberly Truong. 2022. Let’s Talk Open-Source—An Analysis of
Conference Talks and Community Dynamics. In 2022 IEEE/ACM 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceed-
ings (ICSE-Companion) . IEEE, 322–324. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510
454.3522683
[56] David A Watt. 2000. Programming languages-Trends in education.
InProceedings of Simposio Brasileiro de Linguagens de Programacao,
Recife, Brazil, http://www. dcs. gla. ac. uk/˜ daw/publications/PLTE. ps .
Citeseer.
Received 2023-02-02; accepted 2023-07-27