GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source
Naomichi Shimada
Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan
shimada.naomichi.sm3@is.naist.jpTao Xiao
Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan
tao.xiao.ts2@is.naist.jpHideaki Hata
Shinshu University
Japan
hata@shinshu-u.ac.jp
Christoph Treude
University of Melbourne
Australia
christoph.treude@unimelb.edu.auKenichi Matsumoto
Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan
matumoto@is.naist.jp
ABSTRACT
GitHubSponsors,launchedin2019,enablesdonationstoindivid-
ualopensourcesoftware(OSS)developers.Financialsupportfor
OSS maintainers and developers is a major issue in terms of sus-
taining OSS projects, and the ability to donate to individuals is
expected to support the sustainability of developers,projects, and
community. In this work, we conducted a mixed-methods study of
GitHubSponsors,includingquantitativeandqualitativeanalyses,
to understand the characteristics of developers who are likely toreceive donations and what developers think about donations to
individuals.Wefoundthat:(1)sponsoreddevelopersaremoreac-
tivethannon-sponsoreddevelopers,(2)thepossibilitytoreceive
donationsisrelatedtowhetherthereissomeoneintheircommu-
nitywhoisdonating,and(3)developersaresponsoringasanew
way to contribute to OSS. Our findings are the first step towards
data-informed guidance for using GitHub Sponsors, opening up
avenues for future work on this new way of financially sustaining
the OSS community.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Socialandprofessionaltopics →Sustainability ;•Software
and its engineering →Open source model.
KEYWORDS
GitHub Sponsors, Open Source, Sponsorship
ACM Reference Format:
Naomichi Shimada, Tao Xiao, Hideaki Hata, Christoph Treude, and Kenichi
Matsumoto.2022.GitHubSponsors:ExploringaNewWaytoContribute
to Open Source. In 44th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’22), May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510116
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermissionand/ora
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9221-1/22/05...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.35101161 INTRODUCTION
Opensourcesoftware(OSS)projectsareoftenaffectedbyeconomic
challenges,andsolicitingdonationsisacommonmeansofobtaining
funds for OSS projects. However, as pointed out by Staltz, many
OSSmaintainersanddevelopersdonotgenerateenoughincome
to sustain their OSS projects [23].
InMay2019,GitHubintroducedGitHubSponsors[ 33],aservice
whichallowsOSSdeveloperstoacceptdonationsfromotherGitHub
users. While most OSS donation services in the past have targeted
projects,GitHubSponsorsisuniqueinthatitallowsuserstodonate
toindividualOSSdevelopers.GitHubadvertisestheserviceas“a
newwaytocontributetoopensource”,inparticularpointingout
the widespread dependence on OSS projects: “Sponsor the open
source software your team has built its business on. Fund the projects
that make up your software supply chain to improve its performance,
reliability,andstability.”AnyonewhocontributestoanOSSproject
andlivesinoneofthe36regionsinwhichGitHubSponsorswas
availableatthetimeofwritingiseligibletobecomeasponsoreddeveloper. Developers can join a waitlist, and once approved, a
‘Sponsor’ button will appear on their profile and they can define
sponsorshiptiers.Asofnow,GitHubmatchescontributionsofup
to $5k during a developer’s first year in GitHub Sponsors.
ButwhoparticipatesinGitHubSponsors,whatmakesdevelopers
morelikelytoreceivesponsorship,andwhatchallengesandbenefitsdoGitHubSponsorsbring?Toanswersuchquestions,weconductedamixed-methodsstudyofthosewhosignedupforGitHubSponsors
and those who contributed donations.
Existing work on donations in the context of OSS projects—
beforethelaunchofGitHubSponsors—reportedthattheactivity
andpopularityofaprojectonGitHubarepositivelycorrelatedwith
the likelihood of receiving donations, and projects that receiveddonations show a short-term increase in the number of commits
andareductioninthetimetoresolveissues[ 20].Krishnamurthy
etal.studieddonationsinSourceForge[ 14].Theyreportedthatthe
decision to donate is impacted by relational commitment with the
open source software platform, donation to projects, and acceptingdonations from others. Furthermore, the length of association with
the platform and relational commitment affects donation levels.
Nakasai et al. studied the impact of donationbadges on developers’
responses to Eclipse bug reports [ 18]. They reported that bug re-
portsfromuserswhohavedonationbadgesusedinEclipse,take
less time to receive a reply from the developers than other bug
10582022 IEEE/ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
reports.Comparedtothesestudieswhichinvestigateddonationsto
projects, in this work, we study donations to individual developers,
enabled by GitHub Sponsors.
From our quantitative analysis, we find that sponsored develop-
ers aremore active than those looking for sponsorshipunsuccess-
fully, and that many of the sponsors are active developers them-
selves,effectivelybuildingclusters ofsponsorship.Distinguishing
sponsoreddevelopersfromnon-sponsoreddevelopers,thepresence
of sponsorship in their development community is an important
factor. Our qualitative analysis also reveals benefits and challenges
relatedtoGitHubSponsors.Developerstypicallydonothavechan-
nels at their disposal to attract sponsors and communicate with
those who might be interested in donating, but on the other hand,
manydonatetoshowappreciation,notexpectinganythingspecific
in return.
Significanceofresearchcontribution. Giventhesustainabilitycon-
cernsaffectingmanyOSSprojectsthataredependedonbymillions,
understandinghowsponsorshipcanprovidetheneededsupport
is a crucialstep towards ensuring thatwecan continue to relyon
OSS projects. GitHub Sponsor’s focus on enabling sponsoring of
individualdevelopersinsteadofprojectsisuniqueandhasnotbeen
studied before. Our work provides insights into the characteristics,
benefits, and challenges of the early adopters of GitHub Sponsors.
2 RESEARCH QUESTIONS
In this work, we conduct an exploratory study of GitHub Sponsors,
a new approach to support developers. Although GitHub Sponsors
allowsGitHubuserstosponsororganizationsaswellasindividuals,thisstudyonlyfocusesonthesponsorshipofindividualdevelopers.
Also, this studyonly targetssponsorship byindividual developers
anddoesnotcoversponsorshipbyorganizations.ThemaingoalofthestudyistogaininsightsintotheuseofGitHubSponsorsamongindividuals.Basedonthisgoal,weconstructedthreemainresearch
questions to guide our study. We present these main questions and
sub-questions along with their motivation.
RQ1:Who participates in GitHub Sponsors?
RQ1.1: What are the characteristics of sponsored developers?
RQ1.2: What are the characteristics of sponsors?
The motivation of our first main research question RQ1is to set
the stage for the rest of the paper by providing demographic infor-
mation of involved receivers (RQ1.1) and sponsors (RQ1.2).
RQ2:What characteristics make developers more likely to receive
sponsorship?
For OSS developers who want to obtain sponsorship, we set thissecondresearch question(
RQ2)toidentify thecharacteristicsof
developers who are likely to obtain sponsorship.
RQ3:Whataredevelopers’perceivedchallengesandbenefitsre-
lated to sponsoring?
RQ3.1: Why are developers looking for sponsors?
RQ3.2: What is the impact of (not) getting sponsorship?
RQ3.3: Why are developers sponsoring?
Todeepenourinvestigationoftheanswersto RQ2,wethenaskthe
corresponding‘why’questionsfor RQ3,againfrombothsidesof
apotentialdonation: whyaredeveloperslooking forsponsorship(RQ3.1)andwhyaredeveloperssponsoring( RQ3.3)?Weassumed
that the main challenge related to sponsorship is not receiving
money, so we asked about this explicitly in RQ3.2.
3 RESEARCH METHODS
In this section, we describe our methods for data collection and
analysis.
3.1 Data Collection
ThissectiondescribesthestepstoidentifyGitHubuserswhoare
participatinginGitHubSponsors,i.e.,registereddeveloperswho
are asking for sponsors, and GitHub users who are donating to
developers.
Preparing repositories. Since there is no direct way to get
theuserswhoparticipateinGitHubSponsors,wefirstexamined
repositories to get the list of contributing GitHub users. In order to
coverasmanyusersinvolvedinGitHubsponsorshipaspossible,
wecollectedalargenumberofGitHubrepositories,i.e.,repositories
that were created between 2008 and 2020 and had 10 or more stars
when we accessed them. We will discuss the limitations of this
thresholdof10starsinSection5.1.Accessandcloningwasdone
between January and March 2021, and 1,210,041 repositories were
collected. We excluded 387 repositories with no commits, resulting
in 1,209,654 repositories.
Obtaining contributors. The GitHub REST API was used to
retrievethecontributorsfromeachoftherepositoriescollected;due
toAPIlimitations,thetop500contributorsfromeachrepository
were retrieved. When we made requests via API between June
and July 2021, there were repositories for which we could not
getcontributorsbecausetherepositorieshadbeendeletedorsettoprivate,forexample.Weobtained1,695,015contributorsfrom
1,168,856repositories.Thelimitationsofthethresholdofthetop
500 contributors are also discussed in Section 5.1.
IdentifyingGitHubSponsorsparticipants. InJuly2021,We
used the GitHub GraphQL API to identify developers who can
besponsoredviaGitHubSponsors,i.e.,developerswhoareseek-
ing sponsorship. From the 1,695,015 contributors, we identified
9,366suchdevelopers.Afteranalyzingeachdeveloper’suserpro-
filepageforGitHubSponsorsandremovingdeveloperswhohad
deleted their profile, we identified 3,697 developers who had ob-tained sponsors (
sponsored developers ) and 5,666 developers
who had not yet obtained sponsors ( non-sponsoreddevelopers ).
From the analysis of a user profile page, we can get the list of
sponsoringGitHubusersincludinganonymoussponsors.Organi-
zationaccountswereremoved,andweidentifiedatotalof17,458
non-anonymous individual sponsors. This includes sponsored and
non-supported developers.
Identifyingprimaryprogramminglanguages. Sincewehave
the list of contributors for all repositories we analyzed, we can ag-
gregateinformationabouttherepositoriescontributedtobyeach
developer.Theprimarylanguageoftherepositoriescanberetrieved
using the GitHub GraphQL API, so the most common primary lan-
guage of the repositories to which each developer contributed istaken as the primary language of that developer. Note that thisis a rough estimate because we have not analyzed whether the
developer commits in that language or not. The primary languages
1059GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 1: Survey participant demographics
sponsored non-sponsored sponsoring
years coding
less than 5 7 (4%) 4 (3%) 4 (6%)
5-9 44 (25%) 49 (38%) 17 (26%)
10-19 73 (41%) 47 (37%) 25 (38%)
20-29 33 (19%) 21 (16%) 10 (15%)
30 or more 20 (11%) 8 (6%) 10 (15%)
years on GitHub
less than 5 23 (13%) 18 (14%) 15 (23%)
5-9 98 (55%) 87 (67%) 37 (56%)
10 or more 56 (32%) 24 (19%) 14 (21%)
gender
male 157 (89%) 111 (86%) 60 (91%)
female 6 (3%) 8 (6%) 3 (5%)
non-binary, genderqueer, or gender non-conforming
8 (5%) 5 (4%) 2 (3%)
prefer not to say 6 (3%) 5 (4%) 1 (2%)
OSS contributions
full time 30 (17%) 15 (12%) 5 (8%)
part time 129 (73%) 96 (74%) 44 (67%)
other 18 (10%) 18 (14%) 17 (25%)
sum 177 (100%) 129 (100%) 66 (100%)
ofdevelopersidentifiedinthiswaycanbeinterpretedasthepro-
gramming languages of the ecosystems to which the developers
mainly contributed.
3.2 Survey
TounderstandhowdevelopersperceiveGitHubsponsors (RQ3),we
conducted a survey to get developer feedback on GitHub Sponsors.
In August 2021, we sent invitations to 2,000 randomly selected
sponsored developers, 2,000 non-sponsored developers, and 2,000
sponsors to participate in the survey, and received a total of 372
responses:177fromsponsoreddevelopers,129fromnon-sponsored
developers, and 66 from sponsors. Table 1 presents an overview
of the demographics of our survey participants. Responses were
obtainedfromGitHubuserswithdiverseyearsofexperience.Most
of the respondents were male, but responses from other gender
minoritieswerealsoincluded.Mostrespondents’contributionto
OSS is part time, but sponsored developers are more likely to be
full-time developers than others.
3.3 Qualitative Analysis
For the qualitative analysis of the survey responses, three of the
authorscollaborativelytookaninitiallookatallanswersanddis-
cussedwhichthemeswerepresentinthedataandhowthesethemesrelatedtotheresearchquestions.Oneoftheauthorsthenformalised
this discussion into coding schemata. Three authors applied the
codingschematatoarandomsubsetofthedata,andoneauthorfin-
ished the annotation based on the encouraging kappa agreements.
Weallowedmultiplecodesperanswer.Inallcases,thekappaagree-
ment was satisfactory after the first pass, and we did not changenor add codes during the process. We attribute this stability to the
factthatwehadaninitialdiscussionaboutalldata,thatmostan-
swerswererelativelyshort,andthatthisparticularteamofauthorshaveexperienceworkingtogetheronqualitativedataanalysisfrom
previous research projects. We describe each coding schema in the
following questions.
Why are you looking for sponsors? To answer RQ3.1,w e
analyzedthereasonswhyOSSdevelopersaskfordonations.The
three raters independently labeled 29 answers from two groups
(from sponsored developers and non-sponsored developers). Then,
we calculated the kappa agreement of our coding schema from
threeraters.Cohen’skappaforthisqualitativeanalysisis0.7,whichindicates‘substantial’agreement[
26].Thefollowinglistshowsour
coding schema:
•fundingaparticularfeature/product :Weusedthiscode
ifthe respondentmentionedsomething inparticular(other
thantheOSSprojectitself)thattheywereplanningtouse
thedonationsfor,e.g.,“Fundhostingcostsforhostedprojects.”
•gauge interest/satisfaction :Somerespondentsindicated
using sponsorship as a way to receive feedback from the
community, in particular to assess the community’s interest
intheproject,e.g.,“Tomeasurethedegreeofsatisfactionwith
my OSS works.”
•motivation :Weusedthiscodeifrespondentswereaware
that receivingmotivations would increasetheir motivation,
e.g., “It highly motivates me if I get money as donations for
my work.”
•recognition/ appreciation :Ifrespondentsexpressedthat
they wanted to give the community a way to express ap-
preciation or recognition, we used this code, e.g., “Why not,
mostly.Mostlyboilsdowntorecognitionfortheworksincethe
monetary amounts are negligible.”
•financial support in general terms : In cases where re-
spondents gave a somewhat generic answer related to mak-
ingmoney,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“tofundmyopensource
work.”
•none: For respondents who did not mention a reason in
response to the question, we used the code ‘none’.
•notanswered : If the question was not answered, we coded
it as ‘not answered’.
Areyoudoinganythingspecialtoattractsponsors? Toget
abetterunderstandingofwhatdevelopersdotoattractsponsors,
we analyzed the responses of the actions that developers men-
tioned in their survey responses. The three raters independentlycoded 30 answers from two groups (from sponsored developers
andnon-sponsoreddevelopers),achievingCohen’skappaof0.91
or ‘almost perfect’ agreement [ 26]. The following list shows the
coding schema:
•perksforsponsors :For responseswhichmentioned aspe-
cific perk that was only available to sponsors of their work,
we usedthis code,e.g., “I offershort consultingsessions (just
a 30-60 minute video call) for higher tier sponsors.”
•social media : We used this code if respondents mentioned
a specific social media site or social media in general, e.g.,
“Twitter - tweet about my work.”
1060ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
•written content on GitHub : Responses which mentioned
updatingdocumentationtomaketheirworkmoreattractive
tosponsors,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“I’vewrittenoutmygoals
more publicly.”
•none: If respondents did not mention any activities, we
coded the response as ‘none’.
•notanswered : If the question was not answered, we coded
it as ‘not answered’.
How has having sponsors affected you and the projects
youareworkingon?/Howdoesthelackofsponsoringaffectyou and the projects you are working on?
To answer RQ3.2,
we analyzed the responses to the above questions of the impacts
of (not) getting sponsorship to developers and OSS projects. Three
raters independently annotated 28 answers from two groups (from
sponsoreddevelopersandnon-sponsoreddevelopers).Thekappa
agreement is 0.79, interpreted as ‘Substantial’ [ 26]. Our coding
schema is as follows:
•better project quality : We used this code for responses
whichmentionedapositiveimpactofsponsoringtowards
specificqualityattributes,e.g.,“It’smademefeelalotmore
motivated towards adding more open source code, and paying
a higher level of attention to detail.”
•limited effort : This code was used for responses which
mentionedanegativeimpactofthe lackofsponsorship on
theefforttheywerewillingorabletospend,e.g.,“theprojects
receive less attention due to the need to do paid work.”
•motivation :Responsesmentioningtheimpactof(lackof)
sponsorship on motivation received this code, e.g., “Some
pressure to finish the project.”
•satisfaction : We used a similar category for responses re-
lated to satisfaction, e.g., “Just for my heart’s pleasure.”
•need other channels : Responses which indicated that a
lackofsponsorshipviaGitHubSponsorsimpliedthatthey
used othersponsorshipplatforms fallinto thiscategory, e.g.,
“I have people making contribution via other channels.”
•need other income : Similarly, responses mentioning the
need to look for other income in the absence of GitHub
sponsorshipweregivenitsowncode,e.g.,“Ihavetoworkon
closed source and less interesting projects.”
•other: For any answer to the question that did not fit the
above categories, we used the code ‘other’.
•none: If respondents did not mention that there was any
impact, we coded the response as ‘none’.
•notanswered : If the question was not answered, we coded
it as ‘not answered’.
Why are you sponsoring others?/ Why did you become
a sponsor? To answer RQ3.3, we analyzed the responses of the
reasonswhydeveloperssponsorotherOSSdevelopers.Threeraters
independently coded 30 answers from our survey, achieving kappa
of0.62or‘substantial’agreement[ 26].Theloweragreementcanbe
explainedby21combinationsofmultiplecodesbeingdiscovered
when coding reasons for sponsoring. Three raters achieved perfect
agreementin15/30cases(50%)andpartialagreementinanother
14/30 cases (47%), and completely disagreed only in 1/30 case (3%).
Our coding schema is as follows:•dependencies/ benefited otherwise : We used this code
forresponseswhichexplicitlymentioneddependenciesor
other benefits, e.g., “My project uses their projects.”
•excellent work : If respondents indicated that they spon-
soredbecauseofexcellentprojects,weusedthiscode,e.g.,
“I want to contribute to great projects.”
•formof involvement :Relatedtothepreviouspoint,ifre-
spondents indicated that they see sponsoring as a form of
involvement,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“Ihadnomoretimeto
help with coding, so I decided to sponsor.”
•fairness/ give back to community : We used this code if
themainreasonwasrelatedtofairnessrathertowardsthe
community,e.g.,“IfsomeoneprovidesOSSsoftwarewhichI
dailyuse,Ithinkit’sfairandimportanttopayacontribution.”
•set example : Going a step further, some respondents men-
tionedthattheysponsortosetanexampleforothers,e.g.,“Iwanttosetanexampleforotherdevelopersthatlargenumbers
ofevensmallsupporterscanmakeanimpactonkeepingthe
OS community sustainable.”
•sustain project/ community : If the response focused on
using sponsorship to sustain a project or the community as
awhile,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“Tohelpthemsustaintheir
OSS software.”
•recognition/appreciation :Iftheresponsesmentionedrec-
ognizing a project or member of the community, or to show
appreciation, we used this code, e.g., “To praise their work,
and recognize their invested time.”
•motivation : Some respondents explicitly mentioned target-
ingthemotivationofdeveloperswiththeirdonations,e.g.,
“Because I understand how hard it is to stay motivated.”
•required to get access to features/ training : If partici-
pantsmentionedsponsoringinreturnforspecificaccess,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“Itwasrequiredtoaccesstrainingvideos.”
•generichelp/support :Somewhatgenericstatementssuch
as “Help valuable users in community ” received this code.
•other: If the response did not fit any of these categories, we
coded it as ‘other’.
•notanswered : If the question was not answered, we coded
it as ‘not answered’.
What are the effects of your sponsorship? Are the effects
asyou expected? Lastly, we analyzed the responses of the effects
ofsponsoring,totheabovequestions.Threeratersindependently
coded 27 answers from our survey. The kappa agreement is 0.82
or‘almostperfect’[ 26].Wecodedtheresponsesaccordingtothe
following categories:
•collective :Weusedthiscodeforresponseswhichexplicitly
mentioned that their contributions on their own would not
makeadifferencewhilethecollectivemight,e.g.,“Idonot
expect to affect anyone with 1 USD a month. The collectivedoes, but I personally don’t have a say necessarily, which is
good.”
•fund particular activities : If respondents expected partic-
ular activities to take place in return for their sponsoring,
we used this code, e.g., “Maybe better handling of my files
Issues. Also to keep a project alive.”
1061GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 2: Primary programming languages of developers
sponsored non-sponsored GitHut
JavaScript 796 (22%) 1,240 (22%) (19%)
Python 450 (12%) 764 (13%) (16%)PHP 352 (10%) 542 (10%) (6%)C# 257 (7%) 334 (6%) (4%)
TypeScript 204 (6%) 317 (6%) (7%)Go 203 (5%) 298 (5%) (8%)
Java 189 (5%) 373 (7%) (12%)C++ 174 (5%) 294 (5%) (7%)C 148 (4%) 180 (3%) (3%)
Ruby 130 (4%) 169 (3%) (7%)other 794 (21%) 1,155 (20%) (11%)
sum 3,697 (100%) 5,666 (100%) (100%)
•grateful/motivateddevelopers : Responses related to the
motivationofthedevelopersreceivingsponsorshipreceived
this code, e.g., “I’m not actually sure how to measure it. I just
hope that provides enough signal to them to feel motivated.”
•recognition as sponsor : We used this code for responses
mentioning recognition of sponsors, e.g., “Yes, as part of
somesponsorships,wegetourorgsomebadgesintheirrepo,
to showcase our support.”
•required to get access to features/ training : If the in-
tended effect of sponsorship was to get access to certain
features,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“Gettinginvolvedinemail
threads and invitations to beta testing.”
•satisfaction : Responses from sponsors mentioning their
own satisfaction received this code, e.g., “ I honestly don’t get
much out of sponsoring except personal satisfaction.”
•sustain project :Ifthemaineffectwassustainingapartic-
ularproject,weusedthiscode,e.g.,“Thatkeeptheproduct
alive and maintained.”
•none:If respondentsdidnot mentionanyeffect, wecoded
it as ‘none’.
•notanswered : If the question was not answered, we coded
it as ‘not answered’.
4 RESULTS
We present the answers to our research questions in this section.
4.1 RQ1: Who participates in GitHub Sponsors?
To understand participants in GitHub Sponsors, we investigated
the characteristics of sponsored developers and sponsors.
RQ1.1: What are the characteristics of sponsored develop-
ers?Wemeasured thenumberof sponsorsdonating tothe 3,697
sponsoreddevelopersinourdatasetandfoundthat80%hadeightorfewersponsors,and1,355(36%)hadjustonesponsor.661(17%)had
11ormoresponsors,andthedeveloperwiththehighestnumber
of sponsors had 1,342 sponsors. The median was 2.
Primary programming languages. The main programming
languages of the sponsored and non-sponsored developers iden-
tifiedbythemethoddescribedinSection3.1arepresentedinTa-
ble 2. It can be seen that many sponsored developers contribute to922
1101001,000
non−sponsored sponsored
(a) Number of repositories.6,10313,527
101001,00010,000100,000
non−sponsored sponsored
(b) Highest number of stars in
the repositories.
Figure1:Comparisonofrepositoriescontributedtobyspon-sored and non-sponsored developers.
JavaScript, Python, and PHP repositories. Table 2 also shows the
percentageofpullrequestvolumebylanguageforQ42020taken
fromGitHut2.0.1GitHut2.0isawebservicethatprocessesGitHub
datawithGoogle’sBigQuerytovisualizeGitHublanguagestatis-
tics.2In all three sets of data, the set of programming languages in
the top 10 is the same. This means that developers seeking spon-
sorshiponGitHubSponsorsareinanecosystemofprogramming
languages thatare actively being used. JavaScript and Pythonare
at the top of the three lists in common. The other rankings for
sponsored and non-sponsored developers are almost the same, but
there are some differences between these and the GitHut ranking.
Java, which is ranked third in terms of the volume of pull requests,
isrankedseventhintermsofthemainlanguageusedbysponsored
developers. PHP, which ranks eighth in terms of the volume ofpull requests, is found in third place as the primary language of
sponsoreddevelopers.Wecanseethatthereisadifferencebetween
theactivitylevelofeachprogramminglanguage,asmeasuredby
the amount of pull requests, and the ecosystem of programming
languages that have a presence in GitHub Sponsors.
Contributionstorepositories. Figure1aisaviolinplotshow-
ingthenumberofrepositorieswith10ormorestarscontributed
to by sponsored and non-sponsored developers. The median val-
uesare22and9,respectively.Themediannumberofrepositories
contributedtobytheother1,684,126developers,excludingspon-
sored developers and non-sponsored developers (i.e., developers
who had set up sponsorship, but not received donations), was 1.
Inthisanalysisofotherdevelopers,weexcludedasmanybotac-
counts as possible using keywords such as ‘[bot]’, ‘-bot’, ‘Bot’, and
manual checks. Considering that most developers contribute to
only one repository, we can see that both developer groups (spon-
soredandnon-sponsored)areactive,contributingtoseveralpopular
projects,andespeciallysponsoreddeveloperscontributetomany
such projects.
Figure 1b is a violin plot showing the highest number of stars in
the repositories contributed to by sponsored and non-sponsored
1https://madnight.github.io/githut/#/pull_requests/2020/4
2https://github.com/madnight/githut
1062ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
7
1101001,000
(a) Number of repositories.4,239
101001,00010,000100,000
(b) Highest number of stars in
the repositories.
Figure 2: Repositories contributed to by sponsors.
0100200300400
0 5 10 15 20 25
# of developers sponsoringFrequency
non−sponsored sponsored
Figure 3: Distribution of the number of developers spon-
sored by other sponsored or non-sponsored developers.
developers.Themedianvaluesare13,527and6,103,respectively.
We can see that sponsored developers contribute to repositories
with a higher number of stars than non-sponsored developers.
RQ1.2:Whatarethecharacteristicsofsponsors? Ofthe17,458
sponsors we identified, 809 were sponsored developers themselves
and446werenon-sponsoreddevelopers.Oftheremaining16,203
sponsors who had not sought sponsorship for themselves, 6,020
(37%)hadnotcontributedtotherepositoriesanalyzed,while10,183
(63%) were developers who had contributed to repositories with
10ormorestars.Fromthis,wefoundthattwo-thirdsofthespon-
sorsofGitHubSponsorsweredevelopers,notjustusers.Among
GitHubSponsorsparticipants,ofthe16,203GitHubuserswhowere
only sponsoring, 80% were only sponsoring one or two developers.
Those who sponsored the most had sponsored 43 developers. The
median was one.
Contributionsto repositories. Figure 2 presents a violin plot
showing the number of repositories with 10 or more stars con-tributed to by 10,183 sponsors (2a) and a violin plot showing thehighest number of stars in the repositories contributed to by the
same sponsors (2b). From these figures, we can see that these spon-
sors are active developers, comparable to the non-sponsored devel-
opers seen in Figure 1.
Sponsors among sponsored and non-sponsored develop-
ers.Figure 3 shows the distribution of the number of developersFigure 4: Largest network of sponsoring relationshipsamong sponsored developers. Nodes represent developersand are color-coded by the top 10 major programming lan-guages:JavaScript, Python, PHP,C#,TypeScript, Go,Java,
C++,C, andRuby.
sponsoredbyothersponsoreddevelopersandnon-sponsoredde-
velopers.Mostof themwere sponsoringonlyafewdevelopers,but
the maximum values were 25 and 22, respectively. We can see that
the sponsored developer group has more developers sponsoring
other developers than the non-sponsored developer group.
Sponsoring network of sponsored developers. Of the 3,697
sponsored developers, 809 (22%) were also sponsors, suggesting
thatdevelopersaresponsoringeachother.Therefore,wecreated
networks withdevelopers as nodes andsponsorship relationships
asedges.Figure4showsthelargestofthesenetworks.Thenodesize
correspondstothetotalnumberofinputs(beingsponsored)and
outputs(sponsoring)ofthesponsorship.Developerswhoseprimary
language is one of the top 10 major programming languages listed
in Table 2 are colored. In this network, we can see that developers
of the same major programming languages, such as JavaScript,
PHP,C#,andRuby,haveformedclusters.Inparticular,wefindthat
developers whose primary language is PHP form the closest and
largest cluster, and they have a strong social network of donations
through GitHub Sponsors.
Summary : Sponsored developers are more active than
non-sponsored developers, with JavaScript, Python, and
PHP being their top primary languages. About two-thirds
of the sponsors are also active developers, and the spon-
sored developers form clusters that sponsor each other.
1063GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
	
 	
	
 		

	
 	
		

 
Figure 5: A decision tree for classifying sponsored and non-sponsored developers.
4.2 RQ2: What characteristics make developers
more likely to receive sponsorship?
To answer this research question, we employed a decision tree
to examine the characteristics that are important in separating
sponsored developers from non-sponsored developers. We also
present developer feedback on important factors to consider when
deciding who to sponsor.
Decision tree. Weusemachinelearningtofindusefulcharac-
teristics, or features, in the data. Because the relationship between
features and outcome could be nonlinear or the features may in-teract with each other, we conducted the analysis with decision
treesratherthanlinearorlogisticregressionmodels.Thefollowing
featuresweremeasuredfortheoutcomeofhavingornothaving
sponsors(sponsored/non-sponsored).Thesefeaturesweredesigned
based on the findings from the RQ1results. Note that repositories
to be measured here had 10 or more stars.
•highest_star : Highest number of stars in the repositories
thatdeveloperscontributedto.AsseeninFigure1b,spon-
soreddevelopersarecontributingtorepositorieswithahigh
number of stars.
•num_repos : Number of repositories that developers con-
tribute to. As seen in Figure 1a, sponsored developers are
contributing to many repositories.
•num_own_repos : Number of repositories contributed to
andownedbyadeveloper.Owningandmanagingpopular
projects might be a factor in getting sponsorship.
•num_repos_top_contributing :Numberofrepositoriescon-
tributed to that are ranked top in terms of commits. Making
topcontributionstopopularrepositoriesmightbeafactor
in obtaining sponsorship.
•num_repos_top_co_contributing :Numberofrepositories
contributedtowiththetopnumberofcommitsandthathave
at least one sponsor in the same repository. This does not
takeintoaccountwhothesponsorsinthesamerepository
are sponsoring. As seen in Figure 4, sponsored developers
formclustersofsponsoringrelationships.Thepresenceof
GitHub Sponsors participants as sponsors in the develop-
mentcommunitymightbeafactorinobtainingsponsorship.
•num_sponsoring : Number of sponsored developers. As
seen in Figure 3, sponsored developers are sponsoring more
than non-sponsored developers.Figure 5 shows the result of applying the decision tree using
scikit-learn3to the data of 9,363 developers, including 3,697 spon-
sored and 5,666 non-sponsored developers. The feature num_repos-
_top_contributing is found to be the most important, that is, the
existence of such repositories seems to be the most common char-
acteristic of sponsored developers. If that value was three or more,
mostdevelopershadobtainedsponsors.Ifthatvaluewasoneortwoandthefeature highest_star waslessthan590,morethanhalfofthe
developershavenotattractedsponsors.Ifthatvaluewaszero,most
developers did not get sponsors. However, if the number of con-
tributingrepositoriesismorethan13andthefeature highest_star
is morethan 911,then more thanhalf ofthose developershad ob-
tained sponsorship. We found that sponsored developers not only
contribute to the repositories with the most stars and contribute
tothemostrepositories,buttheyarealsothetopcontributorsto
the repositories where sponsoring developers are present. In other
words,whetherornotthecommunitiestowhichdevelopersbelong
haveahabitofdonatingtoOSSdevelopersappearstobeimportant
for whether or not the developers get sponsors.
Developerfeedback. InthesurveydescribedinSection3.2,we
asked how important the following criteria were when deciding
who to sponsor. The criteria are based on our insights gained from
answering RQ1. The respondents were asked to choose from the
following options: very important, somewhat important, a little bit
important, not important at all, or don’t care.
(a)They are major contributors to OSS projects that are impor-
tant to me.
(b) They inspire me.
(c) We are contributing to the same OSS projects.
(d) We know each other outside the OSS community.
Figure6showsthedistributionsoftheresponses.Asexpected,
beingamajorcontributortoanimportantOSSproject(a)wasavery
important criterion. In terms of the criterion of inspirational (b),
themajorityofresponseswerepositive,including‘veryimportant’,
‘somewhatimportant’,and‘alittlebitimportant’.Becauseofthe
individual sponsorship, personal attractiveness seems to be impor-
tant.Frequentresponsestothecriterionofcontributingtothesameproject(c)were‘alittleimportant’,‘notimportantatall’,and‘don’tcare’.Itisnotanimportantcriterionforeveryone,butitshowsthat
some people do care about it. This can be considered as support
3https://scikit-learn.org/
1064ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
(d) We know each other outside of the OSS
community.(c) We are contributing to the same OSS projects.(b) They inspire me.(a) They are major contributors to OSS projects
that are important to me.
100 50 0 50 100sponsoringnon−sponsoredsponsored
sponsoringnon−sponsoredsponsored
sponsoringnon−sponsoredsponsored
sponsoringnon−sponsoredsponsored
Percentage
Don't care
Not important at allA little bit importantSomewhat importantVery important
Figure 6: Distribution of the number of developers spon-
sored by other sponsored or non-sponsored developers.
fortheimportanceofthefeature num_repos_top_co_contributing
as revealed by the decision tree analysis. Being an acquaintance (d)
is mostly considered ‘not important at all’ or ‘don’t care’.
Summary :Inadditiontobeingatopcontributortopop-
ular repositories, we found that it is important to have
developers sponsoring others in the development commu-
nity.OursurveyrevealedthatbeingamajorcontributortoanimportantOSSprojectandbeinginspirationalwerepar-ticularlyimportantcriteriaindeterminingwhotosponsor.
4.3 RQ3: What are developers’ perceived
challenges and benefits related to
sponsoring?
Toaddressthisresearchquestion,weconductedqualitativeanalyses
of the survey results, as described in Section 3.3.
RQ3.1: Why are developers looking for sponsors? Table 3
shows the result of our coding, separately for sponsored devel-
opers and non-sponsored developers. From all 306 answers, the
majority referred to financial support in general terms, accounting
for100sponsoredand83non-sponsoreddevelopers,respectively.
Some sponsored developersstarted to accept donations toreceive
recognition/ appreciation of their works and effort, accounting for
37answers.Amongthereasons,togaugeinterest/satisfactionis
a special reason related to the growthof OSS development. Devel-
opers consider GitHub Sponsors as a way to assess how the OSS
community responds to their works. Some developers see GitHub
Sponsors as a potential opportunity to become full-time OSS de-
velopers.Forexample,onerespondentstatedthat“Ihaveenough
money with my full time job, but I love contributing to OSS andgiving to the community. Sponsors are mainly a way for me to seeTable 3: Why are you looking for sponsors?
sponsored non-sponsored
financial support in general terms 100 83
recognition/ appreciation 37 12
funding a particular feature/product 24 15
motivation 15 8
none 9 3
gauge interest/ satisfaction 8 5
not answered 7 8
Table4:Areyoudoinganythingspecialtoattractsponsors?
sponsored non-sponsored
none 106 103
written content on GitHub 36 10
social media 24 5
perks for sponsors 11 4
not answered 7 8
Table 5: How has having sponsors affected you and the
projects you are working on?/ How does the lack of spon-soring affect you and the projects you are working on?
sponsored non-sponsored
none 74 41
motivation 65 0
better project quality 18 0
satisfaction 14 0
not answered 14 10
other 1 3
limited effort 0 61
need other income 0 19
need other channels 0 1
how much interest my projects get from the community. If it became
self-sustaining some day, I could consider working full time on OSS.”
Areyoudoinganythingspecialtoattractsponsors? Table4
shows the distribution of the codes across answers from sponsored
developersandnon-sponsoreddevelopers.Fromall306answers,
the majority of developers indicated no specific activities to attract
sponsors, accounting for 106 and 103 respectively. Other actions
includedspecificperksforsponsorsandadvertisingonsocialmedia
and/or the social coding platform itself.
RQ3.2:Whatistheimpactof(not)gettingsponsorship? Ta-
ble 5 shows the results of the qualitative analysis. We found thatmost of the sponsored developers (74) have not been affected byhaving sponsors. The second most frequently mentioned impactismotivation,accountingfor65developers.Forexample,onere-
spondent pointed out: “It makes me feel bad when I ignore open pull
requestsorbugreportsfortoolong,andcausesmesomeanxietyasto
whether it’s really okay for me to ask for money, even though I make
it very clear that sponsoring me won’t make development faster or
makemeworkonitfull-time.”Fornon-sponsoreddevelopers,being
1065GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Table 6: Why are you sponsoring others?/ Why did you be-
come a sponsor?
sponsored non sponsoring
dependencies/ benefited otherwise 22 11 22
recognition/ appreciation 22 13 17
generic help/ support 11 7 14
sustain project/ community 8 4 3
excellent work 7 6 5
fairness/ give back to community 7 3 5
motivation 5 4 4
set example 5 0 1
not answered 4 4 9
form of involvement 2 0 4
other 0 1 1
required to get access to features/ training 0 0 1
abletodedicateonlylimitedeffortisthemostcommonimpactfrom
not having sponsors, accounting for 61 developers.
RQ3.3: Why are developers sponsoring? Table 6 presents the
results.Fromtheresponsesof180developerswhoindicatedthat
theyweresponsoring,wefoundthathavingdependenciesonthe
codewrittenbythereceiversofthesponsorshipandrecognition/
appreciation are the most frequently mentioned reasons for all
different roles of OSS developers.
What are the effects of your sponsorship? Are the effects
asyouexpected? Table7showsthedistributionofthecodes.From
all 180 answers, the majority of OSS developers have not observed
any impact of their sponsorship. Other sponsors mentioned grate-
ful/motivated developers, accounting for 13, 7, and 14 answers,
respectively.Oneinteresting themementionedinthe responsesis
related to the collective of open source developers. For example,
onerespondentstated:“No-Itisdifficulttoknowwhotosponsor-
and many people don’t accept sponsorships. I wish folks who did not
needmoneycouldgatherandre-distributemoney(i.e.,flowthrough).”
Summary :Ourqualitative analysisrevealedseveralbene-
fitsandchallengesrelatedtoGitHubSponsors,asperceived
by its participants. While developers are hoping to receive
financial support after signing up for GitHub Sponsors,
themajorityofdevelopersdoesnotdoanythingspecifictoattractsponsors.Sponsorshipcanaffordfundeddevelopersmore time to improve project quality, but those not receiv-
ing sponsorship tend to look elsewhere for money. The
impact of sponsoring is not alwaysclear to those making
the donations, but many donate out of appreciation, not
expecting anything specific in return.
5 DISCUSSION
In this section, we describe the threats to validity that affect our
study, and we discuss implications and future work.Table 7: What are the effects of your sponsorship? Are the
effects as you expected?
sponsored non sponsoring
none 31 20 27
not answered 13 8 16
grateful/motivated developers 13 7 14
satisfaction 8 4 1
recognition as sponsor 2 1 2
fund particular activities 2 0 2
collective 2 0 0
sustain project 1 4 3
required to get access to features/ training 0 0 2
5.1 Threats to validity
Subjectsare earlyadopters. GitHubsponsorship startedin 2019
and at this point, all participants are early adopters. There are not
manydeveloperswhohaveobtainedsponsorsyet,whichisathreat
totheexternalvalidityofourempiricalstudy.Therefore,itisim-
portant to note that the findings of this study are not generalizable
to all open source developers, but rather results for early adopters.
Sponsored developers in less-starred repositories. As explained in
Section 3.1,this study identifiesusers involved inGitHub Sponsors
among developers who have contributed to repositories with 10 or
morestars.Assumingthatmostsponsoreddeveloperscontribute
to popular repositories with a high number of stars, we targeted
these repositories, but did not consider sponsored developers who
only contribute to repositories with a low number of stars. To
examinethemagnitudeofthethreattoexternalvalidityposedby
this limitation, we analyzed a sample of repositories with fewerthan 10 stars in the same way. Due to the large number of lesspopular repositories on GitHub, it is not possible to retrieve all
repositories with 9 or fewer stars from the API. We used the list of
repositories from RepoReapers, which examined 1,857,423 GitHub
repositories for curating engineered software projects [ 17], and
investigated the star counts of all repositories in July 2021. Weidentified1,338,533 repositoriesthathad astarcount of9or less.From the developers who contributed to repositories with 9 or
fewerstars,weexcludedthosewhoalsocontributedtorepositories
with10ormorestars,indicatedinSection3.1.Weobtained450,884
contributors who contributed only to repositories with 9 or fewer
stars. Among these contributors, we identified seven sponsoreddevelopers.Wemanuallyinvestigatedtheprofilesofthesesevenpeople, and found that four had changed their GitHub accountnames, and that their accounts before the change were among
thecontributorstorepositorieswith10ormorestars.Sincethere
wereonlythreesponsoreddevelopersoutofthe450,884developers
who only contributed to repositories with 9 or fewer stars in the
approximately1.3millionrepositoriessurveyed,wecanconclude
thatthethreatrelatedtotargetingcontributorstorepositorieswith
10 or more stars is small.
Upto500contributorsfromarepository. Whenretrievingthecon-
tributorsfromarepository,onlythetop500developerswiththe
most commits could be retrieved dueto API limitations. However,
alargerepositorycanhavemorethan500contributors.Duetothis
1066ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
limitation, developers who are not in the top 500 committers for
at least one repository with 10 or more stars are not included in
our analysis. To examine the effect of this limitation, we measured
the highest commit rank in repositories with 10 or more stars con-
tributed to by each developer. The median and maximum valuesfor sponsored developers were 1 and 351, respectively, while the
medianandmaximumvaluesfornon-sponsoreddeveloperswere
1 and 435, respectively. Most sponsored and non-sponsored devel-
opersinouranalysiscontributetoatleastonerepositorywith10
ormorestarswheretheyarethemaincommitter,sothethreatto
external validity from the top 500 limit seems small.
Responsebiases. Recallbiascanoccurinsurveyresearch.This
means that respondents answer only what they remember and not
necessarilywhatwasmostimportanttotheminthepast.Therefore,
wetriedtocollectspontaneousresponsesandaskedrespondents
to answer most of the questions in an open-ended format.
5.2 Implications and Future Work
GitHubSponsorsadvertisestheirserviceasenabling“anewwaytocontribute to open source.” While donating to open source projects
isnotnecessarilynew,ourstudyconfirmsthatsomesponsorsdo
indeed see sponsorship as an alternative to contributing code, e.g.,
“I had no more time to help with coding, so I decided to sponsor.”
Most ofthe sponsors are activedevelopers themselves, i.e., would
likely have the technical skills to contribute in other ways as well.
However,iftheydonothavesufficienttime,sponsorshipcanbean
effective way for them to show their support and appreciation.
A unique feature of GitHub Sponsors is its focus on enabling
sponsorship for individual developers instead of entire projects.
A sideeffect of thisfocus is thatthe social networkof individual
developersbecomesanimportantdeterminerforwhethertheywillbeabletoattractfunding:ourstudyidentifiedseveralclustersinthe
network of sponsoring relationships among sponsored developers.
While we only investigated sponsorship by individual developers,
organizationalsponsorshipisanimportantaspectthatshouldbe
analyzed in future studies.
Developerswhohadsignedupforreceivingsponsorshipseemed
unsurewhattheycoulddotoattractsponsors.Itmightbeworth
forGitHubtosimplifythecurrentsponsorshiptiersystemwhich
seemstoocomplexfordeveloperswhoareonlylookingforsmall
donations to stay motivated. Expectations around what one gets inreturnforsponsorshiparenotalwaysclear.Fromtheperspectiveofsponsors,weidentifiedawiderangeofreasonsforgiving,fromsus-
taining the entire OSS community to expecting particular features
to be implemented. These expectations are not always perfectly
matchedwiththereasonsthatdevelopersenabledGitHubSponsors
in the first place.
A recent trend related to expectations and sponsorship is ‘spon-
sorware’,4a“areleasestrategyforopen-sourcesoftwarethaten-
ables developers to be compensated for their open-source work
withfewerdownsidesthantraditionalopen-sourcefundingmodels.”
In those cases, expectations are made very explicit and software
isnotreleaseduntilsponsorshiphasbeenobtained.Thisstrategy
stands in contrast to sponsors giving to show appreciation or to do
4https://github.com/sponsorware/docssomething good for the OSS community in general. Future work
will have to investigate whether sponsorware has thepotential to
disrupt the current OSS model.
6 RELATED WORK
TherearemanyfactorsthataffectthesustainabilityofOSSprojects.
Researchers have argued that retaining newcomers is a way tosustain OSS projects [
10,24], and Steinmacher et al. [ 24] found
that 20% of newcomers became long-term contributors. Hata etal. [
9] suggest ways to incentivize developers to code and finally
makeprojectssustainable(theyassumedprojectsthatcanattract
andretaincodingcontributors),which includethatOSS projectsshould prepare documentation and make innovations to reduce
codewritingcost,andemploydevelopers.Previousresearch[ 25]
showed that organizational sponsorship affects development ac-
tivityover time.AccordingtoGitHub’srepresentativesurvey[ 6],
OSS development highly relies on voluntary contributions (23% of
respondents indicated they contribute to open source as part of
theirprofessionalwork).Butrecently,researchersfoundthatthe
number of employees paid to work (they assumed work during
weekdaysfrom9am—5pmaspaidwork)onOSSprojectsisincreas-
ing [21]. Moreover, Atiq and Tripathi [ 1] explored how developers
perceiveasymmetryincompensationinOSSprojects,andfound
thatOSSprojectsthataredistributedunequallymayfailiftheyare
mismanaged. These researches point out that the financial benefits
are a factor to sustain OSS projects.
6.1 Donation
Donations become a common way for obtaining these financial
benefits[3].Nakasaietal.[ 18,19]analyzeddonationsintheEclipse
projects,andfound thatbenefitstodonors andpresentingbadges
could motivate donations. Krishnamurthy and Tripathi [ 14] found
that commitment to an OSS platform contributes to the decision
todonate.Moreover,donationsdecreaseresponsetimetobugre-
portsofdonors,andnewreleasesaretriggersofdonations.Besides
that, Overney et al. [ 20] conducted a mixed-methods empirical
study on the prevalence of donations, characteristics of projects
requesting and receiving donations, and reasons for asking for do-
nationsinOSSprojects.Theyfoundonly0.2%of npmpackagesand
0.04% of GitHub repositories ask for donations and the commonly
used donation platforms are PayPalandPatreon. The projects
asking for and receiving donations tend to be more active, more
mature, and more popular. The authors also qualitatively analyzed
donation information (e.g., README.md files and donation profile
pages) and identified four reasons for asking for donations in OSS
projects: Engineering (48%), Community (18%), Project expenses
(13%),andPersonal(9%).Inaddition,Yukizawaetal.[ 28]promoted
newstrategiesthatappliedsocialproofandlegitimizationofpaltry
contributions tactics to help OSS projects attract donations.
6.2 Bounty
Financial benefits are an important extrinsic motivation to sustain
OSSprojects[ 1].Bountiesareanotherwayofobtainingthesefinan-
cialbenefits[ 3].Unlikedonations,bountiesareusedtomotivate
specific developers (i.e., bounty hunters) for tasks which are not
of their primary interest by providing monetary incentives [ 8,13].
1067GitHub Sponsors:
Exploring a New Way to Contribute to Open Source ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Severalstudies investigatedtheeffectiveness ofbountyprograms
on disclosing vulnerabilities [ 4,16,29]. Similar to Kanda et al. [ 11],
Zhou et al. [ 32] conducted an exploratory analysis on bounty back-
ers and bounty hunters in the bounty issues addressing process of
OSS projects from the Bountysource platform. They found that
backersprefertosupportimplementingnewfeaturesratherthan
fixing bugs, and bounty issues that are likely to be addressed by
hunterstendtobeinmorepopularandmatureOSSprojects.More-
over, the timing of proposing bounties is the most important factor
in this process [ 31]. Zhou et al. [ 30] also found that questions with
bounty are likely to attract more traffic on Stack Overflow. Despite
the advantagesof bounties, theycould also lead todisadvantages:
winner-take-all property, disturbing thesoftware developmentpro-
cess, short-termism, alienating volunteer developers, bypassing
existingleadersinthedevelopmentcommunity,attractingdevel-
operswholackprojectcontext,orredefiningtheprioritiesofthe
project in favor of the bounty [13].
6.3 Motivation
The motivation of OSS developers has been studied for decades.
LakhaniandWolf[ 15]groupedthismotivationintothreegroups:1)
enjoyment-based intrinsic motivations, 2) obligation/community-
based intrinsic motivations, and 3) extrinsic motivations. Theyfound that being paid and feeling creative on OSS projects does
nothaveasignificantnegativeimpactonprojecteffort,contrarytofindingsonthenegativeimpactofextrinsicrewardsonintrin-
sic motivations [ 2]. Besides that, Roberts et al. [ 22] argued that
OSS developers being paid to participate leads to above-average
contribution levels, while intrinsic motivations do not significantly
impactaveragecontributionlevels.HarsandOuetal.[ 7]classified
motivations of OSS developers into internal and external factors.
They showed that external factors (e.g., building human capital,
self-marketing, peer recognition, and personal needs) have greater
weight.VonKroghetal.[ 27]reviewedtheliteratureonthemotiva-
tionofOSSdevelopersuntil2009.Theyidentifiedtenmotivation
categories grouped into intrinsic motivation, internalized extrinsic
motivation,orextrinsicmotivation.Gerosaetal.[ 5]investigated
shifts in the motivation of OSS developers via a survey, and found
that developers contribute to OSS projects for extrinsic factors, but
continue contributing because of intrinsic factors. While financial
benefits are common for experienced contributors, payment andmoney are still not common motivators. Moreover, the study of
Krishnamurthy et al. [ 12] found that intrinsic and extrinsic motiva-
tionspositivelyaffectOSSdevelopers’intentiontoacceptmonetary
rewards.
7 CONCLUSION
TounderstandthepotentialofGitHubSponsorsinhelpingtheopen
source community attract and retain developers, we conducteda mixed-methods study of 1,695,015 contributors from 1,168,856repositories, focusing on sponsored developers, non-sponsored
developers, and sponsors. We identified differences between those
successfulinattractingsponsorshipandthosestillwaitingfortheir
first sponsor. The fact that developers are often clustered in terms
of their sponsorship relationships implies that being connected to
sponsorsandothersponsoreddeveloperscanhaveanimpactonwhether the search for sponsors is successful. While the impact
of sponsorship is not always clear, and some sponsors were left
disappointed that their donations did not have the intended effect,
mostsponsorscontributeasatokenofappreciationandrecognition
and/or for the good of the open source community.
8 DATA AVAILABILITY
Our online appendix contains the lists of studied repositories onGitHub, the dataset for the network diagram for answering RQ1,
thefeaturesofsponsoredandnon-sponsoreddevelopersforRQ2,
thefeaturesofsponsorsforRQ2,andsurveymaterialandcoding
of responses for RQ3. The appendix is available at at https://github.
com/NAIST-SE/GHSponsors and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
6017901.
9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers
JP20H00587 and JP20H05706.
REFERENCES
[1]Arzoo Atiq and Arvind Tripathi. 2016. Impact of financial benefits on open
source software sustainability. In Proceedings of 37th International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS ’16). 10.
[2]EdwardLDeci,RichardKoestner,andRichardMRyan.1999. Ameta-analytic
review of experiments examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic
motivation. Psychological bulletin 125, 6 (1999), 627–668.
[3]NadiaEghbal.2019. Ahandyguidetofinancialsupportforopensource. https:
//github.com/nayafia/lemonade-stand. Accessed: 2021-09-02.
[4]MatthewFinifter,DevdattaAkhawe,andDavidWagner.2013.AnEmpiricalStudy
ofVulnerabilityRewardsPrograms.In Proceedingsof22ndUSENIXConferenceon
Security (SEC ’13). 273–288.
[5]Marco Gerosa, Igor Wiese, Bianca Trinkenreich,Georg Link, Gregorio Robles,
Christoph Treude, Igor Steinmacher, and Anita Sarma. 2021. The shifting sands
of motivation: Revisiting what drives contributors in open source. In Proceedings
of IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’21).
1046–1058.
[6]GitHub. 2017. Open Source Survey 2017. https://opensourcesurvey.org/2017/.
Accessed: 2021-09-02.
[7]Alexander Hars and Shaosong Ou. 2001. Working for free? Motivations ofparticipating in open source projects. In Proceedings of 34th Annual Hawaii
InternationalConference on System Sciences .9 .
[8]HideakiHata,MingyuGuo,andM.AliBabar.2017. UnderstandingtheHetero-
geneity of Contributors in Bug Bounty Programs. In Proceedings of ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
(ESEM ’17). 223–228. https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2017.34
[9]HideakiHata,TaikiTodo,SayaOnoue,andKenichiMatsumoto.2015. Character-isticsofsustainableossprojects:Atheoreticalandempiricalstudy.In Proceedings
ofIEEE/ACM8thInternationalWorkshoponCooperativeandHumanAspectsof
Software Engineering (CHASE ’15) . 15–21.
[10]CarlosJensen,ScottKing,andVictorKuechler.2011. Joiningfree/opensource
software communities: An analysis of newbies’ first interactions on projectmailing lists. In Proceedings of 44th Hawaii international conference on system
sciences (HICSS ’11). 1–10.
[11]T. Kanda, M. Guo, H. Hata, and K. Matsumoto. 2017. Towards understanding an
open-source bounty: Analysis of Bountysource. In Proceedings of IEEE 24th Inter-
nationalConferenceonSoftwareAnalysis,EvolutionandReengineering (SANER
’17). 577–578.
[12]SandeepKrishnamurthy,ShaosongOu,andArvindKTripathi.2014. Acceptanceof monetary rewards in open source software development. Research Policy 43, 4
(2014), 632–644.
[13]Sandeep Krishnamurthy and Arvind K. Tripathi. 2006. Bounty Programs inFree/Libre/Open Source Software. In The Economics of Open Source Software
Development. 165–183.
[14]SandeepKrishnamurthyandArvindK.Tripathi.2009. Monetarydonationsto
an open source software platform. Research Policy 38, 2 (2009), 404–414.
[15]Karim R. Lakhani and Robert G. Wolf. 2003. Why hackers do what they do:
Understandingmotivationandeffortinfree/opensourcesoftwareprojects. In
Open Source Software Projects. 3–22.
1068ICSE ’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Shimada et al.
[16]Thomas Maillart, Mingyi Zhao, Jens Grossklags, and John Chuang. 2017. Given
enougheyeballs,allbugsareshallow?RevisitingEricRaymondwithbugbounty
programs. Journal of Cybersecurity 3, 2 (2017), 81–90.
[17]NuthanMunaiah,StevenKroh,CraigCabrey,andMeiyappanNagappan.2017.
Curating GitHub for Engineered Software Projects. Empirical Software Engineer-
ing22, 6 (2017), 3219–3253.
[18]Keitaro Nakasai, Hideaki Hata, and Kenichi Matsumoto. 2019. Are Donation
BadgesAppealing?:ACaseStudyofDeveloperResponsestoEclipseBugReports.
IEEE Software 36, 03 (2019), 22–27.
[19]KeitaroNakasai,HideakiHata,SayaOnoue,andKenichiMatsumoto.2017. Analy-
sisofdonationsintheeclipseproject.In Proceedingsof8thInternationalWorkshop
on Empirical Software Engineering in Practice (IWESEP ’17). 18–22.
[20]Cassandra Overney, Jens Meinicke, Christian Kästner, and Bogdan Vasilescu.
2020. Howto NotGetRich:AnEmpirical StudyofDonationsinOpen Source.In
Proceedings of ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’20). 1209–1221.
[21]DirkRiehle,PhilippRiemer,CarstenKolassa,andMichaelSchmidt.2014. Paid
vs. volunteer work in open source. In Proceedings of 47th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS ’14). 3286–3295.
[22]JeffreyARoberts,Il-HornHann,andSandraASlaughter.2006.Understandingthe
motivations, participation, and performance of open source software developers:
A longitudinal study of the Apache projects. Management science 52, 7 (2006),
984–999.
[23]Andre Staltz. [n.d.]. SOFTWARE BELOW THE POVERTY LINE.
https://staltz.com/software-below-the-poverty-line.html. Accessed: 2021-02-22.
[24]IgorSteinmacher,IgorWiese,AnaPaulaChaves,andMarcoAurélioGerosa.2013.
Whydonewcomersabandonopensourcesoftwareprojects?.In Proceedingsof6th
InternationalWorkshoponCooperativeandHumanAspectsofSoftwareEngineering
(CHASE ’13). 25–32.[25]KatherineJStewart,AnthonyPAmmeter,andLikoebeMMaruping.2006. Im-
pacts of license choice and organizational sponsorship on user interest anddevelopment activity in open source software projects. Information Systems
Research17, 2 (2006), 126–144.
[26]Anthony J Viera, Joanne M Garrett, et al .2005. Understanding interobserver
agreement: the kappa statistic. Fam med 37, 5 (2005), 360–363.
[27]GeorgVonKrogh,StefanHaefliger,SebastianSpaeth,andMartinWWallin.2012.
Carrotsandrainbows:Motivationandsocialpracticeinopensourcesoftware
development. MIS quarterly 36, 2 (2012), 649–676.
[28]UgoYukizawa,MasateruTsunoda,andAmjedTahir.2019. Pleasehelp!Aprelimi-narystudyontheeffectofsocialproofandlegitimizationofpaltrycontributions
in donations to OSS. In Proceedings of IEEE 26th International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER ’19). 609–613.
[29]MingyiZhao,AronLaszka,andJensGrossklags.2017. Devisingeffectivepoli-
ciesforbug-bountyplatformsandsecurityvulnerabilitydiscovery. Journalof
Information Policy 7 (2017), 372–418.
[30]Jiayuan Zhou, Shaowei Wang, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2020.
Bountieson technicalQ&A sites:a casestudyof StackOverflow bounties. Em-
pirical Software Engineering 25, 1 (2020), 139–177.
[31]JiayuanZhou,ShaoweiWang,Cor-PaulBezemer,YingZou,andAhmedEHassan.
2021. Studying the association between Bountysource bounties and the issue-addressing likelihood of GitHub issue reports. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 47, 12 (2021), 2919–2933.
[32]Jiayuan Zhou, Shaowei Wang, Haoxiang Zhang, Tse-Hsun Peter Chen, and
AhmedEHassan.2021. Studyingbackersandhuntersinbountyissueaddressing
process of open source projects. Empirical Software Engineering 26, 4 (2021),
1–36.
[33]DevonZuegel.[n.d.]. AnnouncingGitHubSponsors:anewwaytocontribute
toopensource. https://github.blog/2019-05-23-announcing-github-sponsors-a-
new-way-to-contribute-to-open-source/. Accessed: 2021-02-25.
1069