content classification of development emails alberto bacchelli tommaso dal sasso marco d ambros michele lanza reveal faculty of informatics university of lugano switzerland abstract emails related to the development of a software system contain information about design choices and issues encountered during the development process.
exploiting the knowledge embedded in emails with automatic tools is challenging due to the unstructured noisy and mixed language nature of this communication medium.
natural language text is often not well formed and is interleaved with languages with other syntaxes such as code or stack traces.
we present an approach to classify email content at line level.
our technique classifies email lines in five categories i.e.
text junk code patch and stack trace to allow one to subsequently apply ad hoc analysis techniques for each category.
we evaluated our approach on a statistically significant set of emails gathered from mailing lists of four unrelated open source systems.
keywords empirical software engineering unstructured data mining emails i. introduction software repositories supply information useful for supporting software analysis and program comprehension .
di erent repositories o er di erent perspectives on systems for example issue reports open a view on defective entities thus enabling studies on defect location and prediction while repositories archiving communication occurred among developers contain valuable information developers resolve crucial questions about the history rationale and future plans for source code .
in particular development emails contain discussions on topics ranging from implementation details to high level design.
the main maintainer of the real time linux explains that mailing list archives provide a huge choice of technical discussions and that developers do not write documentation because they believe that it is all documented in the mailing list .
email data helps to understand a system its history and its design rationale thus supporting program comprehension email data also o ers the best opportunity for a researcher to observe the development process as developers reveal their thought processes most naturally when communicating with other software developers .
however obtaining objective and accurate results from software repositories is not trivial the information extracted must be relevant unbiased and its contribution comprehensible .
researchers are studying repositories to understand what information is more relevant e.g.
in bug reports or in code changes and the impact of data quality on mining approaches and analyses .
in particular extracting valuable data from communication repositories e.g.
irc chat logs mailing lists require the most care as the documents leave complete freedom to the authors.
for example bettenburg et al.
presented the risks of using email data without a proper cleaning pre processing phase .
nl documents are usually treated as bags of words a count of terms occurrences.
this simplification is proven to be e ective in the information retrieval ir field where techniques are tested on well formed nl documents .
in software engineering although e ective for some tasks e.g.
traceability between documents and code this approach reduces the quality reliability and comprehensibility of the available information as nl text is often not well formed and is interleaved with languages with di erent syntaxes code fragments stack traces patches etc.
we present a work for advancing the analysis of the contents of development emails.
we argue that we should not create a single bag with terms indiscriminately coming from nl parts code fragments email signatures patches etc.and treat them equally.
we need to recognize every language in an email to enable techniques exploiting the peculiarities of each category.
this work contributes to a deeper and more detailed analysis of email communication among developers.
we propose an approach based on a combination of parsing techniques and machine learning ml methods to classify the contents of development emails in five categories nl source code patch stack trace and junk text that does not add valuable information such as auto generated disclaimers authors signatures or erroneous characters .
our technique works at the line level which by inspecting hundreds of emails we found to be the appropriate granularity for email content classification.
we created a web application to manually classify email content in the chosen categories.
we classified a statistically significant set of emails from four javaopen source software oss systems used to evaluate the accuracy of our approach.
the contributions of this paper are a novel approach that fuses parsing and ml techniques for classification of email lines a web application to manually classify email content the manual classification of a statistically significant sample set of emails for a total of lines from mailing lists of four di erent software systems in the form of a freely available benchmark and the empirical evaluation of our approach against the benchmark.structure of the paper.
in section ii we motivate our work.
in section iii we describe the related work.
in section iv we show how we collected and manually annotated the email data.
in section v we detail our classification methods and their evaluation.
we discuss threats to validity in section vi and conclude in section vii.
ii.
m otivation figure shows the body of an example development email.
due to the variety of languages used if we consider the content of such email as a single bag of words we would obtain a motley set of flattened terms without a clear context thus severely reducing quality and amount of available information.
inversely by automatically distinguishing the parts composing the email we support many tasks such as alice wrote on mon bob wrote dear list when starting up argouml on my macos x system java it throws a nullpointerexception very soon.
you ll find the trace below.
i hope someone knows a solution.
thanks a lot!
exception in thread main java.lang.nullpointerexception at javax.swing.event.swingsupport.firechange swingchange.java at javax.swing.abstractaction.setenabled abstractaction.java at uci.uml.main.main main.java i m sorry i can t help you bob but thanks for sharing the stack... alice.
beware of programmers who carry screwdrivers.
l. brandwein alice i believe we must change explorer.java to fix bob s problem public void setenclosingfig fig each super.setenclosingfig each if each !
null each.getowner instanceof mpackage m mpackage each.getowner the problem is in the condition i attach the diff with this version src org argouml ui explorer explorer.java revision src org argouml ui explorer explorer.java working copy super.setenclosingfig each if each !
null each.getowner instanceof mpackage if each !
null each.getowner instanceof mpackage m mpackage each.getowner i hope this change is fine by you if so please apply it cheers carl.
i used to have a sig but it took up much space so i got rid of it!
to unsubscribe e mail dev ... argouml.tigris.org for additional commands e mail dev ... argouml.tigris.orgjunknl textpatchstack tracesource code figure .
example development email with mixed content traceability recovery.
in figure the email is referring to several classes e.g.
main fig and mpackage but only the class explorer is critical to the discussion it causes the failure and the email s author is changing it to provide a solution.
we realize the importance of explorer by reading the nl line .
as part of our ongoing investigation on email archives we often found this pattern artifactsmentioned in nl parts of emails are more relevant to the discussion than artifacts mentioned in other contexts e.g.
stack traces .
a traceability method based on bags of words e.g.
cannot recognize whether