zurich open repository and archive university of zurich university library strickhofstrasse ch zurich year developers code context models for change tasks fritz thomas shepherd david c kevic katja snipes will braeunlich christoph posted at the zurich open repository and archive university of zurich zora url conference or workshop item published version originally published at fritz thomas shepherd david c kevic katja snipes will braeunlich christoph .
developers code context models for change tasks.
in 22nd acm sigsoft international symposium on the foundations of software engineering fse hong kong china november november acm.
code context models for change tasks thomas fritz fritz ifi.uzh.chdavid c. shepherd david.shepherd us.abb.comkatja kevic kevic ifi.uzh.chwill snipes will.snipes us.abb.comchristoph br unlich christoph.braeunlich uzh.ch department of informatics industrial software systems university of zurich abb corporate research switzerland raleigh nc usa abstract to complete a change task software developers spend a substantial amount of time navigating code to understand the relevant parts.
during this investigation phase they implicitly build context models of the elements and relations that are relevant to the task.
through an exploratory study with twelve developers completing change tasks in three open source systems we identified important characteristics of these context models and how they are created.
in a second empirical analysis we further examined our findings on data collected from eighty developers working on a variety of change tasks on open and closed source projects.
our studies uncovered amongst other results that code context models are highly connected structurally and lexically that developersstarttasksusingacombinationofsearchandnavigation and that code navigation varies substantially across developers.
based on these findings we identify and discuss design requirements to better support developers in the initial creation of code context models.
we believe this work represents a substantial step in better understanding developers code navigation and providing better tool support that will reduce time and effort needed for change tasks.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programmingenvironments general terms human factors keywords context models search navigation change task user study .
introduction software developers spend substantial time searching and navigating through code to understand relevant parts of a system for a particular change task .
during this process of understanding and then changing code developers implicitly build code context models that consist of the relevantcodeelementsandtherelationsbetweentheseelements permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
fse november hong kong china copyright acm ... .
.often more generally referred to as task context.
since these models mainly stay implicit in developers heads and are not persistent developers have to continuously spend a significant amount of their time creating context models for newly assigned change tasks from scratch .
researchershavesuggestedthatmoreexplicitcontextmodels for change tasks1can be used to support developers in their work .
to form these explicit context models existing approaches have used methods ranging from a developer manually specifying the context e.g.
to automatically inferring the context from a developer s interaction with a development environment e.g.
.
while these approaches have been shown to support developers with change tasks little is understood about the implicit code context models that developers build and their characteristics.
with a better understanding of the characteristics of developers code context models we might be able to help developers in the initial creation of these models for change tasks saving time and effort.
to investigate the characteristics that code context models exhibit for different change tasks we conducted an exploratorystudywithtwelvedevelopersonthreechangetasks in open source projects.
to validate our observations on a broader population of developers and tasks we conducted a second empirical analysis using data sets from several hundreds of change tasks and eighty developers working on open and closed source projects.
amongst other results our studies show that developers context models are highly connected structurally and lexically that the code navigation can differ substantially by individual even for the same change task and that developers start change tasks using a combination of search and navigation and then frequently revisit code elements.
based on our findings we infer design requirements to support developers in the creation of code context models and discuss the design of such an approach.
this paper makes the following research contributions it identifies important observations on the characteristics of code context models based on an exploratory studywith12developersonthreeopensourceprojects.
itprovidesanempiricalanalysisofthefindingsondata collected from eighty developers working on a variety of change tasks on open and closed source projects.
it identifies design requirements and discusses the design of an approach to support developers in the creation of code context models.
1we use the term change task to refer to both modification task and bug.permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
copyright is held by the author owner s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
fse november hong kong china acm 7thisworkrepresentsasubstantialstepinbetterunderstanding developers code navigation and implicit context models for change tasks that will help to provide better tool support with the potential for real world impact on the development process in particular on reducing the time and effort required for change tasks.
.
exploratory study in the process of performing a change task developers build up code context models2 code elements and relationships between these elements that are relevant to the change task.
in this study we investigate these code context model s based on three specific concepts of relevance a relevance as perceived by the developer b relevance as defined by the actual code change and c relevance as defined by the explicit navigation activity of the developer.
since our ult imate goal is to support code context creation we also investigated developers code navigation tendencies to understand how code context models could be created.
in particular we wanted to address the following questions whatarecommoncharacteristicsthatcodecontextmodels exhibit?
how do code context models vary based on different definitions of relevance?
how do developers code context models and navigation behavior vary for different tasks?
to investigate these questions we conducted an exploratory study with a blocked subject project study setup with twelve software developers.
each developer worked on one of three different change tasks for open source projects.
.
study method for this experiment we chose three open source systems in java that all have an open task repository recent development activity and a code base big enough to preclude a systematic understanding of the entire system.
specifically we chose freemind java passwordsafe jpass and rachota .
for each system we chose one open change task that two of the authors were able to perform in less than one hour.
furthermore we chose tasks for which the change could be observed in the graphical user interface.
all three change tasks were reported as bugs however the jpass and freemind tasks could have been categorized as enhancement or modification task.
thus we will mostly refer to all three tasks with the more general term change task .
each developer who signed up for the study was randomly assigned to one of the three tasks.
we then provided each participant a document with instructions and access to a virtual machine that was set up with an eclipse ide3and a workspace that contained the assigned change task description and project.
we decided to set up a virtual machine for each participant on the amazon elastic compute cloud to allow for remote and independent access using his own computer setup and thus to affect the normal behavior as little as possible.
the participants were instructed to first run the application and observe the current behavior to be changed before looking at the code and trying to perform the change.
furthermore the instructions told the participants to answer a set of questions after either completing the 2murphy et al.
introducethebroaderterm task context that extends our notion to arbitrary artifacts.
3eclipse ide for java developers version .
eclipse.orgchange task successfully or after minutes to limit the total time required of a participant to minutes minutes for the change task and minutes for the questions.
in the questions the participants were asked to sketch a model of the source code elements such as classes methods and fields and the relationships they considered relevant for understanding and making the change.
for the sketch the participants were allowed to use pen and paper or their favorite drawing tool and they were encouraged to use any notation or form they wanted to.
the rest of the questions in the set addressed the experience of the participants.
to make sure that the tasks are solvable in the given time andthequestionsareunderstandablebytheparticipants we conducted pilot studies with three graduate students each performing one of the three tasks.
the pilots confirmed our assumption on the timing and we only slightly altered the question on the model sketching part to explicitly state that developers are allowed to use pen and paper for the sketch.
.
subjects werecruitedsubjectsthroughemailandpersonalcontact.
to be eligible subjects had to have experience programming injava.
weendedupwith12participantsthatwerandomly assigned to one of the three tasks four for the freemind task f1 f4 four for the java passwordsafe task j1 j4 and four for the rachota task r1 r4 .
of these twelve developers five worked in a company four were graduate students and three faculty members in computer science all with a background in software engineering.
the subjects programming experience ranged from to years average of .
with between to years average of .
of professional programming experience.
for each task we made sure to have at least two developers with professional development experience and one graduate student to report on.
two of the subjects were female ten male.
on a five point likertscale with strongly disagree to strongly agree all subjects agreed or strongly agreed that java is one of their primary programming languages average of .
and were very familiar with the eclipse ide average of .
.
.
projects and change tasks freemind.
the freemind project version .
.
rc is an open source mind map editor consisting of .5k noncommented lines of code ncloc top level classes and packages.
we selected a task for this project id that was still open and observable.
this change task addressed freemind s failure to save a map after an encrypted node was added as well as the inadequate notification upon failure.
we limited the scope of this potentially large change by asking the subjects to add a reasonable explanation to the save failed dialog.
this chang e required users to propagate exception information from the savemethod of encryptedmindmapnode to the user action actionperformed insaveaction and finally to display the improved message to the user.
the call chain between actionperformed andsaveis relatively long method calls in total and can be challenging to follow.
fortunately when reproducing the failure which we asked all subjects to do before making the change a stack trace was printed to the console that contained the relevant call chain.
java passwordsafe.
the java passwordsafe jpass project version .
final is an open source password management system consisting of .5k ncloc top level classes 8and packages.
we again selected a change task id that was still open at the time and observable.
this task addressed the lost selection and undesired scrolling that occurs when the application is unlocked after coming out of the sleep state.
for this change task we expected subjects to save the selection index in order to reselect and center the appropriate item after the application was unlocked.
while classes unlockdbaction lockdbaction andpasswordsafejface were all relevant for this task only one to two methods in passwordsafejface needed to be changed.
during this task subjects familiar with the standard widget toolkit may have benefitted although prior knowledge was not necessary.
this application also made extensive use of console logging.
observant developers could use these log messages as a starting point for searches.
rachota.
the rachota project version .
is an open source time tracking utility where users can track the time spent on each task.
it consists of 18k ncloc top level classes and three packages.
we selected a task id that was open and observable.
this task addressed the problem of newly created tasks failing to show in the history tab.
for thistask we expectedsubjects totrigger an update of the history tab s underlying model upon task creation.
three classes that are relevant to the task are extremely large historyview has ncloc with methods mainwindow has ncloc with methods anddayview has ncloc with methods .
these large classes along with the fact that the application offered no logging or relevant stack trace made it more difficult for users to find a starting point in the code base.
.
data collection and analysis we used a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods motivated by the ones described by seaman .
we used participant observation by recording each participant s screen and having access to their actual workspace after the session in addition to asking the participant a set of questions.
from the participants sessions we collected three types of data patches for the successful completion of the change task videos capturing the developers screens during their work on the task and the artifacts that contained the answers to the questions including the sketched models.
to record a developer s screen we automatically started a screen recording application at the beginning of a developer s session.
for the questions we asked developers to send us their answers by email after they finished.
we transcribedandcodedthepatches thescreenrecordingsand the collected answers.
the transcripts together with further study artifacts are available at .
from the videos we determined the time that each participant took to complete a task.
we chose the point at which a participantvalidatedthecorrectnessofhischangeintheuser interface of the application as the finish time.
even though the instructions stated that participants should move onto the questions part after minutes to limit the total amount of effort spent three participants chose to continue.
two of these three participants j4 and r4 did not succeed in performing the appropriate change and at some point stopped working on it.
both participants closed eclipse at the end which we used as the finish time.
table presents the time participants took to complete the task or until they stopped.
4this was only used in the freemind task and opened up the parent class.table developer navigation steps transcribed from the screen captured videos several of these refer to tool support provided in the eclipse ide .
structured navigation steps navigation aids call hierarchy type hierarchy find