socio technical developer networks should we trust our measurements?
andrew meneely laurie williams north carolina state university oval drive engineering building campus box raleigh north carolina usa apmeneel lawilli3 ncsu.edu abstract software development teams must be properly structured to provide effective collaboration to produce quality software.
over the last several years social network analysis sna has emerged as a popular method for studying the collaboration and organization of people working in large software development teams.
researchers have been modeling networks of developers based on socio technical connections found in software development artifacts.
using these developer networks researchers have proposed several sna metrics that can predict software quality factors and describe the team structure.
but do sna metrics measure what they purport to measure?
the objective of this research is to investigate if sna metrics represent socio technical relationships by examining if developer networks can be corroborated with developer perceptions.
to measure developer perceptions we developed an online survey that is personalized to each developer of a development team based on that developer s sna metrics.
develope rs answered questions about other members of the team such as identifying their collaborators and the project experts.
a total of developers responded to our survey from three popular open source projects the linux kernel the php programming languag e and the wireshark network protocol analyzer.
our results indicate that connections in the developer network are statistically associated with the collaborators whom the developers named.
our results substantiate that sna metrics represent socio technica l relationships in open source development projects while also clarifying how the developer network can be interpreted by researchers and practitioners.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
metrics process metrics product me trics general terms measurement human factors keywords developers social network analysis developer network .
introduction behind most software products are teams of people collaborating with each other.
misguided effort can result in poor software quali ty so large software development teams must often organize into a complex ecosystem of communication and coordination.
an understanding of developer collaboration from the perspective of the entire team could help structure development efforts.
over the l ast several years social network analysis sna has emerged as a popular method for studying the collaboration and organization of large software development teams.
researchers have been modeling networks of developers based on socio technical1 connection s found in software development artifacts.
most sna studies apply graph theory to socio technical networks of developers often called developer networks to generate sna metrics.
connections between developers in socio technical networks often originate f rom software development artifacts such as version control change logs.
recent empirical case studies of several well known software products have shown that sna metrics are predictive of faults failures and vulnerabilities .
furthermore researchers are developing visual tools and techniques to aid practitioners in viewing analyzing and organizing software develop ment teams via developer networks.
while prediction studies and tool studies showcase the utility of sna metrics we must ask the question do sna metrics measure what they purport to measure?
both researchers and practitioners alike need to know the exte nt to which the developer network and sna metrics represent the reality of a software development project.
for example if the version control logs show that two developers are working on the same code in the same month are they collaborating?
are well connected developers i.e.
central according to sna metrics viewed as experts in the project by teammates?
the answers to these questions underlie many of the assumptions of sna research and its recommendations.
while development artifacts can provide a his torical view of the development project the developers themselves can provide another valuable perspective.
developer perceptions could support that the connections observed in the development artifacts represent actual socio technical relationships.
a st udy of the comparison between developer perceptions and the developer network would help researchers and practitioners draw sound conclusions when analyzing a complex ecosystem of developers.
we use socio technical to describe the connection between two people in the context of work related collaboration permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may honolulu hawaii usa.
copyright acm ... .
.
therefore the objective of this research is to investigate if social network analysis metrics represent socio technical relationships by examining if developer networks can be corroborated with developer perceptions .
to measure developer perceptions we developed an online survey that is personalized to each developer of a development team.
the personalization is based on the sna metrics taken from version control change logs of the developer s project.
developers answered questions about other members of the team such as identifying collaborators and the project s experts.
a total of responded from three open source projects the linux kernel the php programming language and the wireshark network protocol analyzer.
in this paper we provide an empirical analysis of those responses and their relation to the devel oper network and its derived sna metrics.
the main contribution of this paper is the empirical support that developer networks represent the real world socio technical concepts of collaboration distance and expertise.
specifically we have found empiric al support for all three of the following research questions q1 developer network edges .
if two developers work on the same source code file in the same month then do they perceive they are collaborating?
q2 developer network distance .
does the dista nce between two developers in the developer network represent the perceived degree of separation between those two developers?
q3 developer network centrality .
does having a high centrality in the developer network indicate being reputed as a project ex pert by other developers?
the rest of this paper is organized as follows.
section provides background on sna.
section provides related work.
section defines our developer network for this study.
sections and describe our online survey and the thr ee case studies respectively.
section describes the results of our analysis.
sections and discuss limitations and conclusions respectively.
.
background in this paper we use several terms from network analysis.
network analysis is the study of chara cterizing and quantifying network structures represented by graphs .
in network analysis vertices of a graph are called nodes and a connection between two nodes is called an edge .
the degree of a node is defined as the number of adjacent nodes directly connected to the node.
a sequence of non repeating adjacent nodes is a path and a shortest path between two nodes is called a geodesic path note that geodesic paths are not necessarily unique .
in the case of weighted edges the geodesic path is the path of minimum weight.
the diameter of a network is eq ual to the length of the longest unweighted geodesic path in the network.
informally the unweighted geodesic path represents the degree of separation between two nodes.
centrality metrics are used to quantify the location of a node or edge relative to t he rest of the network.
in this study we use the betweenness metric to quantify the centrality of a node in a network.
the betweenness of node n is defined as the number of geodesic paths that include n. in this paper we also normalize our betweenness by the total number of possible paths in the network.
a high betweenness means a high centrality.
informally if a node that lies between many other nodes is highly central.
.
related work applying sna to software development teams has been a heavily researched topic over the last several years.
the work can be summarized in three different categories prediction studies internal validity studies and tools or techniques for the purpose of studying developer communities.
the most prevalent of these three types of studies are the prediction studies .
for example in our previous work we formed a developer network of the linux kernel using the version control change logs.
other researchers such as pinzger formed a variation of the developer network called the cont ribution network .
a contribution network is a graph with two types of nodes developers and files.
edges exist between developers and files if a developer made a commit to a file.
in contribution networks no edges exist between developers or between file s. the contribution network can be used to compute whether a file has been changed by developers who are changing many other files at the time called an unfocused contribution studies in predictio n have been performed on open and closed source products.
other case studies include the jazz platform microsoft windows a nortel product mozilla firefox and the linux kernel .
together the prediction studies have shown that sna metrics are statistically correlated with external quality measures.
the existence of this empirical evidence compels us to study sna metrics directly to gain better insight in to their validity.
we are not the first to conduct a validity study on sna of development teams .
nia et al.
discuss the validity of infor mation flow in situations where not every edge of the developer network may be known.
their findings indicate that some centrality measures are sensitive to such a missing edge and provide guidance on which measures ought to be used with developer network s. meneely et al.
examined the connection between developer network centrality and the notion of solution approver .
studying the openmrs healthcare project the authors examined issue reports and manually recorded the people who approved the final to solution to the issu e. the authors formed a developer network from the version control change logs and found that central developers also happen to be solution approvers.
in addition to the prediction and validity studies other studies have developed better insight into dev elopment teams using sna in general.
bird et al.
in studied the bazaar like structure of open source projects .
specifically the authors found that open source software teams self organize into community structure as evidenced by mailing list archives and version control change logs.
additionally the authors find that developer networks found in open source projects reflect similar collaboration networks found in other discip lines.
also sarma et al.
have developed a tool that visualizes many different aspects of development artifacts including the developer network .
lastly begel et al.
have developed a tool at microsoft that utilizes development artifacts to aid in finding people with specific expertise in a project .
.
developer networks the purpose of a developer network is to represent the complex system of socio technical relationships between developers in a software development project.
we borrow the term socio technical from studies in psychology and sociology that discuss how teams of people can be arranged to work on a set of tasks.
the term socio technical refers to a labor related connection among people that could be in fluenced by social or technical factors.
the term technical is not referring to technology related activities but to the more general idea of technicality skill and labor.
the idea of a developer network is to model socio technical relationships expli citly with edges between developers in a network.
software engineering researchers use a variety of approaches in creating their developer networks.
in all cases researchers are looking for records of social or technical connections in the context of the project.
most researchers use logs from the version control system e.g.
subversion git as a record of what code developers were working on.
the motivation is that if a developer knows enough abo ut the code to enact a change then two developers changing the same code means a socio technical relationship likely exists.
some researchers apply communications logs e.g.
issue tracking comments chat logs or mailing list archives to augment their developer network.
we did not examine those artifacts for two reasons.
first not every case study we examined had communication archives making a comparison across projects difficult.
second communic ation archives can be quite noisy because many communications cannot be considered representing socio technical relationships e.g.
not work related .
in this work we used only the version control change logs to create our developer network.
our develope r network is a graph where the vertices represent a developer on the team.
edges exist where two developers made a version control commit to the same source code file within one month of each other.
an analysis of our choice of one month for edges can be f ound in section .
.
additionally a single edge between two developers might seem too coarse of a measure for measuring socio technical distance.
without weights two developers who only worked on only a file or two by would be treated the same way as two developers who worked on dozens of files together.
to provide a finer granularity in distance measurement we evaluate a weight to the edges in our developer network.
when applying edge weight techniques the weight must adhere to an interval scale so that addition can still be used when computing geodesic paths.
in the case of using file counts for an edge weight we must also make sure that weight represents distance thus more files must represent a smaller distance.
the weights of our edges are defined as the number of source code files in the system that the developers did not work on together.
for example if there are files in a system and two developers worked on different source code files together then the weight on the edge repr esenting distance would be .
in this study we evaluate both weighted and unweighted edges separately.
applying inversion to the number of files i.e.
n does not preserve interval scale.
an example of version control change logs and resulting developer network can be found in table and figure respectively.
assume that the system consists of ten files in total and that all of the following changes are within the same month.
table .
example version control logs.
developer changed files alex a f g h ichiro e ken a b c e randy b c d f g h figure .
example devel oper network.
.
research methodology in this section we discuss our online survey and the steps we took to conduct this study.
.
online survey our online survey consisted of six questions posed to the developers.
the entire survey can be found in the appendi x. for each question the respondents were given the opportunity to provide feedback on the question s itself.
on some of the questions the developers clarified how they interpreted the question e.g.
the meaning of work with described in question .
we found that some questions were interpreted differently among the developers.
based on that feedback we only analyze three of the six questions in the survey.
our online survey is personalized for each developer of a given project.
the possible answers f or each developer is slightly different based on the sna metrics of the respondent.
the developers of each development team were each sent a solicitation email for the survey.
each email had a personalized link to the survey.
before the survey begins the respondent must first verify his or her own identity .
after verifying his or her identity each respondent answered a series of questions.
the specific questions used in this analysis are discussed further in section .
our survey system was developed in java jsp and javascript running in tomcat .
mysql on a server running red hat enterprise linux .
.
conducting the study we executed the following steps to perform the study.
step obtain version control data .
for each of the case studies we ob tained the version control data from the project websites.
in each case study the version control data was captured from july 1st through july 1st .
step compute the developer network .
we computed our developer network according to the defini tions in section using a combination of our own java scripts the jung3 framework and the mysql relational database.
step calculate geodesic path distances .
our geodesic path distance measures were calculated with both weighted and unweighted edges.
the weights of our edges are defined as the number of source code files in the system that the developers did not work on together see section for an example .
step obtain emails for each developer .
we obtained developer email addresses from public artifacts including the version control system mailing lists and issue tracking databases.
in all three studies we were able to trace every version control id to an email although the process was manual.
step develop online survey .
see section .
for a description of our survey.
step load geodesic path distances from the developer network into the survey .
the formulation of some questions depended gathering developers of varying socio technical distances from the respondent.
we used the weighte d geodesic path lengths from the develop er network defined in section as our measure in the survey.
step solicit developers to take the survey .
we sent out a solicitation email to every developer in each developer network asking them to follow the link to our survey.
the link contained a key that was specific to each developer so that the survey system could track the respondent s answers.
as an incentive we put each developer in a drawing for a gift certificate to amazon.com.
step process and analyze responses .
before analyzing the data we read all of the comments that people left on each question and processed the data.
in some situations we removed some responses as being non participatory in the study those responses are not counted in th is paper .
we also removed questions from our analysis based on developer feedback.
the specific details of the case studies can be found in section and the results of the analysis can be found in section .
.
case studies in this section we describe the details of the three case studies we performed.
we intentionally chose projects from different domains with varying community sizes.
in all three case studies when we refer to developers we are referring to the core group of people who are actively wo rking on the project.
in most open source development these core developers are called committers because they have access to making commits to the development project.
additionally in all three case studies we only included commits to source code wh ich we defined as files ending in .c .cpp .s and .h.
we used the previous two years of development history ranging from july to july .
table shows meta data on our three developer networks along with the response rates to the survey.
table .
case study meta data linux kernel php wireshark developers edges commits network diameter respondents .
linux kernel we performed our case study on the most re cent version of the linux kernel at the time of this writing version .
.
.
for the version control data from which developer activity metrics were computed we used the linux kernel git source control repository4.
in the linux kernel the version cont rol repository makes an explicit distinction between the committer of change and the author of a change.
for example if alison submits a patch but rob commits the change then alison is credited as the author and rob is the committer.
we used the author field in this study because the author is intended to be the person directly involved in the change to the system.
the linux kernel had over authors in the time period we examined.
the vast majority of these people however made very small c hanges to the system.
since we are focusing on the core group of developers in this study we only included the developers who were specified as authors of at least commits in the past two years.
of all the commits in the previous two years the authors were on of the total commits.
we obtained all developer emails directly from the version control system.
figure depicts the linux kernel developer network.
the high density of edges highlights the large volume of developm ent activity being done by multiple developers.
also the entire network is spread out with a single group of central developers in the center.
the wide diameter of the network as shown in table supports the visual result that the network is spread out.
figure .
visualization of the linux kernel developer network.
.
php programming language we performed a case study of the php programming language.
the php programming language project includes development on the language itself as well as extensio ns and modules.
for this study we focused on the developers working on the language itself.
unlike the linux kernel the main group of developers is more precisely defined as the people who are granted commit access to the subversion repository.
thus we focused our study on the group of committers to the php language itself.
we obtained the email addresses for each developer by manually investigating their version control user id in public sources such as the profiles and mailing list archives on php.
net5.
figure depicts the developer network for the php programming language.
as with the linux kernel the central developers within this team are quite apparent in this layout.
however the overall spread of the network is much tighter supported by th e diameter metric being .
figure .
visualization of the php developer network.
.
wireshark network protocol analyzer the wireshark network protocol analyzer is a tool that can be used to aggregate and summarize data transported over a network.
we focuse d our study on the group of committers using their subversion repository.
we obtained the email addresses for each developer by manually investigating their version control user id from their public website6.
figure shows a visualization of the deve loper network for wireshark.
the central developers are not as easily seen mostly because of the high degree of most developers.
additionally this community is much smaller committers so the spread of the network is much smaller as supported by ha ving a diameter of .
lists.php figure .
visualization of the wireshark developer network.
.
criterion for developer network edges as we stated in section for our developer network s we defined edges where two developers made version control commits to the same s ource code files within the same month.
that one month time period which we will refer to as the edge window is a parameter that can be tweaked for different software projects depending the process and team culture.
other studies implicitly use an edge window of infinity thus defining an edge where two developers change the same source code file at any time in history .
we believe that such a definition did not incorporate the ephemeral nature of collaboration as code changes so do the socio technical connections amongst the teammates.
with an infinite edge window a developer could potentially be connected to other developers for years after the code has completely changed .
thus we sought to find a minimal meaningful edge window according to the collaboration we observed in our case studies.
we arrived at our choice of the one month edge window through a manual investigation of the frequency of regular committers to features in all three case studies.
through reading version control logs mai ling lists and issue tracking data we identified regular committers to each project .
we observed that even the most frequent committers to a project would sometimes drop off in commits for multiple weeks at a time.
the main reasons we could glean from th e artifacts included temporarily working on other projects vacation and the product undergoing stabilization prior to release.
based on these observations we decided that a day edge window was a reasonable choice.
to understand the impact of the edg e window parameter on number of developer edges we plot edge window values in days against the number of developer edges in figure .
figure .
width of the edge window and number of edges we observed that the number of edges grows rapidly for days then slows down as the window widens out to a year.
interestingly we found a strong logarithmic relationship r2 in all three case studies between the width of the window and the number of edges in the developer network.
these results indicate that in our three case studies the growth in the number of edges changes little when the edge window parameter becomes several months wide.
while we observed one month to be a reasonable edge window for our case studies we do not believe that one month ou ght to be unilaterally applied to all developer networks.
developers are working on all three of our case studies commit code constantly which cannot be said about all software projects.
we believe that the edge window parameter ought to be individually determined for each project.
.
analysis our main goal of analyzing this data was to examine if developer networks can be corroborated with developer perceptions .
we examined specific research questions that were motivated by potential limitations of related work.
the three questions that are covered relate to developer network edges section .
developer network distance section .
and developer network centrality section .
.
.
collaborators and edges several studies employing developer networks have focused on the notion of collaboration including our own studies claiming that the developer network is an estimation of collaboration.
the reasoning is that if two developers are working on the same source code around the same time then some type of s ociotechnical relationship likely exists between the two developers perhaps a collaboration connection.
to evaluate perceived collaboration in this study we asked the developers who they collaborate with in the context of project.
our research question is q1 developer network edges .
if two developers work on the same source code file in the same month then do they pe rceive they are collaborating?
figure show the research and survey question as it was presented in our survey system .
the list of nam es from the auto suggest list comes from the list of committers from the version control logs.
figure .
screen capture of the question regarding collaborators and edges to analyze this question we first processed everybody s responses for misspellings of names and other input validation concerns.
of the named collaborators across all projects of those collaborators were not found in the version control change logs.
we manual investigated those names and found that most people in this cate gory were project organizers or some other role not related to development.
thus we excluded those named collaborators from our data.
next for the collaborators found in the developer network we examined unweighted geodesic distance between each res pondent and his or her named collaborators.
for example if a respondent was directly connected to a named collaborator in the developer network then the unweighted geodesic distance was one.
we aggregated each of those unweighted geodesic distances betwe en a respondent and the named collaborators and report the results in table .
table .
unweighted distances between respondents and their named collaborators linux kernel php wireshark named collaborators collaborators with unweighted di stance collaborators with unweighted distance collaborators with unweighted distance mean unweighted distance .
.
.
ci normal .
.
.
.
.
.
in all three case studies at least of the named collaborators are directly connected in the developer network and at least of named collaborators had an unweighted distance of one or two .
in the case of php slightly more named collaborators had an unweighted distance of two than o ne.
furthermore the mean unweighted distance from a developer to his or her collaborators was considerably close to one.
assuming a normal distribution of the unweighted distances the confidence interval around the average distance is fairly tight.
thus if a developer is not directly connected to a named collaborator then they typically are connected to someone who is connected to that collaborator i.e.
an unweighted distance of .
note also that a respondent could be connected to developers whom he o r she did not name as a collaborator.
we did not assume that a developer would be able to remember or even know who all of his or her collaborators are.
therefore this particular question can only be used to confirm the positive identifications of collabo rators not the negatives.
also our analysis in section .
takes into account the non existence of named collaborators.
these results indicate that perceived collaborators are being captured by edges in a developer network based solely on the version c ontrol change logs.
in other words collaborators in these three open source projects were often working on the same code within one month of each other.
while this result substantiates that developer edges are linked to collaborators one can see that not every named collaborator is represented by an edge.
when interpreting developer networks then one should not assume that every collaborator is directly connected in the developer network although empirically the distance between collaborators tends to be less than two.
.
the distance between two developers some of the most commonly used sna metrics in related work are centrality metrics.
specifically betweenness defined in section .
has been used heavily to measure a developer s centrality in a netwo rk.
the concept of betweenness is based on the notion of geodesic paths if a developer is on a geodesic path between two other developers then that developer must be central to the network.
therefore studying the validity of the length of a geodesic pat h helps us study the validity of centrality metrics as well.
to examine developer perceptions of distance we use the following research question.
q2 developer network distance.
does the distance between two developers in the developer network represent the perceived degree of separation between those two developers?
to address this research question we provided the following question in our survey in figure .
the choices were a i have never heard of this person before b i recognize this name but i don t know much about them c i know who this person is but i have not worked with them directly d i have worked with this person on this project figure .
example s creen capture from custom survey tool for each person the survey showed teammate s from the developer network.
each respondent was given four options for each person shown in figure as options a through d .
we came up with the perceived distance levels and treat those levels on an ordinal scale with a being the most distant d being the closest.
the survey chose those teammates in the following manner.
first the system calculated the respondent s weighted geodesic distance to each of the other developers in the project s developer network.
the survey then ranked all of the other developers by that weighted distance and then chose developers of varying distances in the ranking.
for example if there were other developers then the system would rank those developers by weighted geodesic distance to the respondent and then r eturn the developers ranked ...up to rank .
the actual list of developers was then shuffled before displaying in the survey.
our motivation for this algorithm was this if the geodesic distance to other developers represents the perceived dist ance then the ranking of developers by geodesic distance ought to match the ranking of developers by perceived distance.
to measure the degree of agreement between two ranks we use the spearman rank correlation coefficient.
the spearman coefficient is use ful when the underlying distribution of the random variables is unknown yet they are still on the ordinal scale.
we calculated the spearman coefficient for each respondent s answer to the question giving us a value in the range .
the square of the spearman coefficient itself is normally distributed so we report the confidence intervals around the means of the squared spearman coefficients r2 as well.
we report in table the mean of spearman coefficients between the reported perceived distan ce from the survey and the unweighted distance from the developer network.
table .
mean of squared spearman rank correlation coefficients between unweighted and perceived distances linux kernel php wireshark mean r2 spearman .
.
.
ci normal .
.
.
.
.
.
in each case study the mean squared spearman coefficient was significantly greater than zero indicating the existence of a correlation between the perceived socio technical distances and the developer netwo rk distances.
although the correlations are statistically significant the strength of the correlations are not considerably close to one indicating that the unweighted geodesic distance in a developer network does not always match developer perceptions.
additionally we applied the same analysis to the weighted distances to examine if the finer granularity in weighted edges closer match developer perceptions.
table contains means of the spearman coefficients between the reported perceived distance from the survey and the weighted distance from the developer network.
table .
mean of squared spearman rank correlation coefficients between weighted and perceived distances linux kernel php wireshark mean r2 spearman .
.
.
ci normal .
.
.
.
.
.
the means appear to be higher for weighted edges however in all three case studies the confidence intervals overlap between weighted and unweighted means indicating that there is no statistically significant differe nce between using weighted developer distances and unweighted developer distances.
thus we do not have enough evidence to claim that weighted edges are any better than unweighted edges in measuring what developers perceive as socio technical distance.
these results indicate that the perceived socio technical distance between two developers is statistically correlated with the geodesic distance in the developer network.
.
centrality and reputed expertise now that we have shown that geodesic paths in the deve loper network represent developer distances the meaning of the betweenness centrality measure becomes more intriguing.
experts in sna in other disciplines have argued that the betweenness centrality measures represent authority and visibility in the netwo rk .
according to our experience open sourc e projects deal with visibility and authority of developers quite often.
proponents of open source development have discussed the importance of a meritocracy in organizing development efforts .
the idea is that the more a developer works on the code the more their work will be noticed and trusted the more authority they will have on steering the project.
therefore in the c ontext of open source projects visible authority is often tied to being an expert developer on a given project.
open source developers often measure this level of merit by counting the commits a given developer made.
however as an example if developer p eter works on code in relative isolation from the rest of the group then he would have a large number of commits but have no collaborations with other members of the team and therefore a low centrality.
on the other hand if developer linus makes many co mmits to files that many other people are working on he will likely have a higher centrality.
we hypothesize that in the context of a meritocracy central developers are regarded as experts in the project.
q3 developer network centrality.
does having a high developer centrality in the developer network indicate being a project expert?
our survey question regarding expertise is shown in figure .
figure .
screen capture of the question regarding expertise.
to analyze this question we first processed everybody s responses to ensure that the person they named was someone in the developer network.
furthermore we manually checked for misspellings of names.
we then counted up the number of votes for each named expert.
to be considered an expert we only considered people with three votes or more.
self voting was allowed and one person could not vote for another person more than once.
some respondents named experts who were not in the developer network which we did not include in this study.
none of th e named experts who were not in the developer network was named more than once so this effect did not skew our results.
table shows the breakdown of the number of experts identified and how many of the total votes that the top five experts obtained.
figure shows three histograms by project of the frequency of experts i.e.
or more votes .
table .
summary of votes for experts linux kernel php wireshark number of votes number of experts with votes of votes for the top experts figure .
frequency of project experts by number of votes.
in all three case studies the top five experts accounted for the majority of the votes on expertise.
in the case of php this percentage was lower indicating that the gen eral regard for who was the expert was less widely agreed upon than the other two case projects.
to examine if centrality is correlated with reputed expertise we used the non parametric mann whitney wilcoxon mww test.
we tested for a statistically signi ficant difference in our two centrality metrics developers regarded as experts and developers not regarded as experts.
we apply our test to our two centrality metrics degree and betweenness.
table contains the results of those tests.
table .
associat ion between centrality and reputed expertise centrality metric statistic linux kernel php wireshark degree mean for expert .
.
.
mean for non expert .
.
.
difference significant p .
?
yes yes yes between ness mean for expert .
.
.
mean for non expert .
.
.
difference significant p .
?
yes yes yes the betweenness measure can be interpreted as the percentage of total geodesic paths on which a developer can be found.
being on just of the total geodesic paths for example is quite central for a single developer.
as one can see from the results experts tend to be at least of the total geodesic paths on average.
in every case study and for both degree and betweenness reputed experts were sta tistically more likely to have a higher centrality than non experts.
our results indicate that developer network centrality is associated with being a reputed expert in the project.
.
limitations the largest limitation to this work is the validity of devel oper perceptions.
developers can be wrong about who they collaborate with which could influence our results positively or negatively.
while perceptions are not perfectly trustworthy we believe that comparing developer perceptions with the artifacts bring s us closer to better measuring the overall structure of collaboration in a software development team.
not every developer on the project responded to the survey solicitation and we do not know if our sample of developers was biased in some way.
to mitig ate this we examined three different projects in an effort to achieve more generality.
our questions regarding experts and collaborators required the user to remember people s names.
a respondent might not be able to recall the name of an expert or collab orator.
to mitigate this we provided an auto suggest list of the committers.
additionally in our analysis we did not assume that the named collaborators are a complete list of collaborators.
lastly since our approach included only committers of a proje ct our results do not generalize to the structure of non coding participants surrounding a software development project.
such participants can include users managers and non coding support.
our reasoning for this particular scope was based on the inform ation found in the artifacts we chose to study.
.
conclusion the objective of this research is to evaluate the validity of sna metrics by corroborating developer networks with the perceptions of developers of the projects involved .
our results indicate more support for researchers assumptions on what developer networks represent.
in each case however not every notion was fully supported by developer responses.
for example while edges are close linked to collaborations not every edge represents collabora tion and not every collaboration is represented by an edge.
social network analysis techniques that are sensitive to missing edges then are not appropriate to developer networks.
overall t he developer network ought to be treated as an approximation in future applications of social network analysis .
nevertheless the developer network is in general supported by developer perceptions.
our results can help researchers and practitioners understand the complex ecosystem of developer activity on software dev elopment teams.
.