mind the gap assessing the conformance of software traceability to relevant guidelines patrick rempel1 patrick m der1 tobias kuschke1 and jane cleland huang2 technische universit t ilmenau1depaul university2 software systems process informatics group systems and requirements engineering center ilmenau germany chicago il usa patrick.rempel patrick.maeder tu ilmenau.de jhuang cs.depaul.edu abstract many guidelines for safety critical industries such as aeronautics medical devices and railway communications specify that traceability must be used to demonstrate that a rigorous process has been followed and to provide evidence that the system is safe for use.
in practice there is a gap between what is prescribed by guidelines and what is implemented in practice making it di cult for organizations and certiers to fully evaluate the safety of the software system.
in this paper we present an approach which parses a guideline to extract a traceability model depicting software artifact types and their prescribed traces.
it then analyzes the traceability data within a project to identify areas of traceability failure.
missing traceability paths redundant and or inconsistent data and other problems are highlighted.
we used our approach to evaluate the traceability of seven safetycritical software systems and found that none of the evaluated projects contained traceability that fully conformed to its relevant guidelines.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
management life cycle general terms documentation management keywords software traceability safety standard guideline compliance conformance certi cation software and system safety safety critical failure patterns assessment inspection .
introduction developing software for regulated industries is a challenging process.
not only must the software deliver the required features but it must do so in a way that ensures that the system is safe and secure for its intended use .
to this permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
.end safety critical and other regulated systems must meet stringent guidelines before they can be approved or certi ed for use .
for example software developed for the aerospace industry must comply to the iso12207 and or the do 178b guidelines while software developed for european railway communication signaling and processing systems must comply to en50128 .
most guidelines prescribe a set of steps deliverable documents and exit criterion focused around planning analysis and design implementation veri cation and validation con guration management and quality assurance activities.
in addition they often provide speci c guidelines for the creation and use of traceability in the project.
for example depending upon the criticality level of a requirement the us federal aviation authority guideline do 178b requires traceability from requirements to design and from requirements to source code and executable object code .
in practice traceability is achieved through the creation and use of trace links de ned by the center of excellence for software and systems traceability coest as speci ed associations between a pair of artifacts one comprising the source artifact and one comprising the target artifact .
software traceability serves an important role in demonstrating that a delivered software system satis es its software design constraints and mitigates all identi ed hazards.
when executed correctly traceability demonstrates that a rigorous software development process has been established and systematically followed.
.
traceability challenges organizations struggle to establish and maintain accurate and complete sets of traceability links .
a prior analysis of the traceability information submitted by various organizations to the us food and drug administration fda as part of the medical device approval process showed a signi cant traceability gap between the traceability expectations as laid out in the fda s guidance for the content of premarket submissions for software contained in medical devices and the traceability data documented in the submissions .
while all of the submissions made some attempt to satisfy the fda s traceability guidelines serious de ciencies were found in almost all the submissions in terms of missing traceability paths missing and redundant links and problems in trace granularity which made it very di cult to understand the rationale for individual links.
these observations draw attention to the traceability gapwhich exists between the traceability speci ed and required in guidelines and the actual trace links established inpermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
do 178biso26262 activityartifact type traceability input output origin destinationartifact type tracelink origin destinationtraceability tracepathartifactstrace linkstechnical guidelinesafety critical software project do 178biso26262guideline traceability modelproject traceability model preparation model guideline s traceabilityassessment guideline consistency compare guidelinespreparation model project s traceabilityassessment project vs. guidelinefigure overview of the proposed assessment approach software projects.
trace de ciencies make it di cult for the manufacturers to ensure that the system they are building is safe for use and for certi ers to understand whether they should approve it for use in the public domain.
furthermore the emerging trend towards the adoption of agile methods in regulated domains introduces the need for more continual evaluation.
in fact the european open do initiative actively seeks to address the big freeze problem in which the signi cant cost and e ort of the certi cation process makes it di cult to introduce change once the product is certi ed.
the initiative is developing techniques for integrating agility into the safety critical software development process.
although many people do not consider agile techniques suitable for use in safety critical domains the veri cation driven life cycle based on a rigorous testrst environment with continuous integration of changes has been used e ectively in a number of safety critical projects .
the open do initiative has a speci c goal to develop techniques and tools that will allow all software to be constantly maintained in a ready to certify state.
the bigbang approach in which trace links are created after the fact for certi cation purposes obviously does not support this notion of constant certi ability.
as traceability is a critical element of the certi cation process our approach provides techniques and tools for constantly evaluating and reporting on the trace coverage of a project.
.
gap analysis in this paper we provide formalisms metrics and tool support for evaluating traceability coverage with respect to the guidelines that are relevant for a speci c project.
within the context of this paper we de ne a technical guideline as a document describing a common position of industry and certi cation bodies on how to develop safety critical software within a certain domain.
guidelines generally help to coordinate technical viewpoints of regulators and safety experts in their licensing practices.
they serve as a reference for constructing a safety case and for demonstrating the safety of software based systems.
furthermore they support manufacturers in developing products for international markets.
in contrast regulations are rules of order having the force of law prescribed by a superior or competent authority.
while a regulation only lists obligations that have to be ful lled in order to be compliant with law a guideline suggests measures that should be taken in order to provide evidence that a software complies with regulations.performing a traceability gap analysis is similar to the notion of using test coverage tools to measure the extent to which unit test cases cover lines of code decisions and branches methods and classes .
while test coverage tools are designed to evaluate the rigor of the testing process and to predict the readiness of the software for release our trace coverage tool assesses the extent to which the created trace links adhere to the guidelines for the project.
later in this paper we introduce a set of ten trace coverage metrics that measure traceability coverage at the guideline the project and the artifact level.
.
our approach our approach can be applied during the process of preparing the system for initial certi cation or continuously throughout the software development life cycle in order to achieve continuous certi cation .
it involves three primary steps.
first those parts of a guideline that are relevant to the traceability of a complying development project are translated into a formal representation.
this is a manual step that produces a formal model of a guideline which can be reused across any impacted project.
second project data is automatically parsed and relevant information such as artifact identi ers artifact types and trace links are captured in a formal representation.
finally formally speci ed rules are used to analyze the data for traceability problems within an individual guideline between guidelines and between a relevant guideline and project data.
the concepts of our approach as well as its major steps are illustrated in figure .
the guideline level and project level models serve as meta models for representing traceability within individual guidelines and projects.
the remainder of the paper is laid out as follows.
section describes ve major usage scenarios of our work.
section describes the proposed approach for modeling and assessing guidelines.
section describes the preparation and assessment of project data as well as the problem types that can be identi ed in that data.
section evaluates the di erent usage scenarios against industrial guidelines and relevant safety critical software projects.
in sections and we discuss the results and address threats to the validity of those results.
section reviews related work in the area of requirements traceability and more speci cally in measuring conformance between guidelines and project e orts.
finally section concludes by proposing future research directions.
.
usage scenarios in this section we discuss ve major usage scenarios for our approach and outline their associated challenges.
scenario project s conformance to guideline.
for new projects we provide traceability models that conform to the relevant guideline s .
these traceability models serves as a strategic plan for instrumenting the project environment and de ning the processes needed to create maintain and use trace links as prescribed by the guideline.
furthermore our process constantly evaluates the project for conformance to the traceability model.
scenario continuous certi cation.
consistently maintaining a project in a ready to certify state is challenging but certainly not impossible .
it requires a rigorous veri cation process built into the development environment continuous integration and accurately maintained traceability available at any time to support the certi cation process.
our approach supports ongoing analysis of the traceability coverage of a system with respect to the project s relevant guidelines.
scenario integration of external components.
safety critical systems often integrate subsystems developed by di erent groups and subcontractors.
each of these subsystems carries its own traceability information.
however at integration time traceability must be demonstrated across subsystems.
the traceability model extracted from the guidelines helps to highlight the required integration level trace coverage and to evaluate its actual coverage in the integrated project.
for example it could take a high level requirement which is realized across multiple subsystems and measure and display its overall traceability coverage.
scenario migration to a new or revised guideline.
when an existing product is introduced into a new market it may be necessary to certify the product under a new guideline.
similarly existing guidelines may be revised e.g.
do 178b!do 178c and the new version becomes immediately relevant for product development.
in such scenarios the existing traceability model is updated to re ect the new and or modi ed guidelines and a gap analysis performed between the updated and original traceability model.
our approach provides support for identifying trace de ciencies introduced by the adoption of a new or revised guideline.
scenario multiple guideline conformance.
products are often released into multiple markets governed by di erent guidelines.
similarly a single product may contain components governed by di erent guidelines.
in both cases the product needs to comply to multiple guidelines.
this introduces the need for creating a merged traceability model for two or more guidelines.
to nd the high watermark i.e.
the minimum set of traceability requirements that if followed will satisfy all relevant guidelines traceability requirements need to be merged and contradictions need to be addressed .
our systematic process provides a single set of traceability requirements which can be used for planning purposes and for evaluating trace coverage.
these ve scenarios provide the context for work described in the remainder of this paper.
.
guideline analysis in this study we analyzed ve representative technical guidelines do 178b iso ecss e fda with application to four industrial domains aviation space automotive and medical.
these guidelines were selected based on a literature review and are discussed in more detail in section .
.
the rst step of the proposed approach involves manually creating a model of the traceability concepts prescribed by a guideline.
all studied guidelines follow a similar structure which starts with a description of the development life cycle.
this life cycle consists of multiple processes each composed of activities their prerequisites and the artifacts they are required to produce.
additionally a guideline de nes objectives to be ful lled for demonstrating safety.
one of the most important objectives is software traceability.
in this section we use the do 178b guideline to illustrate our approach.
guidelines were modeled manually by one author of this paper.
the process involved reading the guidelines identifying artifacts and their required traceability links and then specifying them formally using f logic.
.
f logic for the formalization representation and assessment of the traceability concepts found in the guidelines and the projects artifact and traceability structure we used the flogic frame logic language.
we chose f logic because it is a knowledge representation and ontology language which combines the advantages of conceptual modeling with objectoriented frame based languages and o ers a declarative and compact syntax .
features include object identity complex objects inheritance polymorphism query methods and encapsulation.
f logic allowed us to de ne the required complex data schema to reason about di erences between two schemas to reason about di erences between a schema and instances and to infer implicit knowledge from a schema.
as elaborated by kifer et al.
the f logic language consists of the sets c object constructors andv variables logical connectives and quanti ers and auxiliary symbols f g !
!
!
!
!
!
etc.
.
classes are de ned as a group of objects or as a subclass of another class.
for example requirement artifact r23 requirement r23 r25 expresses that requirement is asubclass ofartifact that r23 is a or an instance of requirement and that r23is equivalent tor25.
signature atoms specify constraints on classes.
for example tracelink activity expresses that the method expressions source and output when applied to objects that belong to class tracelink and activity respectively must yield an object belonging to class artifact orartifacttype .
the rst signature expression is a scalar signature the second signature expression is a set valued signature .
data atoms apply value returning methods to objects.
for example tl1 tracelink act1 activity 945a artifacttype?guideline level project level ?
missing artifact typeproblem a b a bproblem artifact type mapping guideline project a b a cproblem ba b aproblem b a aartifacta a b b trace link ?
missing trace linkactivity missing activityrequired trace path trace link type?
missing trace link typeproblem a b c ab d cproblem a bcproblem problem a ?
?
?
c a d b?ledgend control flowproblem ab d c?
?figure problem types at guideline level problems and project level problems expresses that the methods source and output are applied to the objects tl1and act1 respectively.
method source returns the object art1 and method output returns the set of objectsfat1 at2g.
as with comparable logic based languages implication rules can be speci ed in the form of head body where head is a single molecule and body can be a conjunction of molecules ornegated molecules .
thereby a molecule is the simplest kind of formula constructed from the f logic alphabet introduced above.
the following example speci es an implication rule ?x activity allartifacttypes !
!
?y ?x input!
!
?i output!
!
?o ?i ?y ?o ?y this rule states that the method allartifacttypes returns for any object of class activity a uni ed set of all input and output artifact types.
the example also illustrates the syntax of variables ?
x ?y ?i ?o named with a question mark and followed by letters digits or underscores.
.
modeling the guidelines formalizing a guideline involves modeling its required artifact types activities and traceability paths.
.
.
step model artifact types all investigated guidelines de ne types of artifacts which are required to be created during software development.
guidelines also de ne which artifact type should include what information.
based on this information types of artifacts that are required by a guideline can be derived see figure artifacttype .
example the do 178b guideline lists all required artifact types in a dedicated section.
one required artifact type is software requirements data.
the guideline states that software requirements data is a de nition of the high level requirements including the derived requirements.
this data should include functional and operational requirements under each mode of operation performance criteria ... .
the following molecule de nes class swreqdata software requirements data as a subclass ofartifacttype which represents all artifact types.
swreqdata artifacttype additionally the following signature atom asserts that class swreqdata consists of two multi valued methods funcreq functional requirements and opreq operational requirements .
both methods correspond to the result type swreq software requirement and are parameterized by modeofop the related software requirement s mode of operation.
swreqdata funcreq modeofop swreq opreq modeofop swreq class swreq consists of a single value method which de nes whether or not the software requirement is derived swreq .
.
step model activities guidelines also de ne the activities of the prescribed software life cycle figure activity .
each activity is characterized by the set of artifact types that it creates figure output .
additionally an activity may use one or more previously created artifact types figure input .
example the do 178b guideline prescribes requirements speci cation as follows inputs to the software requirements process include the system requirements the hardware interface and system architecture if not included in the requirements from the system life cycle process and the software development plan and the software requirements standards from the software planning process.
when the planned transition criteria have been satis ed these inputs are used to develop the software high level requirements.
the following molecule asserts that class specifyswreq is asubclass ofactivity .
specifyswreq activity the following data molecule asserts that specifyswreq depends on the input artifact objects syrd system requirement data sya system architecture swdp software development plan swrs software requirements standards and produces the output swreqdata .
specifyswreq in fsyrd sya swdp swrsg out fswreqdatag .
.
step model traceability paths a guideline also prescribes the traceability to be provided between artifact types figure traceability .
prescribed traceability is always related to an artifact type as origin figure origin and an artifact type as destination figure destination .
example traceability between source code and low level requirements should be provided to enable veri cation of the absence of undocumented source code and veri cation of the complete implementation of the low level requirements.
the following data atom asserts that rt1is an element of the class requiredtrace required traceability which requires traceability between swdesignspec software design speci cation and sourcecode source code .
rt1 requiredtrace origin!swdesignspec destination!sourcecode .
assessing guideline consistency as illustrated in figure problems and we identi ed three types of problems that can occur in technical guideline models.
we describe each problem and then discuss how it can be identi ed automatically from the formal model.
for this purpose we provide formalized assessment rules per problem type.
guideline problem missing artifact creation activity.
every artifact type that is de ned by a guideline should be created by a software process activity.
otherwise artifacts of this artifact type cannot be traced to the activity that produced the artifact type nor to the artifact types that were used as input.
implication when conducting our case studies we identi ed three potential reasons for the occurrence of this problem i the de nition of software process activities within the guideline is inconsistent however we consider this unlikely given that technical guidelines are written and revised carefully by a group of subject matter experts.
ii activities or artifact types of the software life cycle prescribed by a guideline have not been modeled correctly leading to inconsistencies in the guideline model that are detected by our problem checking rules.
iii a guideline is written within a larger context and refers to artifact types that were created in a process that is out of the guideline s scope.
for instance the guideline iso consists of ten parts while only part six is related to software development.
furthermore part six requires traceability to a system requirement artifact without de ning system requirement creation activities.
guideline problem missing trace path.
when a guideline requires traceability between two artifact types it implicitly requires the existence of a direct or transitive trace path between both artifact types.
this means that if no trace path exists between these two artifact types it is clear at the de nition level that the required traceability between the two artifacts cannot be satis ed.
implication as with to problem this problem can be caused by an inconsistent guideline an incorrect model creation or an unresolved reference to a related guideline.
guideline problem ambiguous trace path.
if a guideline requires traceability between two artifacts the existence of a trace path between the artifact types is neces sary see problem .
if multiple trace paths between two artifacts are identi ed these paths are ambiguous.
implication analogous to problems and the existence of this problem indicates an inconsistent guideline model caused by one of the three reasons described in the implications of problem .
the main intention for creating the assessment rules for the problems to was to automatically evaluate the consistency of the derived guideline model and to thereby assure the quality of the model preparation as described in section .
.
assessing merged guidelines we identi ed two problem types which may be caused when two or more guidelines are relevant for a given product and must therefore be merged together.
figure illustrates the two problems and types.
guideline problem contradicting artifact creation after merge.
every single guideline de nes software process activities and artifact types which are produced by activities.
however if two guidelines de ne di erent activities for creating the same artifact type these activities contradict each other.
implication the existence of this problem type indicates that two or more guidelines cannot be uni ed into a single model which respects all of the stated guidelines.
if a software products needs to comply to both guidelines measures must be taken to explicitly distinguish contradicting artifact type creation activities.
otherwise the origin of a created artifact cannot be determined unambiguously.
guideline problem ambiguous trace path after merge.
every single guideline de nes required traceability.
additionally trace paths can be derived from the de ned software process activities.
if two guidelines require traceability between the same pair of artifact types but prescribe di erent trace paths the merging of these guidelines introduces ambiguous trace paths to the merged model.
implication as with the previous problem type the analyzed guidelines cannot be uni ed into one model respecting all requirements.
.
project compliance the primary purpose of our work is to analyze compliance of an individual project s traceability to its relevant set of guidelines.
therefore we also need to formally model the traceability artifacts found in an individual project and to compare these to the formal model of the guidelines.
we rst describe our process for constructing the project level traceability model.
.
constructing a project level model the constructed model consists of traceability artifacts traceability paths and traceability links.
.
.
step parse project artifacts and trace links the rst step towards a project level traceability model is to collect all artifacts and trace links from within the software project.
typical representations of artifacts are text documents hypertext application database records source code and diagrams.
trace links typically appear in the form of trace link matrices hyper links text