combining rule based and information retrieval techniques to assign software change requests yguarat cerqueira cavalcanti brazilian federal data processing service and federal university of pernambuco center for informatics ycc cin.ufpe.brivan do carmo machado federal university of bahia computer science department ivanmachado dcc.ufba.brpaulo a. da mota s. neto federal university of pernambuco center for informatics pamsn cin.ufpe.br eduardo santana de almeida federal university of bahia computer science department esa dcc.ufba.brsilvio romero de lemos meira federal university of pernambuco center for informatics srlm cin.ufpe.br abstract change requests crs are key elements to software maintenance and evolution.
finding the appropriate developer to a cr is crucial for obtaining the lowest economically feasible xing time.
nevertheless assigning crs is a laborintensive and time consuming task.
in this paper we present a semi automated cr assignment approach which combines rule based and information retrieval techniques.
the approach emphasizes the use of contextual information essential to e ective assignments and puts the development team in control of the assignment rules toward making its adoption easier.
results of an empirical evaluation showed that the approach is up to more accurate than approaches which rely solely on machine learning techniques.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement d. .
management life cycle productivity software quality assurance sqa keywords software maintenance and evolution change request management automatic change request assignment bug triage .
introduction crs are software artifacts that describe defects to be xed or enhancements to be implemented in a software system .
crs are managed with the support of a cr repository software such as bugzilla1.
a cr repository plays a funda1 permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september vasteras sweden.
copyright acm .
.
.mental role in the software maintenance process being a common place for communication and coordination among di erent stakeholders .
the task of assigning a cr also referred to as cr triage consists of selecting the most suitable software developer to handle a given cr.
generally such a developer is the one who has enough expertise to handle the issues reported in the cr .
in addition the assignment decision must take into account the developer s workload availability and the cr priority in order to obtain the lowest economically feasible time to x .
thus this task requires considerable knowledge of the project and good communication skills to negotiate with involved stakeholders .
assigning crs to developers is both labor intensive and time consuming as it is usually regarded as a manual handling task .
depending on the software project the number of new crs can vary from dozens to hundreds in a single day .
as a consequence the greater the number of crs that are opened the more complex the problem becomes.
several research have proposed automated approaches to overcome the problem of cr assignment by using information retrieval ir techniques .
some of these approaches are based on the hypothesis that the most suitable developer to handle a new cr is the one who has already solved similar crs .
while other approaches consider that an appropriate developer can be found by looking at past crs and data from version control systems or source code .
in general these approaches use ir techniques to automatically suggest a list of appropriate developers for a new incoming cr.
despite the number of proposals there is no empirical evidence about their applicability to real world environments.
most practitioners are still assigning crs manually.
we believe that current approaches have not been adopted because of two main problems as discussed next.
firstly existing approaches are usually designed to be autonomous in the sense that the software analysts do not have the control of the approach they cannot modify the behavior of the approach.
without such control in turn the approach cannot be properly calibrated.
as a consequence if its performance is not adequate it is simply discarded.
secondly these approaches lack contextual information necessary to properly assign crs.
software development companies might have high turnover rates e.g.
developers move from project to project developers can be hired red during project development or they can even take a vacation or a day o .
this dynamic in uences the assignment of crs.
thus contextual information impacts the performance of automated approaches.
we developed a con gurable approach for semi automated assignment of crs which enables software analysts control its behavior as well as it provides a mean to support contextual information necessary to perform e ective assignments.
the approach relies on rule based expert system rbes and ir techniques.
it could perform up to better than a support vector machine svm based approach.
this paper is organized as follows section provides some background on cr management section presents the proposed approach to automate the assignment of crs section describes the experiment performed to evaluate the proposed approach and section concludes this work.
.
background when a cr is reported it follows a work ow represented as a state machine in the cr repository as figure illustrates.
the work ow encompasses the phases untreated modi cation and veri cation as explained next.
figure cr generic work ow .
in the rst untreated the cr is reported in the cr repository.
each cr stores essential information for understanding and implementing the request such as short and long description of the change the change type e.g.
defect or enhancement the target component and the version of the software under analysis.
additional elds can be de ned in the cr repository con guration.
in the modi cation phase the development team can accept the cr or not and the discussion takes place.
when a cr is accepted a developer is assigned to the task.
as we previously discussed he she should be someone with the capability of handling the request.
after the assigned developer has implemented the cr theveri cation phase takes place.
this encompasses the veri cation of the cr implementation which is commonly held by the quality assurance team.
the cr may return to the developer if it needs additional repairs.
if a developer is not able to handle a cr this can be reassigned to others until it reaches the appropriate developer.
when the cr is given as properly xed this work ow reaches an end and the change can be released for production.
.
cr assignment approach to support the cr assignment task we provide tool support for e ective automation.
along this section we describe the strategy used to perform crs assignments in an automated way and the components used to implementsuch strategy as a software solution.
besides we detail the method to extract assignment rules.
.
semi automated strategy the approach employs an automation strategy in which the crs can be assigned in di erent moments which we callphases .
figure shows this strategy as a work ow diagram.
it integrates an rbes and an ir model with learning features.
while the former is used to implement the organization speci c rules for assignment the latter uses historical information to match developers with crs.
figure automation strategy.
in order to explain the work ow in figure we assume that there is an incoming cr and a list of available developers as input for the whole process.
the expert system and the ir model are executed in di erent phases of the strategy as we describe next.
in the rst phase the rbes runs over these two inputs by applying simple rules for cr assignment.
examples of these rules could be a all incoming critical crs must be assigned to developer a and b all incoming crs for component xyz must be assigned to developer b .
such type of rules do not require much processing resources and as reported in it is often su cient to assign a cr.
thus by executing them rst chances are high to assign a cr in this rst phase.
however if the simple rules are not helpful to assigning the cr then as a second phase we apply the ir model to nd developers that have solved similar crs in the past.
this is the main technique usually implemented in existing approaches to reason on cr assignment .
then a new execution of the rbes is performed taking as input the list of appropriate developers.
this time the strategy encourages the use of more complex rules so as to combine di erent variables such as availability developers workload and experience cr severity and reassignment patterns.
if neither the rst nor the second phases are able to automatically assign the cr then the third phase takes place.
326the assignment can be performed in two ways depending on the strategy con guration a it can be performed by the analyst who manually assign the cr or b the cr can be assigned automatically.
in the rst case the decision of the analyst may be aided by the list of appropriate developers if it was successfully retrieved.
in the second case the strategy can be con gured to automatically pick some developer possibly from the list of appropriate developers.
.
.
controlling the approach s behavior notably the presence of the rbes is a fundamental mechanism to enable the control of the automated assignments.
that is the approach can be tuned by changing the rules.
otherwise the approach could perform incorrect assignments and no one would be able to x it.
furthermore the strategy of figure was described in terms of a default work ow for cr assignment.
however the phases of the strategy could be executed separately according to the analyst s needs.
we understand that providing such a control is fundamental to increase the adoption and e ectiveness of the approach.
.
components of the approach .
.
rule based expert system rbes we use an rbes to deal with rules for cr assignment which is usually context dependent.
we implemented it using drools2.
listing shows three cr assignment rules expressed with drools.
the rst one is a simple rule which assigns every critical cr to the developer identi ed by dev03 fakedev.com as well as crs which a ect component c. the second rule veri es if the textual content of the cr contains the terms crud orders and assigns it to dev01 fakedev.com .
rule critical crs or crs for module c when cr cr severity critical module c then cr.
assignto developer dev03 fakedev .com end rule crs that contain specific text when cr cr text .
contains crud orders then cr.
assignto dev01 fakedev .com end listing example of rules de ned with drools.
.
.
workload balancing we can observe that the method availabledeveloper received the parameter workloadbalancing.assignments.
this parameter informs which type of workload balancing algorithm should be used by the rbes.
in our example we determined the rbes to apply an algorithm based on the amount of crs that each developer has been assigned to.
note that this algorithm must consider in the computation only the crs that are not closed xed.
other workload balancing algorithms could be implemented and used in our strategy to automated cr assignment by extending the classes and interfaces available.
information retrieval model with learning figure shows the architecture of the ir model implemented in our solution.
it is performed in two steps i data preprocessing and training and ii recommendation.
in the rst represented by the solid arrows the history of cr assignments is retrieved from the cr repository to be used as a training set for the classi er.
each cr is preprocessed before being indexed in which meaningless words are removed stopper and the remaining words are reduced to their radical stemmer .
only the xed crs must be considered in this step since they are classi ed according to the developers who xed them.
figure ir model with learning.
next the indexer receives the preprocessed crs in order to produce the matrices of terms extracted from each cr using the following techniques term frequency inverse document frequency tf idf and latent semantic indexing lsi .
both tf idf and lsi are further described in this section.
when the indexing is done the classi er can query these crs through the indexer .
in the second step represented by dashed arrows the input cr is preprocessed through the stopper and stemmer and passed to the classi er .
next the classi er matches the cr against the knowledge database to retrieve a list of similar crs that have already been xed.
as a result the developers that xed the retrieved crs are potential ones to handle the new cr.
.
.
textual representation for the process shown in figure the textual information of each cr is represented in the indexer using the vector space model vsm model .
with vsm the crs are represented in a space of term vectors.
each dimension of this space is represented by a term which is associated with a weight known as tf idf.
in the physical representation the tf idf produces a matrix that links each term with the crs that contains it.
in addition the lsi is used to produce a low dimensional representation of the tf idf.
lsi is based on singular value decomposition svd .
ahsan et al.
identi ed that lsi increases the performance of automated cr assignment.
.
.
machine learning algorithm the svm algorithm is used to provide learning capabilities to the ir model since it has the better performance when recommending developers to new crs .
the svm is a supervised machine learning algorithm.
such kind of algorithms take as input a set of labeled instances to build and train a classi er this classi er is then used to assign a label to unknown instances .
speci cally svm is a non probabilistic linear binary classi er based on computational learning theory that is used for both regression and classi cation tasks.
.
extraction of assignment rules currently the extraction of assignment rules is manually performed using two techniques manual analysis of crs data and interviews with the sta .
.
.
manual analysis of crs manual analysis consists of extracting the assignment rules by sampling the available cr data.
it is important to note that the samples must contain only crs that have already been solved.
the samples are then manually analyzed with the objective of identifying patterns of cr assignments.
in order to nd these patterns basically we must look for meaningful words in the cr elds such as title description and steps to reproduce.
meaningful words are those that refer to software functionalities error messages speci c stack traces and names of software components.
.
.
interviews with cr assignees this technique consists of interviewing those people of the software projects which are responsible for assigning the crs to developers.
these can include the project leaders managers developers or anyone who performs this role.
in these interviews we must try to capture the knowledge of these people on cr assignments.
this knowledge can be captured by asking only one simple question such as could you describe the characteristics of the crs that the developer is commonly assigned to?
.
.
experiment machine learning based approaches have proved to be the best choice especially when applying the svm algorithm.
in this way this experiment compared the proposed approach with a pure machine learning approach which uses the svm algorithm.
the experiment was performed as an o line experiment in which it was used historical data of crs assignments from one of the main software projects of the brazilian federal data processing service serpro .
due to the use of this historical data it was not necessary the participation of subjects except the researcher which was responsible for performing the experiment.
next we discuss the research questions and the related metrics that must be collected to aid with the questions.
.
research questions q1.
what is the accuracy of the proposed approach for automated cr assignment?
q2.
what is the necessary e ort to setup the approach in a software development project?
q3.
does the achieved accuracy pay the necessary e ort needed in the setup?
.
metrics m1.
for the rst question the accuracy of our approach is computed by verifying if the developer that was automatically assigned to a cr is one of the developers who eventually worked on the cr.
for instance if we run our approach to automatically assign a set of crs and as a result of these crs were correctly assigned to developers that worked on the respective crs then the approach has an accuracy of .
m2.
for the second question it is simply tracked down the time spent with the activities to setup the approach.examples of these activities are algorithm training rules extraction and collecting and preparing context information.
the time for each activity was individually collected.
m3.
for the third question it is compared the time saved with automated assignments in relation to the e ort to setup the approach.
we assume that a cr assignment performed manually takes minutes on average.
this time is in accordance with the results presented in .
thus whenever our approach assigns a cr successfully according to de ned metric for accuracy minutes are added to the total time saved with automated assignments.
.
operation .
.
instrumentation the instruments of this experiment are the crs and the context information data collected at serpro by querying the available management systems and the time sheets used for measurement.
the cr dataset was extracted from a private software development project conducted at serpro.
the software is a web based application mainly developed in the java programming language.
as context information we included information on developers availability such as data about developers vacation developers project allocation and developers experience.
time sheets were used to track down the e ort spent with the necessary activities to setup the approach as previously mentioned.
the other instrument is the java programming language.
pure java code is used to access our approach s application programming interface api in order to perform the cr assignments.
.
.
testing dataset we selected crs that were with their status set to closed from the two main modules of the aforementioned project one module with crs and the other with .
for con dential reasons we call them simply by module a and module b respectively.
a total of developers have been assigned to these crs thus being considered for the automated assignments note that we are counting only those developers that changed the software in order to x the cr being excluded testers requirement analysts team leaders and project managers.
.
.
rules extraction in order to extract the assignment rules we followed the manual extraction techniques mentioned in section .
.
thus we informally interviewed the workers which were responsible for performing the assignments.
these workers consisted of project managers and team leaders.
four workers were interviewed.
in these interviews we asked the workers to classify the developers according to the kind of crs that they were commonly assigned to.
then we formulated some rules according to this classi cation.
we also analyzed samples of crs from the dataset to discover new rules.
finally it was formulated assignment rules.
.
.
configuration of the proposed approach in section we introduced the strategy to automated assignment in our approach which speci es that each step in the strategy could be con gured such as de ning which steps should be executed.
for this experiment we con gured 328the approach to execute the three possible phases that is execute simple rules execute complex rules including the suggestion of appropriate developers and nally suggest developers for assignment.
for this last phase the cr was simply assigned to the rst developer in the recommendation list.
additionally we developed an algorithm for workload distribution to support the formulated rules as well as the list of recommended developers.
the algorithm computes the workload of each developer according to the amount of assigned crs.
whenever two or more developers suggested had the same amount of crs assigned one of them was selected randomly.
.
.
training the svm algorithm.
we used the svm machine learning algorithm implemented in the weka project.
the algorithm was then congured encompassing stopwords and stemming.
in order to train the svm algorithm we used a fold cross validation with the same dataset being randomized times which helps to increase the generalization of the results.
.
analysis and interpretation next we provide the analysis and interpretation of the experiment results answering each research question.
.
.
q1.
what is the accuracy of the proposed approach for automated cr assignment?
results with svm.
we observed a higher average accuracy of when assigning crs from the module a and for module b. since svm deals with text similarity the di erent values for accuracy in the two modules is possibly due to the vocabulary used in the crs.
it is possible that the vocabulary used in the crs of module a is easier for machine learning than the one used in module b. results with the proposed approach.
we observed that our approach had a higher average accuracy of when trying to assign the crs from module a. in regarding to the crs from module b our approach achieved an average of at its best.
for the crs of module a it represents an improvement of on the accuracy and for module b it represents a signi cant of improvement.
.
.
q2.
what is the necessary effort to setup the approach in a software development project?
as previously mentioned our approach needs some extra e ort for con guration such as the de nition of the assignment rules and extraction of context information.
although the retrieval of context information in serpro was straightforward extra work was necessary to insert this information in the database used by the approach.
thus two hours was necessary for processing and integrating the context information in the approach.
regarding rules de nition we spent about hours.
this involved the manual analysis and statistics of cr data.
thus for the complete preparation of our approach prior to the experiment s execution we spent about hours.
.
.
q3.
does the achieved accuracy pay the necessary effort needed in the setup?
as stated in the de nition of the metric m3 for each cr correctly assigned we considered a reduction of minutes that would be needed to perform the assignment manually.thus we used the formula to compute the amount of time that would be saved with automated assignments.
hours x m2 a b acr m 10min the variable acr m is the number of correctly assigned crs achieved with the respective approach for the module m given by formula where ncr m is the number of crs for module mandacc m is the higher average accuracy for module m. acr m ncr m acc m form2 a b considering both modules a and b svm correctly assigned crs which would save hours of manual assignments.
on the other hand our approach assigned crs that could save hours of manual assignments.
thus our approach could save hours more that pure svm approaches.
thus for the scenario that we used to perform the validation our approach would not pay for itself since the economy of hours is less than the time needed to con gure the approach which was hours.
however it is important to observe that this result is not conclusive for a long term running experiment.
this is explained by fact that as the time passes more crs would be reported and less con guration e ort would be necessary.
as a consequence the amount of manual assignments avoided would keep increasing while the e ort would be stable thus leveraging the payo of the approach.
.
threats to validity external validity.
firstly the dataset of crs used in the experiment may not be representative for other organizations and projects.
as we used data of a large private project from a large organization the results may not apply to small projects and organizations or open source projects.
secondly the learning process of svm is based on textual similarity and quality of the crs s data may impact its performance matter et al.
.
in this experiment we included all textual elds of the crs in the learning process.
as we have not assessed the text quality chances are that some of these elds could have impacted on the svm performance.
internal validity.
the threat regarding internal validity concerns measuring the time spent to con gure the proposed approach such as de ning the rules.
this was an iterative process of trail and error which made it di cult to measure the time spent.
thus there may be some bias in the reported values but not su cient to invalidate the results.
.
experiment considerations the rst point concerns to the accuracy of the svm algorithm.
we understand that the svm and the testing dataset could be tweaked in order to produce better accuracy results however it would require more preparation e ort prior to the experiment execution.
additionally since the proposed approach also relies on the svm algorithm the tweaking would produce better results for both pure machine learning approach and the new proposed approach.
consequently the extra preparation e ort would not change the conclusions of the experiment and thus was unnecessary.
the second point refers to the performance of the proposed approach.
in order to test it we formulated assignment rules and designed an algorithm for workload balanc329ing.
these two aspects have a signi cant impact on the performance of the approach.
as a consequence the creation of other rules as well as other algorithms for workload distribution could considerably improve the performance of the approach.
on the other hand such a work would require more e ort and could decrease the approach s payo .
we consider that the rules and the workload algorithm used were su cient to the experiment purpose.
a third point is in respect with the time spent to formulate the assignment rules.
we did not have previous experience with extracting such rules.
it was necessary to de ne mechanisms to help us with discovering these rules from historical data such as interviews with the management team statistical analysis and manual analysis of crs.
as a consequence our inexperience could inevitably produce inaccurate rules thus prejudicing the results of the experiment.
however as more experience is acquired more e ective rules can be formulated as well as new methods to extract them.
finally as a fourth point we should consider the di erence between the current assignments of crs that is those found in historical data and the ideal assignments .
this last refers to the assignments that aim at optimizing the crs xing schedule.
this experiment compared the automated assignments in relation to the current assignments .
as a consequence we cannot ensure that the proposed approach produced better assignments.
in order to measure the quality of assignments it would be necessary other kind of experiments with more costs and e ort involved.
.
conclusion and future work in this paper we proposed a novel semi automated approach to assign crs to software developers.
it employs a strategy to automate cr assignments based on rule based expert system rbes and information retrieval ir techniques.
the rbes provides a means to cope with dynamic environments and contextual information through the use of assignment rules.
the rbes is aided by the the ir model which use historical information from assignment history.
the experiment to validate the proposed approach indicated an improvement of assignment accuracy up to over approaches that rely solely on machine learning algorithms.
this means that a rule based approach is a simple and e cient solution that can leverage cr assignments.
despite the observed improvement there are open issues regarding the approach to investigate.
the rst issue concerns the extraction of assignment rules from the cr repositories which is manually performed.
future work should investigate automated methods to extract these rules.
the second issue encompasses the analysis of algorithms for balancing the workload among developers.
we have tested a balancing algorithm that relies only on amount of crs assigned.
however developers have other activities that cannot be measured by only counting crs.
thus we aim at tuning our approach with other balancing algorithms.
finally context information is rather dynamic as it changes very frequently.
thus we need to provide mechanisms that enable to e ortlessly evolve the assignment rules.