mining fine grained code changes to detect unknown change patterns stas negara university of illinois urbana il usa snegara2 illinois.edumihai codoban oregon state university corvallis or usa codobanm eecs.oregonstate.edudanny dig oregon state university corvallis or usa digd eecs.oregonstate.edu ralph e. johnson university of illinois urbana il usa rjohnson illinois.edu abstract identifying repetitive code changes bene ts developers tool builders and researchers.
tool builders can automate the popular code changes thus improving the productivity of developers.
researchers can better understand the practice of code evolution advancing existing code assistance tools and bene ting developers even further.
unfortunately existing research either predominantly uses coarse grained version control system vcs snapshots as the primary source of code evolution data or considers only a small subset of program transformations of a single kind refactorings.
we present the rst approach that identi es previously unknown frequent code change patterns from a ne grained sequence of code changes.
our novel algorithm e ectively handles challenges that distinguish continuous code change pattern mining from the existing data mining techniques.
we evaluated our algorithm on hours of code development collected from developers and showed that it is e ective useful and scales to large amounts of data.
we analyzed some of the mined code change patterns and discovered ten popular kinds of high level program transformations.
more than half of our survey participants acknowledged that eight out of ten transformations are relevant to their programming activities.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
software engineering distribution maintenance and enhancement general terms algorithms experimentation keywords program transformation code changes data mining .
introduction many code changes are repetitive by nature thus forming code change patterns .
frequent pattern minpermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
.ing is successfully applied in a broad range of domains.
for example amazon.com recommends related products based on customers who bought this also bought that .
net ix recommends new movies based on customers who watched this also watched that .
similar frequent pattern mining has revolutionized other services such as itunes goodreads social platforms etc.
more recently data mining techniques became popular in the domain of genetics .
in particular these techniques are employed to identify similar sequences of genes which is a common task in dna studies.
we conjecture that mining frequent code changes can be similarly transformative for software development.
identifying frequent code change patterns bene ts integrated development environment ide designers code evolution researchers and developers.
ide designers can build tools that automate execution of frequent code changes recommend code changes or o er intelligent code completion thus improving the productivity of developers.
researchers would better understand the practice of code evolution and also would be able to focus their attention on the most popular development scenarios.
library developers can notice and x the common mistakes in the library api usage.
existing research predominantly detects frequent code change patterns either analyzing the static source code of a single version of an application or comparing the application s version control system vcs snapshots.
in our previous study we showed that data stored in vcs is imprecise incomplete and makes it impossible to perform analysis that involves the time dimension inside a single vcs snapshot.
recent research considered more precise data captured directly from ide but their code change identi cation techniques were limited in two ways i they were looking for a single kind of code change patterns refactorings ii they considered only a small subset of previously known kinds of refactorings.
in this paper we employed data mining techniques to detect previously unknown frequent code change patterns from a ne grained sequence of code changes.
our mining algorithm does not use any prede ned templates to look for patterns and thus all patterns it detects are previously unknown.
we recorded the code changes as soon as they were produced by developers.
consequently our algorithm s input sequence is the most ne grained and precise representation of code evolution.permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
there are unique challenges posed by our problem domain of program transformations which render previous o theshelf data mining techniques inapplicable.
first for program transformations we need to mine a continuous sequence of code changes that are ordered by their timestamps without any previous knowledge of where the boundaries between patterns of transformations are.
in contrast standard data mining techniques operate on a database of transactions with well known boundaries.
second unlike the standard frequent itemset mining when mining frequent code change patterns a high level program transformation corresponding to a given pattern may contain several instances of the same kind of code change.
for example rename local variable refactoring involves the same change for all