characteristic studies of loop problems for structural test generation via symbolic execution xusheng xiao north carolina state university raleigh nc email xxiao2 ncsu.edusihan li tao xie university of illinois at urbana champaign champaign il email sihanli2 taoxie illinois.edunikolai tillmann microsoft research redmond wa email nikolait microsoft.com abstract dynamic symbolic execution dse is a state ofthe art test generation approach that systematically exp lores program paths to generate high covering tests.
in dse the presence of loops especially unbound loops can cause an enormous or even infinite number of paths to be explored.
there exist techniques such as bounded iteration heurist ics and summarization that assist dse in addressing loop probl ems.
however there exists no literature survey or empirical wo rk that shows the pervasiveness of loop problems or identifies chall enges faced by these techniques on real world open source applic ations.
to fill this gap we provide characteristic studies to guide f uture research on addressing loop problems for dse.
our proposed study methodology starts with conducting a literature sur vey study to investigate how technical problems such as loop pro blems compromise automated software engineering tasks such as t est generation and which existing techniques are proposed to d eal with such technical problems.
then the study methodology co ntinues with conducting an empirical study of applying the ex isting techniques on real world software applications sampled ba sed on the literature survey results and major open source pro ject hostings.
this empirical study investigates the pervasive ness of the technical problems and how well existing techniques can address such problems among real world software applicati ons.
based on such study methodology our two phase characteris tic studies identify that bounded iteration and heuristics are effective in addressing loop problems when used properly.
our studies further identify challenges faced by these techniques and p rovide guidelines for effectively addressing these challenges.
i. i ntroduction software testing is one of the most commonly used techniques for improving software quality but it is typically a labor intensive process that accounts for high cost in soft ware development and maintenance.
to address the issue dynamic symbolic execution dse recentl y made popular with the advent of powerful constraint solvin g tools can be used to automatically generate high covering tests by systematically exploring program p aths.
dse executes the program under test symbolically with arbitrary or default inputs and collects path conditions as the constraints on inputs from the executed branch statements.
dse then systematically negates part of these constraints t o form new path conditions and leverages a constraint solver to solve these path conditions for obtaining new test inputs.
t hese new test inputs steer the future explorations towards diffe rent paths of the program iteratively collecting new constrain ts and achieving new structural coverage such as statementand branch coverages .
with the advances of research on constraint solvers e.g.
z3 and cvc3 dse based tools such as sage and pex become promising in generating test inputs for unit testing and security sy stem testing .
since sage has be en continually running on more than machines in a security testing lab and pex found serious faults from an already we lltested component of the .net runtime.
a significant challenge for dse is how to handle loops which may compromise dse s effectiveness in terms of structural coverage and fault detection.
as a special type of branches loops can cause the number of paths to be explored to grow exponentially.
even worse the number of paths becomes infinite due to the presence of input dependen t loops idls causing dse to run out of resources e.g.
the allocated time or number of explored paths before achievin g satisfactory coverage.
for example a recent study sho ws that dse may keep unfolding an idl without achieving coverage of any new branches.
recent research has tried to address this challenge by using bounded iteration to constrain loop unrolling using search guiding heuristics to guide path exploration or using loop summarizat ion to summarize loops based on inferred loop invariants referred to as loop summarization .
although loops whose iteration counts are statically bounded may still pose problems to dse idls are considered as much more severe problems since idls may cause the search space to become infinite.
some previous work proposes effective techniques to assist dse in dealing with idls referred to as loop techniques but these techniques have their limitations in handling different ki nds of idls.
for example bounded iteration and search guiding heuristics effectively prune the search space but they may prevent dse from covering subsequent branches that require loops to iterate more than a certain number of times .
inferring loop invariants as conducted by loop summarization requires some abstractions to be performed on the symbolic states and may lose precision on summarizing the loops .
moreover loop summarization requires detection of induction variables whose values are modified by a constant 1input dependent loops are loops whose iteration numbers de pend on some unbounded input.value or constant times for each loop iteration.
however on ly a few idls can be summarized by induction variables.
godefroid et al.
report that their technique can summarize o nly out of of the detected idls in their evaluations.
unfortunately there exists no literature survey or empir ical work that shows the pervasiveness of loop problems or identifies challenges faced when these techniques are appli ed on real world applications.
to fill such a significant gap we provide two phase characteristic studies on loop problems for structural test generation with the focus on test generat ion tools based on dse.
our proposed study methodology starts with conducting a literature survey study to investigate h ow technical problems such as loop problems compromise automated software engineering tasks such as test generatio n and which existing techniques are proposed to deal with such technical problems.
then the study methodology continues with conducting an empirical study of applying the existing techniques on real world applications sampled based on the literature survey results and major open source project h ostings.
this empirical study investigates the pervasiveness of the technical problems and how well existing techniques can address such problems among real world applications.
in our literature survey study we survey the literature from a comprehensive