towards an intelligent domain specific traceability solution jin guo natawut monaikul cody plepel and jane cleland huang systems and requirements engineering center school of computing depaul university chicago il usa jguo9 cdm.depaul.edu natawutmo gmail.com plepel.cody gmail.com jhuang cs.depaul.edu abstract state of the art software trace retrieval techniques are unable to perform the complex reasoning that a human analyst follows in order to create accurate trace links between artifacts such as regulatory codes and requirements.
as a result current algorithms often generate imprecise links.
to address this problem we present the domain contextualized intelligent traceability solution docit designed to mimic some of the higher level reasoning that a human trace analyst performs.
we focus our e orts on the complex domain of communication and control in a transportation system.
docit includes rules for extracting action units from software artifacts a domain speci c knowledge base for relating semantically similar concepts across action units and a set of link creation heuristics which utilize the action units to establish meaningful trace links across pairs of artifacts.
our approach signi cantly improves the quality of the generated trace links.
we illustrate and evaluate docit with examples and experiments from the control and communication sector of a transportation domain.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirements speci cations i. .
natural language processing text analysis keywords traceability intelligent system domain ontology .
introduction software traceability is an essential component in the development of any non trivial software system.
it is de ned by the center of excellence for software traceability coest as the ability to interrelate any uniquely identi able software engineering artifact to any other maintain required permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september vasteras sweden.
copyright is held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm ... .
.
.links over time and use the resulting network to answer questions of both the software product and its development process .
in safety critical systems regulated by bodies such as the us food and drug administration or the federal aviation authority it is speci cally required as part of the assessment approval and certi cation process .
in all domains software traceability can provide useful support for a variety of software engineering activities including compliance veri cation impact analysis and testcase regression analysis.
despite its importance numerous studies have shown that achieving e ective traceability is challenging primarily because creating and maintaining accurate trace links for large and or complex projects is e ortintensive arduous and error prone .
to address these problems researchers have developed and evaluated techniques that use standard information retrieval methods to automate or semi automate the process of trace link creation.
techniques include the vector space model vsm latent semantic indexing lsi and probabilistic networks .
other techniques involve instrumenting the project environment and con guration management tools to prospectively capture trace links as a byproduct of the development process .
unfortunately while such techniques are often able to return of the targeted links precision rates are often quite low ranging from depending on the characteristics of the project and its software artifacts .
industry demands more precise results before they are willing to integrate trace retrieval techniques into their software development tools and processes and therefore these low accuracy problems have hindered the adoption of trace retrieval practices in industry.
.
term mismatches the major barrier is caused by the mismatch of terms that occurs frequently across software artifacts to be traced .
for example consider the following system requirement for a driver optional highway system dohs that states the highway wayside segment shall monitor signal road work directive and hazard detector information from eld devices and the related system design artifact that states during lamp out conditions the wiu shall send the current state of the highway signal.
even though the two artifacts exhibit almost no shared terms the fact that the wiu is an acronym ofhighway wayside interface unit that wius are located in the highway wayside segment and are connected to eld devices and that monitoring of eld devices is supported by data mean that these two artifacts are related and a source artifact target artifact ontology source action unit target action unit action unit extraction term based artifact matching with vector space model link creation heuristics for each pair of source target action units.
link not a link generated trace links ordered by likelihood high confidence docit links merged with lower confidence vsm links and pushed to the top of the list.
human evaluates docit generated links.
ontology and link creation heuristics updated accordingly.
human vets and uses the generated links retrieve rules for constructing action units retrieve relationships between concepts and link creation rules.
target artifact target artifact figure the docit process showing its primary components and execution context.
trace link should be created.
current term based trace retrieval algorithms are incapable of understanding these concepts and would therefore be unlikely to precisely create the corresponding link .
on the other hand most human domain experts performing the tracing task manually would be able to look beyond the mismatch of terms reason about the concepts in the domain and correctly establish a trace link between a source and target artifact.
approaches that attempt to solve this problem through the use of ontologies alone fail to take into consideration speci c roles played by di erent concepts .
they therefore do not handle the nuances of why two artifacts with similar terms or even terms related through the ontology should or should not be linked.
approaches that rely purely on ontology therefore may improve recall but still fail to adequately address the precision problem .
.
docit solution our work delivers a domain contextualized intelligent traceability docit system capable of performing humanlike reasoning for the highly focused area of communication and control within a transportation domain.
while there are non trivial costs involved in creating a docit system for even a single regulatory domain this initial outlay must be balanced against the far greater costs of establishing a su cient set of trace links to demonstrate compliance and safety for such systems.
our experiences of working in this domain have shown that traceability costs for a single project can easily exceed million us .
fortunately as regulations apply across multiple projects the docit knowledge base can be reused in projects that need to comply to the same regulatory codes.
.
overview the remainder of the paper is laid out as follows.
sections and provide an overview of docit and the targeted domain.
sections and describe action units link heuristics and the knowledge base respectively.
section describes the process we used for constructing the initial knowledge base and the way we implemented docit in conjunction with a term based approach.
section describes a series of experiments we conducted to evaluate docit.
finally section discusses threats to validity section presents related work and section summarizes our ndings and lays out directions for future work.
.
docit the various elements of docit are depicted in figure .
docit takes as input a source artifact e.g.
a regulatory code and a set of target artifacts e.g.
system level requirements to be traced.
trace links are built around action units extracted from source and target artifacts .
link heuristics de ne the conditions under which the properties of two action units determine that a link should be created between their associated source and target artifacts .
both the action unit extraction process and the application of link heuristics are supported by a domain speci c ontology .
while docit tends to deliver more precise trace links than term based algorithms it depends on a relatively complete and correct set of action unit de nitions action unit extraction rules link heuristics and supporting ontology.
we refer to these collectively as the docit knowledge base from now on.
given that we cannot guarantee completeness of this knowledge base especially when tracing new datasets we deploy docit within the safety net of the popular term based vector space model vsm .
by merging docit generated links with term based generated ones we push the more precise docit links towards the top of the merged list of candidate links.
furthermore we leverage the vsm similarity scores to create an ordered ranking of docit links .
finally we incorporate human feedback into our process.
this facilitates ongoing re nements in the docit knowledge base and assigns the human analyst the nal task of vetting the generated trace links .
the work we present in this paper builds on our previous proof of concept .
however our earlier work relied upon a human analyst to manually map artifacts onto a simple set of seven trace creation heuristics and utilized a rudimentary ontology.
in contrast the work in this paper makes very signi cant advances in moving toward our longer range goal of complete automation.
knowledge is now represented in a formal ontology language.
the novel concept of action units and their associated extraction rules are introduced allowing us to automatically parse and analyze non trivial industrial requirements.
furthermore the previous high level link heuristics are discarded and replaced with heuristics centered around the new notion of action units.
given an underlying knowledge base these link heuristics allow us to automate the task of generating a relatively precise set of trace links.
.
transportation domain the purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that a docit solution can be used e ectively in a complex regulated domain.
we focus our e orts on the communication and control aspects of the transportation domain for several reasons.
first it represents a regulated safety critical industry for which traceability is required.
second its projects tend to grow very large with tens of thousands of trace links and therefore the tracing task can be particularly costly and arduous.
finally we have access to two large industrial datasets from our collaborators.
due to the proprietary nature of the project we are not able to disclose its exact domain and therefore all of our examples in this paper have been disguised under the domain of communication and control for the driver optional highway system dohs .
we established a one to one mapping between terms in our domain and terms in the dohs.
the dohs provides environmental controls used by both manned and unmanned vehicles to propose routing to prevent vehicles from entering accident zones and to provide a wide range of directives.
the dataset includes system requirement speci cation artifacts srs system design description artifacts sdd and subsystem requirement speci cation artifacts ssrs .
our industrial collaborators provided two validated trace matrices which included trace links from srs to sdd and trace links from ssrs to sdd.
.
action units the action unit represents a novel and fundamental building block of our approach.
in this section we explain what an action unit is how it is de ned and nally how it is instantiated through a natural language extraction process.
.
action unit definition each action unit is de ned in terms of a verb syntactic group a set of properties and a set of mapping rules which identify a part of speech to be mapped to each property.
a verb syntactic group represents a group of verbs which belong together because they tend to be used in similar ways.
for example the verbs transmit broadcast indicate upload and deliver do not mean exactly the same thing but they do exhibit the same syntactical usage pattern.
as a result they also exhibit similar part of speech dependencies.
for example we can say that when one of these verbs is found in a sentence the recipient of the action is normally identi ed as the noun phrase which is the object of the preposition to associated with the verb.
syntactic group transmit upload convey forward grant display report broadcast indicate properties action unit definition properties the wayside segment shall transmit wayside status messages wsms to the automobile segment.
semantic group transmissive instance of an action unit action transmit agent theme recipient subject nsubj passive agent agent direct object dobj passive subject nsubjpass prepositional object prep to agent theme recipient wayside segment wayside status message automobile segment figure a de nition of an action unit showing sample properties and an example instantiationthe action unit s properties are then de ned in terms of thematic roles which represent a standard set of roles that a noun phrase can play with respect to a verb.
while linguistic theories have recognized over di erent types of thematic roles we observed six of them in the data set from which the knowledge base was constructed.
these are agent the initiator of some action capable of acting with volition as in the dohs system shall send... theme the entity which is moved by an action as in ...shall send a message recipient the object which receives or gains something as a result of the action as in ...send a message to a subsystem instrument the object with which or by which the action is performed as in ...send a message through an interface location the place in which the action is completed as in ...send a message within the limits initial location the place in which the action is initiated as in ...leave the area .
this role was created to account for sentences containing two locations as in transition from a to b .
the work in this paper is based on these six observed roles however docit algorithms are extensible to accommodate additional roles as needed.
finally the action unit de nition provides a set of mapping rules which describe the part of speech dependencies that must be mapped to each property.
di erent de nitions use various combinations of properties and dependencies.
for example in figure an action unit de nition is given for a syntactic group related to the set of actions transmit upload convey etc.
the de nition prescribes the need to identify an agent theme and recipient and speci es that these roles are played by the subject nsubj direct object dobj and prepositional object of to prep to respectively.
the same gure shows an instantiated action unit populated through parsing the artifact the wayside segment shall transmit wayside status messages wsms to the automobile segment.
the action transmit was recognized as a member of the transmissive semantic group and the noun phrases wayside segment wayside status message and automobile segment were mapped to the agent theme and recipient properties respectively.
we discuss the purpose of the semantic group in the next section.
.
instantiated action units an action unit needs to be identi ed and extracted automatically from the text in an artifact.
the challenging aspect of this task is that artifacts such as requirements and regulatory codes are written in natural language often describe multiple features carry extraneous information such as rationales de nitions and other forms of description often describe complex constraints and conditions and are not always grammatically well formed.
action unit extraction is a natural language processing nlp task.
we used the stanford parser for this task because its unlexicalized pcfg parser can achieve relatively accurate parsing results with fast processing speed.
we now provide an overview of the parsing process.
.
.
preprocessing the text from the artifact is rst preprocessed by replacing terms such as with or and removing super u757figure parsed tree of sample artifact table dependencies extracted from the parse tree det segment the nn messages status nn segment wayside dobj transmit messages nsubj transmit segment det segment the aux transmit shall nn segment automobile root root transmit prep to transmit segment nn messages wayside ous characters such as which confuse the parsing process.
in addition unhelpful frequently occurring parts of the sentence such as provide for were removed through a string pattern matching process.
such patterns have been added to our knowledge base.
.
.
parse tree the stanford parser was used to produce a pos part ofspeech tree as illustrated in figure .
each node is labeled with a pos tag.
we limited our approach to support only noun phrases np as they have been shown to play the most crucial role in the tracing process .
nps such as all critical data can be identi ed by extracting nodes labeled npin the parsed tree.
phrases which have similar meanings but di erent structures such as signal state and state of signal are transformed into a standard form using tree pattern analysis and matching techniques.
overall we processed basic noun phrases lists of noun phrases and also prepositional phrases verb phrases and clauses found within a noun phrase.
from this tree the stanford parser generated a dependency set as depicted in table which provides the information needed to automatically map pos to the properties de ned in each applicable action unit de nition.
thus a dependency such as nsubj transmit segment relates automobile segment as the subject of transmit.
in general the np in the nsubj dependency with the verb transmit along with any other verb in its syntactic group should be considered the agent of the verb.
from the dependency set we may then extract an instance of the action unit from an artifact in an automated fashion as each relevant dependency links a verb to nouns that get mapped onto action unit properties.
.
.
semantic verb groups there is one nal step in the action unit instantiation process.
while properties and their mappings are driven by the usage patterns of the verb the link creation process is driven by their semantics .
the nal step in the process therefore involves looking up the semantic group of the verb.
our current knowledge base includes distinct semanticgroups such as a rmative calculative evasive and receptive.
while standard semantic groupings do exist i.e.
in wordnet they tend to focus on quite commonly used verbs and do not include many of the verbs found in our transportation domain.
furthermore in many cases no appropriate grouping exists in which a new verb can be added.
we therefore developed our own semantic groupings following the process described in section .
of this paper.
the end result of the extraction process is that each artifact is represented by one or more instantiated action units.
it is these action units which are then used in the trace link generation process.
.
link heuristics trace links are created by comparing two action units extracted from a source and target artifact respectively.
currently a trace link is established between the source and target artifact whenever a relationship is established between a pair of their action units.
however in future implementations we plan to take all pairs of action units for a source and target artifact into account simultaneously in order to reason more e ectively about conditions and constraints.
.
link heuristic definition each link heuristic provides a set of guidelines for evaluating whether two action units of speci ed semantic groups should be linked or not.
for this reason most heuristics are named according to a semantic pair for example motivepermissive transmissive administrative or transmissive receptive.
the transmissive receptive heuristic can only be applied when one action unit is of type transmissive and the other is of type receptive and so on.
currently the only exception is the basic heuristic which can be applied whenever two action units share the same semantic group.
link heuristics also specify rules for comparing the action unit properties.
for example a heuristic might specify a rule that the themes of two action units must be the same or that the agent of one action unit must match the recipient of another.
such matches can be either exact orhierarchical.
an exact match means that two elements are the same or equivalent while a hierarchical match means that two elements are related through the is a or compositional hierarchy of the ontology.
for example a wayside interface unit is part of the wayside segment .
such hierarchical and compositional relationships are captured in the domain ontology which we describe in section .
.
sample link heuristics we illustrate our approach with three di erent link heuristics.
each is de ned in terms of its semantic groups as well as the rules by which the elements must match where an element is de ned as the terms assigned to a property in the action unit.
for example wiu might be the element assigned to a theme property.
there are currently four types of matching criteria mc de ned as follows for a pair of elements mc if both elements are present then they must match exact or hierarchical .
however if one or both of the elements are missing the mc can be ignored.
mc if one element is present the other must be present too and must match exact or hierarchical .
if neither element is present the mc can be ignored.
mc both elements must be present and must match exact or hierarchical .
mc both elements must be present and must match exactly.
.
.
basic link the basic heuristic is applicable when the semantic group in both action units are the same.
a link is established if and only if agents recipients and instruments are matched at mc level and themes andlocations are matched at mc level .
we provide the following illustrative example a1 any critical failure during the disengaged mode will force the obm to enter the failed mode.
action enter semantic group motive themes obm location fail mode a2 the vehicleguard doh system shall have a failed mode where the automobile segment transitions if a vital hardware or software failure is detected.
action transition semantic group motive themes automobile segment location fail mode in this case all the criteria for the heuristic are met.
both action units belong to the motive semantic group.
the obm i.e.
onboard module is part of the automobile segment therefore the themes match at the hierarchical level.
finally the two locations exhibit an exact match.
therefore a trace link is established.
.
.
transmissive receptive this heuristic applies when the semantic group in one action unit is transmissive and the other is receptive.
a link is established if and only if agents recipients instruments and locations match at mc level and themes match at mc level .
we provide the following example.
a1 the obm shall support reception and decomposition of wayside status messages wsm .
action reception semantic group receptive recipients obm themes wayside status message a2 the wayside segment shall transmit information to the automobile segment in the form of wayside status messages wsms .
action transmit semanticgroups transmissive agents wayside segment recipients automobile segment themes wayside status message in this case the semantic groups are transmissive andreceptiveand so the heuristic is applicable.
checking the property pairs we see that agents instruments and locations are missing and therefore ignored.
furthermore the recipients property is present in both cases and obm stands for onboard module which is a part of the automobile segment and therefore hierarchically linked through the ontology.
fi nally both action units contain the same theme of wayside status message.
as a result a link is created.
.
.
motive permissive this heuristic applies when the semantic group in one action unit is motive and the other is permissive .
a link is established if and only if locations match at mc level and themes match at mc level .
we illustrate this with a nal example.
a1 the cut out mode is entered automatically from the self test mode.
action enter semanticgroups motive location cut out mode initiallocation self test mode a2 the vehicleguard doh system shall be forced into cut out mode by selecting the cut out mode setting on the sealed mode switch on the obm unit.
action force semanticgroups permissive themes vehicleguard doh system location cut out mode in this example the semantic groups are motive andpermissive location properties are an exact match and as the theme property is present on only one side it is ignored.
a link is therefore created.
our current knowledge base includes link heuristics each of which is summarized in figure .
.
ontology both the action units and link heuristics are supported by an underlying ontology.
without the ontology we would be unable to understand conceptual relationships between di erent terms and would therefore be constrained by the same problems as more basic term matching approaches.
a knowledge base is an information repository used to collect organize and search data .
many kbs are built in a manner that supports automated deductive reasoning.
such kbs are composed of a set of data that includes basic terms that de ne the vocabulary of the domain and a set of sentences that describe the relationships between those terms.
the data is often represented in the form of an ontology in which knowledge is constructed using logical operators such as and and or as well as implication and negation operators to build complex ideas from more primitive concepts .
our kb performs two primary functions for tracing purposes using the knowledge in the kb to compare two artifacts and mapping elements of software artifacts to concepts in the ontology.
we also store syntactic group information and semantic group information in the knowledge base so that given a verb we can determine which groups it belongs to.
the docit kb was created using owl web ontology language a formally de ned ontology language developed by w3c for the semantic web .
owl is capable of representing complex knowledge about things groups of things and relationships between those things.
owl ontologies provide classes properties individuals and data values all 759semantic groups agent theme recipient instrument location init loc.
agent1 recip.
recip.
agent2 instrum.
theme2 init loc.
loc.
loc.
theme2 agent1 theme2 basic groups must match affirmative inclusive calculative inclusive descriptive transmissive enforcive calculative enforcive calculative enforcive enforcive enforcive receptive enforcive regulative enforcive regulative inceptive inceptive inceptive receptive inceptive transgressive inceptive transgressive inspective respective motive motive necessitative receptive permissive motive permissive permissive preservative inceptive preservative preservative receptive receptive receptive transmissive receptive transmissive regulative inclusive regulative transmissive transgressive motive transgressive permissive transmissive administrative transmissive enforcive transmissive inceptive transmissive permissive transmissive transmissive if both elements are present they must match exact or hierarchical .
if one element is present the other must also be match exact or hier.
both elements must be present and must match exact or hierarchical both elements must be present and must exhibit an exact match.
figure trace link heuristics speci ed in terms of semantic pairs and required matches.
of which are stored as semantic web documents.
we created our initial kb using prot eg e an open source ontology editor and saved it in an owl .owl format for use during the tracing process.
.
knowledge structure the kb contains general concepts which are expected to be reusable across multiple domains and also domainspeci c knowledge which is designed solely for use in a speci c regulatory domain e.g.
communications and control for the transportation sector of our case study.
the general section of our kb includes facts about verbs and verbs used as nouns such as reception orintegration .
these are represented as individual elements in the ontology.
every identi ed verb belongs to one or more semantic groups representing its functionality.
for example the verb enter is used in two functionally distinct ways across the set of observed artifacts rst as in the system should enter the failure mode when a vital error occurs the motivegroup and second as in the driver should be able to enter the current date into the system from the hmi the transmissive group .
each verb is also categorized under one or more syntactic groups based on how it interacts with the surrounding noun phrases.
reexamining the previous example we see that thefailure mode is a location that the system should enter while the current date is something the driver should enter which gets received by the system .
despite having similar syntactic distributions the arguments of enter in each case play di erent roles in determining the main function contained in each sentence.
the second part of the ontology describes domain speci c taxonomic relations between objects such as names of systems subsystems operating modes and message types used by components of the system.
.
querying the kb for an ontology to be useful it needs to provide a mechanism for supporting queries and returning relevant information.
the docit ontology therefore provides a query function which can accept either a single term or a noun phrase and return a set of related concepts as well as a set of relations.
for example if we issue a simple query for the term update the kb returns the information that update is an action and belongs to the regulative semantic group and syntactic group as syntactic groups are labeled by id only .
similarly a query issued for the noun phrase power on self test returns a rich set of hierarchically related terms among other things specifying that the power on self test is a kind of relay test which in turn is a kind of self diagnostic test.
this information is critical for enabling traceability between artifacts which may use di erent terms that are related through a hierarchy of concepts.
.
docit in practice deploying docit required construction of the knowledge base and development of a functioning prototype.
.
building a knowledge base our current version of docit requires the presence of a knowledge base composed of action units link heuristics and a domain ontology.
in this section we describe the systematic approach we followed to build the knowledge base needed to support automated trace link generation in our domain of study.
we worked closely with a domain expert from our collaborating industry to ensure that our reasoning and the subsequent results were well founded.
articulating these steps is an important precursor towards complete automation of ontology building for tracing in a given software engineering domain.
step .
create syntactic and semantic groups the stanford parser was used to identify verbs and verbs represented as nouns.
for each identi ed verb we manually checked whether an appropriate syntactic group and semantic group existed.
to identify relevant syntactic groups we asked is there an existing syntactic group which contains verbs conveying similar behavior?
to identify relevant semantic groups we asked is there an existing semantic group which contains verbs conveying similar meaning?
if not we created a new syntactic and or semantic action group.
step .
create action unit construction rules for each new syntactic group we created a set of action unit construction rules.
these rules specify the relevant properties i.e.
thematic roles such as location agent etc.
and the appropriate dependent pos which should if present be associated with the property.
let us assume that no existing syntactic group exists for the verb send.
first we run the stanford parser to identify verbs and their dependencies.
we then inject a human reasoning step.
for example we might determine that the action send requires a direct object i.e.
send what?
furthermore this direct object is generally an entity that is moved by the action.
we therefore add theme as a property to the action unit and specify that the direct object serves this role.
a similar process is used to add other relevant properties and their associated parts of speech.
step .
create link heuristics link heuristics are built around pairs of semantic groups.
the occurrence of a previously unseen pair of semantic groups will trigger the need for a new link heuristic to be created through analyzing the likely thought process of a human analyst.
first we determine the rationale for the link and secondly we formulate this in terms of the thematic roles.
we frequently engaged our industrial collaborator in this process so that he could con rm or refute our rationales for each link.
it is worth noting that our current implementation takes a rather greedy approach to constructing the various rules heuristics and concepts.
each of these elements is added to the knowledge base if it bene ts the currently evaluated artifact and or trace link.
while we considered implementing a do no harm policy i.e.
not adding new information if it harmed previous trace links we rejected this idea in favor of a more global optimization to be explored in future work.
.
integration with term based approach as previously explained we implemented docit in conjunction with the vector space model vsm .
.
.
vector space model the vsm algorithm computes similarity between two documents.
each query and each document is represented as a term vector de ned in the space of all terms found in the set of queries t t1 t2 t n. more formally a document dis represented as a vector d w d w2 d w n d where wi drepresents the term weight associated with term ifor document d. a query is similarly represented as q w1 q w2 q w n q .
each term tis assigned a weight using a standard weighting scheme known as tf id f where tf represents the term frequency and id fthe inverse document frequency.
term frequency with respect to document dis often computed as tf ti d freq ti d jdj where freq ti d is the frequency of the term in the document and jdjis the length of the document.
inverse document frequency id f is usually computed as id fti log2 n n i where nis the total number of documents in the traceable collection and ni is the number of documents in which term tioccurs.
the individual term weight for term iin document dis then computed as wid tf ti d id fti.
a similarity score sim d q is computed between document dand query qas follows sim d q pn i 1wi dwi q ppn i 1wi d ppn i 1wi q any query document pair receiving a similarity score over a threshold value is treated as a candidate traceability link.
.
.
merging results to use vsm in conjunction with docit the docit approach is rst applied to the source and target artifacts to produce a list of candidate links referred to from now on as candidate docit links.
vsm is then applied to the same source and target artifacts to produce a ranked list of candidate vsm links.docit tends to produce fewer but more accurate links than vsm.
therefore a merged list of candidate links is created by placing docit links at the top of the list ordered according to their vsm rankings and then adding all remaining vsm links in their original order to the bottom of the merged list.
.
.
learning new facts and rules the process of discovering and specifying link heuristics is ongoing and therefore any knowledge base needs the ability to grow and expand over time as new information acronyms or sentence structures are seen for the rst time.
we therefore developed a gui tool which incrementally displays links which were missed by docit but ranked highly by vsm.
these links provide an ideal opportunity for eliciting knowledge from the domain expert who is performing the tracing task.
the source and target artifacts of the link are parsed and action units are displayed.
the tool then provides a gui to help the user to construct new link heuristics.
.
ev aluation to evaluate docit s ability to support trace link generation we designed and executed four di erent experiments labeled e1 to e4.
the rst evaluated docit s ability to correctly identify and retrieve action units from both the srs and sdd datasets.
the second and third experiments evaluated docit s ability to generate trace links correctly with varying degrees of support from the knowledge base and nally the fourth one analyzed the e cacy of the link heuristics.
an alpha level of .
was used for all statistical tests.
.
e1 action unit extraction our docit solution is intended to work in complex software systems with real requirements.
the rst experiment was therefore designed to address the research question rq can docit extract action units correctly and consistently from complex industrial requirements?
correct parser error complex sentence missing verbaction units per category sdd srs figure analysis of generated action units .
.
experimental design to answer this question we used docit to extract action units from randomly selected srs artifacts and randomly selected sdd artifacts.
each action unit was then evaluated by two researchers in our team.
action units that were correctly extracted according to the de nitions in the action unit were classi ed as correctly parsed .
in addition when the mapping was not successful we classi ed the failure causes into the following three categories parser errors i.e.
the parser generated an incorrect tree structure or incorrectly assigned part of speech tags and as a result the retrieved action unit was incorrect convoluted sentence i.e.
the sentence was very confusing and produced multiple action units.
as a result each action unit was too sparse to support e ective link creation.
an example of a convoluted sentence is the system should provide the functionality by which the subsystem under its control can perform..... missing verb i.e.
a verb identi ed by the parser cannot be found in the set of verb syntactic groups.
.
.
results and analysis results are reported in figure .
the sdd sample produced action units while the srs dataset produced re ecting the fact that sdd artifacts in this dataset tend to contain longer more complex descriptions than srs ones.
of the sdd action units were correct failed due to parser errors due to convoluted sentences and due to incomplete verb knowledge in the knowledge base.
of the srs action units were correct and the single failure was due to a parser error.
action units were constructed for each identi ed verb and no missing ones were observed.
these results show that docit was able to correctly extract .
of the action units from sdd and from srs.
the main cause of failure in both cases was parser errors which can be addressed in future work through adding additional pattern matching rules to the knowledge base.
.
e2 when the kb is relatively complete the second experiment evaluated docit s ability to generate trace links when the knowledge base was customized for the dataset.
this represents an ideal scenario in which the knowledge base provides relatively complete coverage of the concepts in a dataset.
we addressed the research question rq given a relatively complete knowledge base can docit return an accurate set of trace links?
.
.
metrics results were evaluated using three standard metrics.
recall measures the fraction of relevant links that are retrieved while precision measures the fraction of retrieved links that are relevant.
a third metric mean average precision map measures the extent to which correct lists are returned at the top of a ranked list.
map requires an ordered ranking of the links and so is only reported for results that include vsm.
as our implementation of map examines all correct links it achieves recall of .
.
the use of map as a traceability measure has been advocated in numerous papers .
first the average precision ap of each correct link is computed as follows ap pn r precision r isrelevant r jrelevantdocuments j e2 srs1 sdd e3 srs2 sdd e3 ssrs sdd vsm only .
.
.
vsm docit .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.0mean average precision figure map by query and link for each of the three datasets in experiments and .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1recall precision vsm only vsm docitwhen using vsm docit the docit alone recall of .
serves as a lower bound on achievable recall.
figure precision versus recall for experiment where ris the rank of the target artifact in an ordered list of links isrelevant is a binary function assigned if the link is relevant i.e.
marked as correct in the reference set and otherwise p r is the precision computed after truncating the list immediately below that ranked position and nis the total number of documents.
we compute map scores at recall values of .
across all queries as follows map recall pq q 1ap q q where qis a single query and qis the total number of queries.
please note that all subsequent