magic fuzzer scalable deadlock detection for large scale applications yan cai department of computer science city university of hong kong tat chee avenue hong kong yancai2 student.cityu.edu.hk w.k.
chan department of computer science city university of hong kong tat chee avenue hong kong wkchan cs.cityu.edu.hk abstract we present magicfuzzer a novel dynamic deadlock detectio n technique.
unlike existing techniques to locate potential deadlock cycles from an execution it iteratively prunes lock dependencies that each has no incoming or outgoing edge.
combining with a novel thread specific strategy it dramatically shrinks the size of lock dependency set for cycle detection improving the efficiency and scalability of such a detection significantly.
in the real deadlock confirmation phase it uses a new strategy to actively schedule threads of an execution against the whole set of potential deadlock cycles.
we have implemented a prototype and evaluated it on large scale c c programs.
the experimental results confirm that our technique is significantly more effective and efficient than existing techniques .
keywords deadlock dete ction multithreaded programs.
i. introduction a multithreaded c c java program may use locks to coordinate its threads.
however some improper uses of locks in the code may lead to concurrency bugs .
deadlocks are severe problems that lead multithreaded programs or their components to fail to make further progress if deadlocks are formed.
in general there are two kinds of deadlocks resources deadlock and communications deadlocks .
a resource deadlock occurs when a set of threads is holding some resources and is waiting for the resources which have already been held by the threads in the same set.
a communication deadl ock occurs when one or more threads wait for some messages signals from other threads which are paused and unable to send the required messages signals or have already sent the messages signals before a waiting thread starts to wait for the message s signa ls.
in this paper we focus on resource deadlocks where locks are resources.
potential deadlocks can be detected via static analysis model checking dynamic analysis runtime monitoring or their integration .
analy ses based on lock order graphs or their integrations with the use of the happens before relation have been explored .
methods to confirm whether a potential deadlock is real and to avoid or heal deadlocks have been studied.
it has been well discussed in the above mentioned