a qualitative study on user guidance capabilities in product configuration tools rick rabiser christian doppler lab for ase johannes kepler university linz austria rabiser ase.jku.atpaul gr nbacher systems eng.
and automation johannes kepler university linz austria paul.gruenbacher jku.atmartin lehofer siemens vai metals technologies linz austria martin.lehofer siemens.com abstract software systems are nowadays often configured by sales people domain experts or even customers instead of engineers.
configuration tools communicate the systems variability to these end users and provide guidance for selecting and customizing the available features.
however even if a configuration tool creates technically correct systems addressing the specific needs of business oriented users remains challenging.
we analyze existing configuration tools to identify key capabilities for guiding end users and discuss thesecapabilitiesusingthecognitivedimensionsofnotations framework.
we present an implementation of the capabilitiesinourconfigurationtooldoplercw.weperformeda qualitative investigation on the usefulness of the tool s capabilities for user guidance in product configuration by involving nine business oriented experts of two industry partners from the domain of industrial automation.
we present key results and derive general implications for tool developers.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
tools general terms design human factors keywords configuration tools end user guidance qualitative study cognitive dimensions of notations.
.
introduction product configuration tools allow end users like sales people project managers or customers to tailor a product to business requirements or market needs by selecting and customizing product features.
a frequent application area of these tools are software product lines which leverage permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
ase september essen germany copyright acm ... .
.extensive reuse to improve quality and development productivity .
during product derivation systems are configured by exploiting the variability of the product line pl .
the scale and complexity of pls makes the configuration process challenging and tedious .
numerous tools have thus been proposed to support product configuration e.g.
.
typically these tools guide end users by offering configuration choices presented in tables or trees.
surprisingly despite their importance there is still a lack of empirical data regarding the usefulness of configuration tools for end users in real world settings.
a recently published survey on configuration challenges confirms the need for further empirical research.
usefulness regards a tool s utility whether its functionality allows to do what is needed and its usability how well users can exploit the offered functionality .
assessing usefulness requires involving users and studying their behavior and opinions thus qualitative research methods are recommended .
based on an analysis of requirements for supporting product derivation in pls we have been developing the dopler configurationwizard cw a configuration toolwithaspecialfocusonbusiness orientedendusers.
earlier publications on the dopler tools described its underlying approaches to variability modeling and role based derivation .
in this paper we emphasize dopler cw s capabilities for guiding end users during product configuration.
for the currently ongoing industrial rollout a thorough refactoring of the research prototype was performed including the development of new features and usability improvements.
to this end no empirical results exist on the usefulness of configuration tools capabilities for guiding users in general and on the dopler cw in particular.
we thus carried out a study of the dopler cw involving nine experts from management sales marketing and product lifecycle management of two industry partners to assess the tools user guidance capabilities.
we investigated two research questions regarding the perspective of industrial end users rq1 addresses the usability of user guidance capabilities in configuration tools.
rq2 addresses the utilityof these capabilities in configuration tools for deriving products from a pl.
the involved subjects used the dopler cw to perform configuration tasks.
their actions were recorded and we used think aloud protocols to understand the rationale behind their actions.
the experts completed a usability questionnaire and we performed structured interviews to understand the utility of the tool for deriving products.permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
ase september essen germany copyright acm ... .
the contributions of this paper are the identification of key configuration tool capabilities for guiding users based on a review of existing literature and tools together with a discussion of these capabilities using the cognitive dimensions of notations a framework from the area of humancomputer interaction hci an implementation of the capabilities in the dopler cw and a thorough analysis of the usefulness of the user guidance capabilities as perceived by industrial end users to derive general implications for tool developers.
.
configuration tools and their user guidance capabilities product configuration tools go beyond basic installation wizards and user preference dialogues.
typically they use an enactable definition of the configuration choices and provide a textual or graphical representation of these choices together with guidance for end users in configuration.
enactable definitions such as models or configuration languages define a set of choices and their dependencies for obtaining configuration decisions from end users.
for instance choicescanbeoptional alternative optionalvariant and variant.
a choice can also mean to just set a particular textornumbervalue.
variabilitymodels orconfiguration languages such as kconfig are frequently used for that purpose.
product configurator tools developed in the artificial intelligence ai community work on top of knowledge bases to support configuration .
representations provided by configuration tools include textual formats such as lists or tables and graphical representations such as trees or graphs.
due to the often high number of configuration options with many dependencies textual formats like a hierarchically structured list of choices are often used in tools.
numerous commercial and academic configuration tools have been developed and it would be beyond the scope of this paper to discuss them all.
we briefly present examples of feature oriented knowledge based and workflow oriented product configuration tools and their basic features.
.
product configuration tools feature oriented tools.
several tools developed in the software product line community present the configuration options to users in a feature tree.
for instance the commercial tool pure variants supports textual and graphical representations and provides guidance for users by automatically selecting or deselecting related features after making a choice.
the commercial tool gears provides a graphical feature tree allowing selections similar to pure variants.
there exist also several academic tools of different maturity which present feature choices to users in tree form.
examples are splot thekumbangconfigurator visit fc covamof or the featureide .
in feature oriented configuration tools user guidance is not a primary focus users can start configuring by selecting arbitrary nodes of the tree.
knowledge based tools.
tools emphasizing end user support have also been developed in the ai community.
while pltoolsexplicitlydescribevariabilityusingfeaturesordecisions ai product configurators describe choices using constraints .
user guidance is essential in web front ends and wizards of such configurators.
typical use cases in clude sales or installation support.
for instance the configworks advisor suite allows users to quickly develop end user configurator applications.
configit offers a product modeler for defining product properties and the configit runtime that can be used in web front ends www.
configit software.com .
the enterprise business application sap also provides configurators to adapt sap r3 to the users needs.
other examples are the ilog configurator and salesplus .
workflow oriented tools.
suchtoolsguideusersinproduct configuration by presenting variability choices in a certain order.
for example the dopler cw presents questions in tabular form where the questions in the table can be answered row by row .
abbasi et al.
present an approach for feature based configuration workflows .
the c2o configurator guides users by presenting questions in a particular order that is rearranged automatically to minimize user input and configuration conflicts.
quaestio also guides users through a set of questions.
it displays separate lists of valid and answered questions and provides an inspector showing guidelines in natural language and dependencies to other questions.
the tool vresolve in the vmanage tool suite visualizes questions as a tree that can be traversed from top to bottom.
.
user guidance capabilities the usability of interactive tools relies on tailoring them tospecificneedsofusersandtheirtasks .
thementioned tools provide diverse capabilities to guide end users in product configuration.
while many of these capabilities are wellknown in hci their usefulness for different product configuration tasks as well as their dependencies are not well understood.
the cognitive dimensions of notations framework helps to evaluate and characterize user guidance capabilities and provides a vocabulary for discussing tradeoffs.
characterizing product configuration tools in terms of activities defined in the cd framework shows that different dimensions are relevant.
configuration tools are about searching i.e.
seeking for a specific configuration option exploratory understanding i.e.
discovering the configuration options available in the decision space modification i.e.
setting configuration options when making decisions as well as incrementation i.e.
adding annotations and comments to configuration options.
we defined key tool capabilities for user guidance based on our analysis of configuration tools in a systematic literature review .
we used the available technical documentation usermanuals publications andpresentationstoidentifythe capabilities.
we also installed and tested the tools when availableandusedscreencastsandtutorialsinothercasesto get a more complete picture.
we discussed the resulting list of capabilities and grouped similar or closely related items.
finally we named each group of similar or closely related capabilities leading to eight capabilities.
we assessed each capability using the cognitive dimensions defined in the cd framework.
wecannotclaimcompleteness however thelist providesgoodcoverageofuserguidancefeaturesinacademic and commercial product configuration tools.
we describe each capability and give examples from the tools.
a many configuration tools support hiding and showing configuration options depending on the stage of the configuration.
when starting configuration only the initially relevant options are selectable while others remain disabled111or hidden.
this feature reduces complexity by focusing the user on options relevant at a certain stage.
depending on the choices other options become modifiable.
for example it does not make sense to ask a user about details of a feature unless it has been selected for a product.
this capability is related with cd dimension visibility the ability of a system to view components easily when browsing through and searching for specific configuration options.
workfloworiented tools such as the c2o configurator or vresolve and commercial knowledge based tools like configit support this capability.
feature oriented configuration tools often disable some options based on constraints and dependencies however they typically still show the full feature tree.
hiding options is only possible by manually applying filters but not done automatically to guide users.
b providing views and filters on configuration options helpstokeepthetaskofconfiguringacomplexproductmanageable.
views can be cross cutting and allow structuring the decision space during configuration.
filters can be applied within views and across views to show only configuration options fulfilling a particular criterion e.g.
containing a particular keyword .
obviously this capability also has to do with the cd dimension visibility.
however the dimensionhidden dependencies is equally relevant as links between configurationoptionsmaynotbevisibleduetoviewsandfilters.
most configuration tools provide basic means to group and or filter the presented configuration options while only particular tools such as pure variants or the sap r3 configurator allow displaying different views.
c branching and navigation support allows users to quickly work their way through a large number of configuration options.
tools automatically activate the next relevant option or view for example as soon as all options in a view have been selected or deselected.
this capability also addresses hidden dependencies as users are guided to streamline navigating along diverse dependencies.
while most tools allow tracking progress by showing the remaining configuration options only few tools actively assist the user navigating through the configuration space.
all workfloworiented tools provide some kind of navigation support.
for instance vresolve traverses a tree of options breadthfirst or depth first.
also the c2o configurator leads the user to the next relevant question after making a decision.
d configuration tools should give end users freedom in navigation i.e.
to select an arbitrary configuration option or view at any time to avoid the straitjacket feeling well known from many wizards enforcing strict guidance.
this capability needs to work well with capabilities a and c. for instance when a user selects an arbitrary option branching and navigation should continue from the selected option.
for this capability the cd dimension premature commitment comes into play as it allows users to overrule constraints regarding the order of configuration options.
feature oriented product configuration tools generally provide freedom in navigation.
knowledge based tools often enforce a particular order and do not allow arbitrary selection except for returningtopreviouslyselectedoptions.
gears forexample allows selecting arbitrary features at any time while ilog assumes the options to be selected step by step.
workfloworiented tools define an order for selecting options but typically still allow users to navigate freely.
e product configuration tools typically perform on thefly validity checks of user choices.
for instance if only num bers in a certain range are allowed for a numerical choice theusershouldbeinformedwhenprovidinganinputoutside this range.
tools should at least prevent invalid input but it is generally desirable to also get explanations and help for resolving the problem.
the cd dimension error proneness is relevantinthiscasetoprotecttheuserfrommistakes.
commercial tools like pure variants and configit strictly check all inputs and guide users in resolving problems.
research tools typically put less emphasis on checking the validity of user choices and often only notify users about invalid configurations without revealing the specific problem .
f anotheruserguidancefeatureis resetandundo .
users do not want to start again from scratch after an unintended or wrong selection.
they need features to undo their choices andtokeeptheconfigurationprocessconsistent.
thisallows themtoexploretheeffectsofdifferentchoices.
provisionality the degree of commitment to actions is relevant here as reset and undo are fundamental for this purpose.
all commercial tools we analyzed provide support for reset and undo.
however only some research tools like featureide or covamof provide such support.
g users need immediate feedback to understand the effects of their choices.
for instance when selecting a particular configuration option the effects on the system to be configured should be visible e.g.
the selected or parameterized components .
this capability addresses progressive evaluationas the work to date can be presented at any time.
support for immediate feedback can be manifold.
for example pure variants displays a result model that adapts based on feature selections.
the configworks advisor suite displays the resulting product based on the configuration choices.
many tools provide feedback only after configuration has been completed or if demanded by the user.
h product configuration tools also provide annotations and comments capabilities on configuration options.
this is helpful if the presented options do not adequately reflect the requirements or if the phrasing of the options is confusing.
for example if an option desired by the user is not available she can create a comment to request it.
the cognitive dimension secondary notation is relevant for this capability as users can provide input in their preferred way.
featureoriented tools e.g.
pure variants and kumbang support defining arbitrary feature attributes which can also be used to create annotations and comments.
.
the dopler cw the discussed user guidance capabilities have driven the development of our configuration tool dopler cw.
dopler is a decision oriented pl approach supporting variability modeling and product derivation .
the dopler cw renders variability models as questionnaires that are used by end users in a workflow oriented fashion.
in dopler variability models decisions define configuration options for end users.
important attributes of decisions are the question that is asked to a user during product derivation and the decision type defining how questions can be answered boolean string number or enumeration .
a decision can depend on other decisions hierarchically if it needs to be made before other decisions or logically if the answer affects other decisions.
the decision type can be further constrained with validity conditions.
decisions are related with assets in dopler models answering questions allows selecting and parameterizing components .
based112figure the dopler configurationwizard provides user guidance capabilities for hiding and displaying configuration options a showing options in different views b leading the user through the decision space c while still allowing free navigation d checking the validity of given answers e resetting and un decisions f giving immediate feedback g and creating comments and annotations h .
on answers to questions generators produce arbitrary output e.g.
configuration files documentation or code .
the first version of the dopler cw was developed between and .
the tool has been used in several case studies whichfocusedonitsutilitytogenerateproduct configurations but did not address usability.
for industrial rollout the research prototype was thoroughly refactored in a project carried out by siemens vai including the development of new features tool extensions and usability improvements.
as part of this project we conducted an empirical study of the revised dopler cw to systematically study the tool s usefulness.
the dopler cw supports all user guidance capabilities described above.
figure presents a screenshot of the tool showing configuration options for the siemens ecs pl .
the letters a h in the figure indicate the identified capabilities.
the dopler cw supports hiding and showing configuration options a depending on the stage of the configuration.
the tool only shows the initially relevant questions when starting configuration while others remain disabled or hidden until they become relevant.
the cw also supports views and filters b on configuration options several panes allow switching between different views containing questions.
users work with one view at a time only to ensure focus.
each question can be part of several views and can be assigned to different users with different roles .
questions within one view can further be filtered based on their type and whether they have already been an swered.
the branching and navigation c features of the doplercwguideusersbyautomaticallysettingthefocus to the next available question after the user has answered a question.
further the tool asks the user whether to switch to the next relevant view as soon as all answerable questions in one view have been answered.
the tool also gives the end usersfreedom in navigation d .
users can choose any answerable question and switch views at any time.
when a user selects a question branching and navigation continues from the selected question.
the cw conducts on the fly validity checks e of user choices.
if the user enters a value outside the range defined in the variability model the tool displays a message and prevents the input.
fine grained reset and undo f is also supported.
users can step by step undo and redo their choices.
they can also select an arbitrary question and reset it thereby unassigning the value of the underlying decision variable .
the cw gives immediate feedback g to users answering questions.
the list of pl assets included or parameterized as a result of the user choices can be viewed at any time and it is updated right after entering a choice.
users can also generate configurations or documents to assess progress and to experiment with partial configurations.
additional views can be displayed e.g.
to show business calculations that dynamically adapt based on the user s answers.
the cw also allows creating annotations and comments h on questions.
using this capability users can phrase a change request or a requirement related with decisions.
.
investigating the usefulness of the dopler cw our qualitative study covers the usability and utility of the dopler cw for business oriented end users.
the study involved industrial experts performing productconfiguration of an electrode control system ecs for electric arc furnaces in steel production.
a variability model has been developed as part of our ongoing collaboration with siemens vai and siemens ct. our tool in this case is used to automate the generation of customized sales documents like offers product descriptions or commercial conditions .
westructuredourstudybasedontheguidelinesbyruneson and h st .
.
research questions and approach we followed the research approach outlined in figure to investigate two research questions.
rq1.
what is the usability of user guidance capabilities in product configuration tools?
this research question investigates the well known dimensions of usability and assesses the capabilities as realized in the dopler cw from the perspective of industrial end users.
for instance learnability means that a user can rapidly start getting her work done with the system.
efficiency refers to the property that once a user has learned to use a system she can reach a high level of productivity.
memorability denotes that if users return to the system after some period they can still use it without having to learn everything all over again.
the errors accuracy attribute refers to errors made by users and general tool errors as well as recovery capabilities.
finally subjective satisfaction denotes that the system should be pleasant to use such that users are subjectively satisfied and like the system.
rq2.
what is the utility of user guidance capabilities in product configuration tools for deriving products from a product line?
this research question investigates whether users can successfully derive a product using the dopler cw tool.
for the ecs pl the configuration tasks involve generating sales documents for the configured product that fulfill the expectations of stakeholders .
utility further addresses the perceived opportunities and risks of using the tool in daily business.
.
study system and subjects the study system is a siemens pl of software intensive electrode control systems ecs for electric arc furnaces in steel production .
sales has to provide a large number of offers per year to prospective customers.
when creating these documents sales people need to parse and process the documents manually for each quote.
we used the ecs variability model which allows generating customized ms word documents such as sales offers product descriptions return on investment roi estimations and commercial conditions.
please note that the user interface of the tool does not differ at all if software configuration files would be generated instead.
the ecs variability model comprises decisions with hierarchical dependencies assets representing documents part of dependencies between assets and dependencies between assets and decisions.
nine business oriented stakeholders of our industry partners participated in the study covering diverse roles.
subjects involved a sales manager sm two product owners figure research approach.
po a marketing manager mm a product lifecycle manager plm a team manager tm a developer d a project manager pm and a sales person s .
.
study phases based on the ecs variability model the following steps were performed individually by each subject briefing.
we started each session with a short briefing of the goal and process of the investigation the main capabilities of the tool and the configuration tasks to be performed.
the study system was known to all subjects and was therefore not explained.
preparation of model and tool.
we initialized the logger loaded the ecs variability model in the cw and started the screen cast tool.
product configuration.
participants performed the tasks and were observed by a scribe.
a person from siemens vai assumed the role as the customer while the subjects took over the role of a sales person asking questions about the ecs system.
interviews.
after completion of the tasks we performed a semi structured interview on the utility of the cw.
usability questionnaire.
finally the subjects were asked to complete the usability questionnaire.
.
product configuration tasks participants performed seven tasks task check and review ecs customer details and roi requirements.
configuringecsstartswithcheckingandrevising customer details and roi requirements of customers.
these are part of the model and presented by the cw as questions in two different panes cf.
figure .
task configure ecs basic system and spare parts.
the subjects answered questions displayed in four different panes regarding basic ecs properties power supply integration additional options and spare parts cf.
figure .
task configure hmi.
questions in this pane regard the human machine interface of the ecs.
task capture customer specific requirements.
we additionally asked participants to capture new customer requirements that could not be fulfilled with the available options by creating annotations.
task configure commercial conditions.
participants made choices regarding the commercial conditions needed in contracts in a separate pane cf.
figure .
task view and check calculated values and price list.
we asked users to check the calculated roi and price list displayed in separate panes cf.
figure and .
these114values are re calculated after answering questions to provide immediate feedback in configuration.
checking these values for plausibility helps assessing utility rq2 because utility depends on the correctness of the calculated values.
task generate documents.
the final task was to generate sales documents based on the given answers.
reviewing these documents also helps evaluating the cw s utility.
.
data collection methods and sources we used the following methods and sources think aloud.
weinstructedparticipantstospeakoutloud and explain their actions while working with the tool .
we recorded the statements of participants during all tasks.
observer protocols.
a scribe observed the participants performing the tasks and documented additional observations not explicitly stated by the participants.
tool instrumentation.
we instrumented the cw tool to loguseractionslikequestionsanswered answersreset views selected comments created generator started etc.
the logger also recorded a time stamp of user actions to allow chronological analyses.
screen cast tool.
we used jing to record the screen including all mouse movements while users performed their tasks.
usability questionnaire.
we used four of nielsen s five usability attributes as shown together with the results in table .
we did not consider memorability as users were all novices in using the cw and assessing this attribute would havebeendifficultinthisstudygiventhatsubjectswereonly available for a single session.
regarding learnability participants rated how easy they perceived learning to carry out the given configuration tasks very easy easy hard very hard .
efficiency means the perception of subjects regarding the potential productivity of the tool for their daily work very efficient efficient inefficient very inefficient .
the accuracy attribute according to nielsen addresses the number of errors that occurred no some many too many errors .
too many errors means that users could not finish the assigned task while no errors means that not a single error occurred.
subjective satisfaction regards to what degree users liked the system very good good bad very bad .
we phrased the attributes as questions e.g.
how easy was it to learn performing the given tasks?
semi structured interviews on utility.
after all tasks had been carried out a researcher asked the following four open questions to the participants and documented their answers.
what did you like?
what did you dislike what should be improved?
what are the opportunities when using this tool in daily business?
what are the risks when using this tool in daily business?
.
data analysis and reporting after completing all sessions with the subjects we aggregated the results.
a researcher carefully transcribed the think aloud protocols and observer notes using a coding technique and related all statements to the user guidance capabilities in a spreadsheet cf.
table .
a total of think aloud statements and observations were recorded.
two researchers checked the interpretation of the think aloudanswersandobservernotes.
theygroupedstatements by task and role of the subjects and merged duplicate or highly similar statements.
they also grouped all answers to the questions in the utility interview by roles and againtable transcribed think aloud statements with related roles observations and coded capabilities.
task .
observation transcribed statementroles s observation s capability t1.o1top down approach for answering questions provides good guidancesm po mm plm tm d pm susers sometimes unnecessarily selected next decision although already done by the toolc d g ... ... ... ... ... t4.o2i wonder how to capture the risk?sm this is possible but probably too hidden in current guih tn.om... ... ... ... merged duplicate or closely related answers.
they additionally analyzed the cw logs and created a spreadsheet capturing basic descriptive statistics.
they used the screen casts in case they did not understand the user actions only by looking at a log.
furthermore the authors discussed the reported benefits and drawbacks and the comments made by study participants in the utility interviews to derive implications for configuration tool developers cf.
table .
the auhors also explored trade offs among cd dimensions as suggested by the cd framework .
.
results we present the results with regard to the research questions on usability and utility.
we derive implications for product configuration tool developers as well as trade offs among capabilities based on the cd framework dimensions.
finally we discuss threats to validity.
.
rq1 usability table shows the results of the usability questionnaire.
all subjects were novices with hours of cw usage.
overall the results regarding the usability attributes are quite positive.
four subjects said there were some errors e.g.
the toolthrewanexceptionwhentypingspecialcharactersasan answer to a question or as a filename.
however the results of the tool log and the screen casts show that all subjects were able to complete the assigned tasks.
the average time was minutes and the median time was minutes this is higher than usual because of the think aloud statements of participants .
there were no critical errors or other serious issues.
for each tool capability we report key results derived from the think aloud statements and recorded observations.
a hiding and showing configuration options.
decisions that become available later during configuration can be either hidden or shown grayed out in the cw.
in task a po wondered why some questions are not answerable .
the tool log and the screen cast shows that he was stuck for some time.
also in task the sm was wondering why some questions were grayed out.
the overall feedback on this feature was rather diverse some users preferred showing decisions as grayed out while others suggested hiding them.
it is possible in the cw to switch between these two settings but apparently this was unclear to the users.
b views and filters.
the idea to show related questions in different views was generally well understood.
for115instance for configuration task we recorded think aloud statements of the mm and the plm i switch through panes to get to additional questions .
however a user commented that it is sometimes hard to understand how questions are related with each other across different views.
the tool logs and screen casts show that some users switched between two panes several times to understand the effects of their actions and the dependencies between decisions.
while views are useful for models with many decisions overusing them may also lead to unwanted effects.
c branching and navigation.
all subjects reported for several configuration tasks that they liked the top down approach for answering questions by going through decisions.
the tool logs and screen casts show that the typical approach of users was to go through the questions from topto bottom and pane by pane.
we observed that users sometimes manually selected the next question although this was already done by the tool immediately after answering a decision.
no negative comments or suggestions were recorded regarding the feature for automatically moving to the next view.
in configuration task the sm said that the order of questions is sometimes confusing .
it seems that the user was unaware of cw s features for sorting and filtering.
d freedom in navigation.
the results clearly show the importance of this feature.
for instance seven out of nine users selected questions not directly following the last question at least once one user even twelve times.
six of these sevenparticipantsnavigatedtoaquestioninadifferentpane at least once.
there are however also drawbacks regarding this feature.
the tm and the pm both commented that they did not understand initially in task how an arbitrary question can be answered.
when taking a look at the screen cast we noticed that the subjects selected a pane but did not select the question to display the possible answers which seems trivial but nevertheless led to problems.
e on the fly validity checks.
the cardinalities of enumeration questions e.g.
were perceived as hard to comprehend.
in addition the plm a po and the sales person reported issues regarding entering float values.
the tool logs and screen casts show the confusion of users in these cases and the importance of undo and reset.
f reset and undo.
the tool log showed that on average only four answers to questions were changed using reset or undo after setting them initially.
the minimum was zero while in the maximum case questions were reset.
there were no user suggestions regarding this capability.
g immediate feedback.
the possibility to immediately generate product artifacts i.e.
documents was well received.
after generating documents in task users reported that nothing unexpected happened documents were properly generated and that they liked this capability.
the dopler cw computes a total price and the estimated roi based on the selected features.
in task the mm and the pos asked how the price is calculated.
this shows that displaying formulae in addition to results should be possible.
h annotations and comments.
in task the plm commented that when answering a question with no it might sometimes make sense to also document the why not .
although capturing the rationale of a decision is possible in the tool using the commenting feature this was not immediately obvious to the user.
also in task think aloud comments by several subjects indicated that a particular question did not provide the required configuration options.table usability questionnaire results.
subject learnabilityefficiency accuracy errors satisfaction sm very easy efficient some good po easy very efficientno good mm hard very efficientno very good plm very easy very efficientsome very good po very easy very efficientno very good tm very easy very efficientsome very good d easy efficient no very good pm easy efficient some very good s easy efficient some good the commenting feature provided by the cw was developed for that purpose.
in task the sales manager said i wonder whether there is a relation to questions?
this suggests that questions with attached commentsshouldbehighlightedbetterinthegui.alsointask4 a po stated ok i define what i want or what the customer wants and can enter diverse additional attributes.
this is kind of a semi formal requirements management approach isn t it?
we noticed that it was unclear to users what will happen after creating a comment.
compared to all other tasks the creation of comments took users quite a long time.
furtherthinkaloudstatementsandobservationssuggested six new tool features many of which have now already been implemented.
forexample intask1themmsaidthatquestions related with customer details and roi requirements should be prefilled with default answers to accelerate the process.
in task a sales person suggested copy paste support for entering answers.
in task the sales manager asked whether it would be possible to define a price when specifying a new requirement in a comment.
support for defining arbitrary additional attributes for comments would hence be desirable.
in task the plm asked how can i save my work?
i m afraid i ll lose the valuable information i entered .
similarly in task the mm and the plm requested a feature to save export or print the entered information.
while saving can be done with a simple click these comments suggest an auto save capability.
furthermore a feature showing the formulae in addition to the results of calculations is useful.
finally questions with attached comments should be highlighted even better in the user interface.
.
rq2 utility observingsubjectsandanalyzingtherecordeddatashowed that subjects were able to configure products using the cw.
according to the participants the generated sales documents fulfilled their expectations.
the semi structured interviews regarding utility led to interesting additional comments.
what did you like?
the tm the sm two pos and the plm commented that one of the most important aspects of the cw regarding utility is its integrated consistent easy to learn intuitive graphical user interface .
oneparticipantalso saidthatitispossibletostartgeneratingdocumentswithout muchtrainingsothetoolitselfmightbeusedtotrainpeople 116especially non technical experts on a particular system and its variability.
the price list and value calculation views were also regarded as very important for the tool s utility by the sm and the mm.
what did you dislike what should be improved?
according to the sm and the mm while this does not affect usability limiting the total number of decisions is very important for the tool s utility.
this can for instance be achieved by pre answering certain questions and thereby focusing on the most important questions to reduce the size of the models.
one participant disliked the pre defined order of views and decisions.
while the freedom in navigation capability of the dopler cw would have allowed this participant to arbitrarily jump to any view or decision the branching and navigation capability was perceived as disturbing.
the tm and the mm commented that while there have been some small ui issues thesedid not hinder me in achieving my goals.
one participant doubted the utility of the annotation and commenting capability in practice and perceived it as too abstract andhard to understand .
allotherusershowever liked this feature and two po and plm even regarded it as very important for practice.
what are the opportunities when using this tool in daily business?
six participants pm tm po plm mm and sm said that the tool saves time and improves efficiency.
the d mm and a po also commented that the tool helps to avoid making errors in the configuration process.
the pm and the sm also regarded the tool as an important step towards standardization.
again the possibility to use the cw for training new users especially regional sales people was considered as an additional opportunity.
the tm commented that using the cw avoids redundant data entry by diverse users involved in the process.
a po recognized that using the cw avoids that customers get access to critical dataasithidesthemodelunderneathandjustdisplaysquestions.
the marketing manager further commented that the cw avoids or at least minimizes non conformance costs.
what are the risks when using this tool in daily business?
pm and tm commented that using the cw might increase the maintenance costs as variability models need to be kept up to date.
the mm and a po were afraid that using the cw might lead to knowledge drain i.e.
that while now people are experts in configuration with the cw also a non expert can perform configuration.
the developer and the team manager commented that integrating the tool in the tool landscape of the company might not be so easy.
the plm said that there is the danger that wrong answers are given due to misinterpreting what the customer wants or even due to typos and that it is very hard to identify such wronganswers .
themmpointedoutthatpreventionofdata leakage and protection of know how included in the tool is essential.
he suggested encrypting models and calculations.
the sm further commented that there is the danger that immature pls are modeled which might increase the effort for treating specific customer wishes .
.
implications and trade offs the results of the usability and utility assessment involving nine experienced industrial experts overall confirm the usefulness of the dopler cw and the importance of the identified user guidance capabilities.
we derived implications for tool developers based on participants comments and our analyses.
to strengthen our interpretations withexisting hci knowledge we discuss trade offs among the cd framework dimensions based on our initial mapping in section .
.
a the capability for hiding and showing configuration options led to controversial results.
while some participants of the study really liked it others were pretty confused.
according to the cd framework poor visibility hidden options inhibits scanning a fact which can explain the confusion.
we conclude that it is important to provide a setting for deactivating this capability if desired.
also there clearly exists a trade off between the dimensions hidden dependencies andvisibility in this context because of hidden configuration options.
b our results indicate that views and filters are very important to guide users.
this is not surprising given the size and complexity of today s systems.
however the number of views and the number of elements need to be balanced.
there is a trade off between few views containing many elements and many views with only few elements that stems from the relation to the cd dimensions visibility andhidden dependencies .
hidden dependencies are problematic for modification activities in our case setting configuration options.
integrating an option for displaying dependencies on demand e.g.
in a separate view may thus be advisable.
c branching and navigation was well received by most subjects however welearnedthatdifferentparticipantsprefer different ways of navigating through the decision space.
in this case developers need to be aware of the trade off betweenhidden dependencies andpremature commitment see capability d .
d freedominnavigationwasregardedasveryimportant by the subjects.
we conclude that despite their different aims both capabilities c and d should be provided in an integrated way to address the trade off just mentioned.
an important lesson here is that experts highly familar with the product line want to navigate their own way while novices need guidance.
e on the fly validity checks are certainly important however this capability was not recognized very much by users but rather expected to be present.
regarding the cd dimension error proneness we could not identify trade offs to other dimensions.
reasons for errors need to be explained while otherwise the checks should be as hidden from users as much as possible.
nevertheless not all product configuration tools provide such capabilities.
f interestingly when developing the cw we assumed high priority of reset and undo and devoted a lot of effort to develop these features.
the results of the study though show that this capability was the least used and commented on.
partly this can be explained by the nature of the study of sequentially performing configuration tasks.
we assume however that end users nowadays simply expect reset and undo eveniftheyuseditveryinfrequentlyduringourstudy.
there exists a trade off between provisionality andpremature commitment inthiscontextbecauseundo redonavigatesthe user through configuration options similar to branching and navigation cf.
capability d .
g immediate feedback was regarded as essential by participantsofthestudyforboththetool susabilityandutility.
usersbenefitfrominstantlyseeingtheeffectsoftheiractions and can check their work to date frequently cd dimension progressive evaluation .
our results confirm that it is important to support a highly interactive and incremental work117table summary of implications and trade offs for configuration tool developers.
capabilities cd dimensions benefits drawbacks implications trade offs a hiding and showing configuration options visibility hiding reduces complexity provides immediate feedback graying out unanswerable questions can cause confusionallow users to turn off this capability hidden dependencies visibility b views and filters visibility hidden dependencies essential to work with large and complex models dependencies between questions in different views not obviousbalance the number of views and elements visualize dependencies on demand provide branching and navigation together with freedom in navigation visibility hidden dependencies c branching and navigation hidden dependencies improves guidance of users order of questions might not be intuitive for all userscombine with freedom in navigation provide user specific navigation paths premature commitment d freedom in navigation premature commitment user specific traversal of models potential lack of guidance if not combined with other capabilitiescombine with branching and navigation premature commitment e on the fly validity checks error proneness essential to avoid inconsistent input complex checks are difficult to understand e.g.
cardinalities hide as much as possible explain the reasons of errors foster the use of annotations to record difficulties with understanding checks f reset and undo provisionality allows to experiment rapidly with different choicescombine with branching and navigation premature commitment g immediate feedback progressive evaluation supports prototyping and experimentation e.g.
by quickly creating products hard to comprehend how results have been derivedsupport a highly iterative and incremental work mode explain how automated processes work h annotations and comments secondary notation allows dealing with deviations and exceptions purpose of collected annotations and comments unclearexplain how annotations and comments are processed provisionality mode as otherwise it is hard for users to comprehend how results have been derived.
however automated processes such as generating documents or configurations need to be explained to users to avoid confusion.
h the annotations and comments feature cd dimensionsecondary notation was also regarded as important however it was also commented as being hard to perceive.
here a trade off among secondary notation andprovisionality became evident as the configuration process is interupted whenever users start adding comments.
we conclude that while a capability is needed for adding comments in an easyto use and informal way it is important to explain to users how annotations and comments are processed e.g.
by illustrating the workflow.
.
threats to validity a threat to construct validity is the potential bias caused by the system selected for the study.
however our study does not focus on model details but on the usefulness of the tool utilizing the model.
we selected the ecs model as it was known to all industry participants and allows working with all cw capabilities described in section .
according tosiemensexperts thesystemisrepresentativeofothersystems in industry.
a further threat is that our study assumes the ecs variability model to be complete and correct a fact thathasbeenconfirmedbytheindustryexpertscreatingthe model but is hard to verify.
there are also threats to internal validity meaning that theresultsmighthavebeeninfluencedbyourtreatment.
we had no direct influence on the selection of subjects as they were nominated by our industry partners.
also the numberof subjects may seem relatively small.
however they cover a wide range of different roles of business oriented end users and are well qualified for the study.
regarding conclusion validity there is a threat that the results are not based on statistical relationships but on qualitative data .
however given that a main aim of the study was to study the behavior and opinions of users of a tool qualitative research methods are well suited.
the analysis of the collected data still depends on our interpretation.
theworkwasperformedbyasingleresearcherbuttheresult was carefully checked by two other researchers.
with respect to external validity we selected a system representativeregardingsizeandcomplexityfortheautomation software domain and asked experienced industry people covering diverse roles.
although the derived implications depend on our experiences of using and implementing the dopler cw and especially its gui the capabilities are common in other configuration tools as discussed in section .
the mapping to the cd framework relates our results to hci knowledge.
.
conclusions and future work the configuration of software products is more and more performed by end users such as sales people project managers domain experts or customers.
tool capabilities are thus required for guiding such end users in product configuration.
usability issues are often underestimated in current product configuration tools.
in particular the dependencies among different guidance capabilities are not well understood.
the key contributions of this paper are the identification of key product configuration tool capabilities118for guiding users based on a review of existing literature and tools including a mapping to the cd framework an implementation of these capabilities in the dopler cw and a thorough analysis of the usefulness usability and utility of the user guidance capabilities with industrial end users together with general implications and trade offs for configuration tool developers.
we will further improve the dopler cw and hope that the study results will contribute to the development of configuration tools in software engineering.
.