singapor e management univ ersity singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity resear ch collection school of computing and information systems school of computing and information systems effectiv e communication of softwar e de velopment knowledge effectiv e communication of softwar e de velopment knowledge through community por tals through community por tals christ oph treude singapor e management univ ersity ctreude smu.edu.sg margaret anne st orey follow this and additional works at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch part of the softwar e engineering commons citation citation treude christ oph and st orey mar garet anne.
e ffectiv e communication of softwar e de velopment knowledge thr ough community por tals.
.
esec fse pr oceedings of the 19th a cm sigsof t symposium and the 13th e uropean conf erence on f oundations of softwar e engineering sz eged hungar y september .
.
available at available at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch this conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the school of computing and information systems at institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
it has been accepted for inclusion in resear ch collection school of computing and information systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
for mor e information please email cher ylds smu.edu.sg .
effective communication of software development knowledge through community portals christoph treude margaret anne storey dept.
of computer science university of victoria ctreude uvic.ca mstorey uvic.ca abstract knowledge management plays an important role in many software organizations.
knowledge can be captured and distributed using a variety of media including traditional help les and manuals videos technical articles wikis and blogs.
in recent years web based community portals have emerged as an important mechanism for combining various communication channels.
however there is little advice on how they can be e ectively deployed in a software project.
in this paper we present a rst study of a community portal used by a closed source software project.
using grounded theory we develop a model that characterizes documentation artifacts along several dimensions such as content type intended audience feedback options and review mechanisms.
our ndings lead to actionable advice for industry by articulating the bene ts and possible shortcomings of the various communication channels in a knowledge sharing portal.
we conclude by suggesting future research on the increasing adoption of community portals in software engineering projects.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
management general terms documentation human factors keywords community portal knowledge documentation .
introduction and motivation software development is knowledge intensive and the e ective management and exchange of knowledge is key in every software organization.
knowledge is distributed through various artifacts and media forms from formal documentation and technical articles to blogs and wikis.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
esec fse september szeged hungary.
copyright acm ... .
.however many organizations struggle with the e ective exchange and dissemination of knowledge across the community .
although various forms of documentation exist software projects encounter many knowledge management challenges how should knowledge be distributed?
how should knowledge be kept up to date?
how should feedback be solicited?
how should knowledge be organized for easy access?
there is no roadmap for what kind of information is best presented in a given artifact and new forms of documentation such as wikis and blogs have evolved .
unlike more formal mechanisms wikis and blogs are easy to create and maintain.
however they do not o er the same authoritativeness that comes with traditional documentation and they can become outdated and less concise over time .
while the informality of a wiki page or blog is sometimes enough users often expect reviewed technical articles.
one mechanism that has emerged recently and brings various communication channels together is the use of web or community portals.
such portals are not just used in software communities but are essential to companies such as amazon.com ebay or tripadvisor where they enable the development of communities around products.
similarly many of today s software projects wish to solicit feedback and input from a broader community of users beta testers and stakeholders.
while several projects use community portals such as microsoft s msdn1or ibm s jazz2 the use of portals for software development projects has not been studied yet.
it is unclear how portals can play an e ective role in software development and how di erent communication channels and artifacts should be utilized.
this paper presents a rst study of a successful software project ibm s rational team concert and its use of a community portal.
our methodology follows a grounded theory approach using data from semi structured interviews with developers ethnographic eld notes gathered during observations on site and quantitative data on the content of the community portal.
based on our ndings we develop a model of artifacts in a community portal that characterizes the artifacts along di erent dimensions such as intended audience content type feedback options and review mechanisms.
we provide actionable advice on how a community portal can provide bene ts to a software project and we discuss how the di erent channels and artifacts available in a portal can be used e ectively.
we also identify the shortcomings of di erent artifacts and suggest improve1 91ments to current tools and processes.
with this research we aim to assist managers and developers in their decisions about using community portals.
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
related work is summarized in section .
in section we describe the community portal case study and in section we introduce our methodology.
in section we report our ndings and describe a knowledge artifact model.
we discuss our ndings in section and we report limitations of our work in section .
section concludes the paper and outlines future work.
.
background and related work we discuss three areas that are key to our research knowledge management documentation in software development and the use of community portals to share information.
.
knowledge in software development knowledge management has long been recognized as essential to software development .
rowley de nes knowledge management as concerned with the exploitation and development of the knowledge assets of an organization with a view to furthering the organization s objectives.
the knowledge to be managed includes both explicit documented knowledge and tacit subjective knowledge.
how knowledge is managed in an organization depends on the particular style of software development.
plan based or traditional methods usually rely on the management of explicit knowledge while agile methods rely on the management of tacit knowledge .
the number of studies on knowledge management in software development projects is limited.
an overview of knowledge management in software engineering was conducted by ruset al.
.
the focus of their review is on motivations for knowledge management di erent approaches to knowledge management and factors that are important when implementing knowledge management strategies in companies.
dings yr and conradi report on a literature survey of the lessons learned on the actions taken by companies the e ects and bene ts of these actions and descriptions of the strategies for knowledge management.
bj rnson and dings yr also identi ed the following main nding across several papers there is a need not to focus exclusively on explicit knowledge but also on tacit knowledge.
within knowledge management the transfer of knowledge is particularly challenging.
as described by komi sirvi oet al.
sharing knowledge is di cult in the light of shortterm goals and companies often fall back to needs based approaches for knowledge transfer.
knowledge transfer is essential when integrating new developers into a team.
in a recent study using grounded theory dagenais et al.
identify early experimentation internalization of structures and cultures and progress validation as the main factors for the integration of newcomers.
they also found that documentation was often not helpful and outdated.
our research focuses on the knowledge captured in a community portal and on how to present it e ectively.
.
documentation in software development documentation has long been prominent in the list of recommended software engineering practices .
in parnas and clements described a design process in which documentation plays a major role.
they argue that manydevelopers regard documentation as a necessary evil written only as an afterthought to adhere to bureaucratic regulations.
therefore documentation ends up being incomplete and inaccurate.
parnas and clements identi ed four organizational issues that lead to those problems poor organization of the documents which makes it harder to maintain them boring prose that leads to inattentive reading confusing and inconsistent terminology and myopia caused by authors who know the documented system too well to take a comprehensive point of view.
in a survey of software professionals forward and lethbridge found that content up to dateness availability and the use of examples are the most important document attributes.
in a related study lethbridge et al.
explored how software engineers use and maintain documentation.
they found that most software engineers do not update documentation in a timely manner with the exception being highly structured easily maintained forms of documentation such as test cases and in line comments.
kajko mattsson reports on a study in which she found poor documentation practices even though her interviewees understood the necessity of documentation.
her participants identi ed the lack of a detailed documentation model as the main problem.
similar results were found in a study by visconti and cook .
they discovered a maturity gap between policies and the adherence to those policies.
dagenais and robillard conducted a study to understand how documentation in open source projects is created and maintained.
among other ndings they report that the use of wikis for documentation has several shortcomings such as a lack of authoritativeness and that the use of a separate documentation team results in naming inconsistencies and out of date documentation.
recent trends such as agile documentation suggest that executable products should be preferred over static documentation.
from the agile point of view documentation should be just good enough and it should only be updated when it hurts .
the rationale behind this is that the fundamental issue is communication not documentation and that comprehensive documentation does not ensure project success.
while the developers in our study did not use agile documentation only some of the documentation was formally organized whereas other parts of the community portal evolved without strict rules.
.
research on community portals community portals have become a platform used by online communities for the dissemination of information on the web .
members of a community can nd relevant information on portals and can often contribute their own content.
these community portals attract a disproportionately large amount of web tra c and engage visitors with free content .
kondatova and goldfarb identify three objectives of such portals and the communities surrounding them to supply content to users to encourage members to contribute and to facilitate communication and interaction.
portals aim to meet these objectives by o ering various forums wikis mailing lists and other communication mechanisms .
as millen points out the archive of conversation in an online community is often a valuable information resource.
to date research on community portals has focused on areas such as education and e government.
katz exam92ines how the use of portals allows educational institutions to integrate information and services used by their communities and aims to guide institutions in their decisions about using portals.
gant and gant found the responsibilities of simultaneously providing breadth and depth in online content to be a challenge for governments using portals.
as mentioned earlier the use of community portals by software development projects has not been studied yet.
several open source projects such as eclipse3 php4or the apache http server5 o er portals that bring together a variety of artifacts such as bug trackers mailing lists forums wikis and events.
more recently commercial products such as microsoft s visual studio or ibm s jazz have started using community portals.
for example the msdn portal6features a library with api