sketches and diagrams in practice sebastian baltes computer science university of trier trier germany s.baltes uni trier.destephan diehl computer science university of trier trier germany diehl uni trier.de abstract sketches and diagrams play an important role in the daily work of software developers.
in this paper we investigate the use of sketches and diagrams in software engineering practice.
to this end we used both quantitative and qualitative methods.
we present the results of an exploratory study in three companies and an online survey with participants.
our participants included software developers software architects project managers consultants as well as researchers.
they worked in di erent countries and on projects from a wide range of application areas.
most questions in the survey were related to the last sketch or diagram that the participants had created.
contrary to our expectations and previous work the majority of sketches and diagrams contained at least some uml elements.
however most of them were informal.
the most common purposes for creating sketches and diagrams were designing explaining and understanding but analyzing requirements was also named often.
more than half of the sketches and diagrams were created on analog media like paper or whiteboards and have been revised after creation.
most of them were used for more than a week and were archived.
we found that the majority of participants related their sketches to methods classes or packages but not to source code artifacts with a lower level of abstraction.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement documentation d. .
design methodologies representation general terms design documentation human factors keywords sketches diagrams empirical study source code artifacts permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
fse november hong kong china copyright acm ... .
.
.
introduction over the past years studies have shown the importance of sketches and diagrams in software development .
most of these visual artifacts do not follow formal conventions like the uni ed modeling language uml but have an informal ad hoc nature .
sketches and diagrams are important because they depict parts of the mental model developers build to understand a software project .
they may contain di erent views levels of abstraction formal and informal notations pictures or generated parts .
developers create sketches and diagrams mainly to understand to design and to communicate .
media for sketch creation include whiteboards engineering notebooks scrap papers but also software tools like photoshop and powerpoint .
when designing sketches relieve short term memory augment information processing and are a source of creativity .
the goal of our research was to investigate the usage of sketches and diagrams in software engineering practice and their relation to the core elements of a software project the source code artifacts.
furthermore we wanted to assess how helpful sketches are for understanding the related code.
we intended to nd out if how and why sketches and diagrams are archived and are thereby available for future use.
since software is created with and for a wide range of stakeholders and sketches are often a means for communicating between these stakeholders we were not only interested in sketches and diagrams created by software developers but by all software practitioners including testers architects project managers as well as researchers and consultants.
our study complements a number of existing studies on the use of sketches and diagrams in software development see section .
which analyzed the above aspects only in parts and often focused on an academic environment a single company open source projects or were limited to a small group of participants .
based on our ndings we point at the need for tool support to better integrate sketches and diagrams into the software development process.
throughout this paper we summarize preliminary ndings in boxes with dashed borders and our nal results in boxes with solid borders.
for simplicity we use the term sketch in the following to denote both informal sketches as well as diagrams following a formal notation like uml.
.
research design our research was carried out in two phases first we conducted an exploratory eld study on the use of sketches and diagrams in three di erent software companies to determinearxiv .09172v1 jun 2017a set of dimensions for characterizing the visual artifacts.
in total we identi ed the dimensions that are shown in figure .
some of them were derived from related work others emerged during our research.
in the second phase we asked practitioners to describe their last sketch based on these dimensions in an online survey with participants.
.
exploratory research for our exploratory study we collaborated with a company developing utility software company a a company developing software for real time devices company b and a company developing software for the health care sector company c .
companies a and b are small to mediumsized enterprises whereas company c is a large corporation.
.
.
field study first our interest focused on real life sketches drawn by software practitioners.
previous studies showed that in practice sketches and diagrams are often rather informal .
however we had only seen few samples of sketches drawn by professional software developers.
thus we collected sketches drawn by di erent developers of companies a and b and interviewed them about certain properties of their sketches.
we prepared two questionnaires one for each developer and one for each collected sketch.
using the developer questionnaire we captured demographic data like gender age and work experience.
furthermore we asked how often the participant normally uses sketches in his or her daily work.
for each sketch we asked how many persons contributed to it the purpose for creating the sketch and its estimated lifespan.
moreover we requested a small description and asked for the relation of the sketch to source code.
the median age of the developers was and their median work experience was years.
we were surprised by the broad spectrum of sketches and diagrams even in this limited setting.
the sketches ranged from simple to do lists through visualizations of geometric problems to computer generated uml diagrams.
however the majority of sketches were informal only two of them contained uml elements.
the most common purposes were understanding issues and designing new features.
the median lifespan was rather short to days and only a minority of sketches were kept permanently .
.
developers related of their sketches to methods or classes.
in company a the employees used sketches on a monthly basis in company b on a weekly basis.
these results led to rst preliminary assumptions on the dimensions formality uml elements purpose lifespan archiving and relation to source code .
sketches are mostly informal and uml is rarely used.
their main purposes are understanding and designing and the lifespan is in most cases only a few days.
sketches are rarely archived and are mainly related to classes and methods.
.
.
interviews since the questionnaires and collected sketches revealed di erences between the cultures of the two companies regarding sketch usage we wanted to investigate how sketching is integrated in the software development work ow of di erent companies.
therefore we semi structurally interviewed one software developer and the chairman of company figure dimensions of a sketch or diagram in software development b. as we could not interview employees of company a we recruited two developers from company c to be interviewed.
the interviews revealed that the management of company b actively demanded sketching and sketch archiving without forcing the developers to use a certain notation in company c the role of sketching di ered between the teams.
one developer reported that in his team informal whiteboard and paper sketches were used almost daily in different situations.
in contrast to that the other developer from the same company but a di erent team noted that hand drawn sketches were used surprisingly little .
while the collected sketches were mostly created on paper the interviews revealed the importance of whiteboards as sketching media .
one participant reported that in his team the whiteboard is normally used as soon as more than two persons are involved.
otherwise the preferred medium is paper but computer programs like powerpoint and enterprise architect are also applied.
as mentioned above only few of the collected sketches were archived permanently.
however all participants mentioned important sketches being archived either by saving a digital picture or by redrawing them digitally.
the latter is an example of a transition from one medium to another as described by walny et al.
.
we did not focus on these transitions in the eld study but decided to further investigate the reuse andrevision of sketches in our online survey.
in this context we also wanted to assess how much e ort goes into the creation of sketches.
furthermore the interviews revealed the importance of the team context and the contributors that helped creating the sketch.
context and contributors in uence the sketching practice in teams.
paper and computers are used when sketching with one or two persons otherwise whiteboards are the preferred medium.
.
research questions while some of the sketch dimensions were already partly addressed in existing studies e.g.
medium purpose revision and uml elements others like the relation to source code have not been investigated yet.
with our survey we wanted to reproduce ndings from the other studies but also intended to gain new insights into the use of sketches and diagram in software development practice.
we were especially interested in the reasons why or why not sketches are archived.
moreover we wanted to collect data on the actual lifespan of sketches in practice and their relation to source code focussing on their value for documenting the related source code artifacts.
we dedicated an own dimension to uml because it it often seen as the lingua franca of software engineering see e.g.
.
since past studies and our preliminary research showed that uml isoften used informally we wanted to assess how many uml elements are actually present on sketches created by software practitioners.
the following ve research questions summarize what we wanted to learn with our online survey rq1 how frequently do developers create use and revise sketches and how much e ort is put into these sketches?
rq2 what is the lifespan of sketches to what extent and why are they archived?
rq3 how formal are sketches and to what extent do they contain uml elements?
rq4 what media are used for creating sketches in what context and for what purpose are they created and how many persons contribute to them?
rq5 to what source code artifacts are sketches related and could they help to understand these artifacts in the future?
.
survey design to investigate our ve research questions we designed an online questionnaire consisting of questions in total of which referred to the last sketch or diagram that the participant created for a professional software project.
three of these questions were open ended the others were closedended.
one of our main goals while designing the questionnaire was to make it as concise as possible to increase the completion rate see e.g.
and to make it more likely that companies would forward our request for participation.
to assess the dimensions mentioned above we asked the participants about the last sketch or diagram they created for a software project.
furthermore we asked if the sketch could be helpful in the future to understand the related source code artifact s and for demographic data about the respondent.
the target population for our study i.e.
the population of which we drew a sample were basically all software practitioners in the world meaning all software developers testers and architects but also consultants researcher and everyone else involved in creation of software.
the questionnaire was online from august until december collecting responses in total.
first we recruited participants by a network of colleagues and contacts asking them to motivate others to participate in our study.
in a second phase we posted a call for participation in two social networks various online communities and irc channels.
furthermore we contacted several german software companies and asked them to forward a call for participation to their employees.
in a third phase the german it news website heise developer published a short article on our survey asking the readers to participate.
in the last recruitment phase we contacted people working in the area of software engineering asking them to advertise our survey on twitter.
we also posted a call for participation in a large linkedin group with more than .
members focusing on software architecture.
all survey questions and the coding can be found in table .
moreover we made the questionnaire and the answers publicly available .
the variables in the table are either directly related to a certain research question or capture demographic data about the participants.
the names of most variables are based on the sketch dimensions.
however we used multiple variables to capture the context in which the sketch was created team size application area employment of agile methods and model driven software engineering .beside these closed ended questions our questionnaire contained three open ended questions two of them were related to rq2 asking for reasons why or why not the sketch has been archived.
at the end of our questionnaire participants had the possibility to provide general remarks on their last sketch or their general usage of sketches and diagrams.
.
results in this section we present the methods we used to analyze the survey data describe the participants and report on how the data answers our research questions.
.
methods we analyzed the responses to the closed ended questions by means of descriptive statistics and quasi experiments and the responses to the open ended questions using open coding .
the results of the quasi experiments are shown in table the rst column indicates the grouping or quasiindependent variable i.e.
the variable which was used to divide the responses in two or more groups.
these groups were then analyzed using the variable in the second column the dependent variable .
since we used pairwise deletion of missing values and in some cases ignored the middle values of the point likert scales we state the number of responses for each group and variable n .
furthermore we provide the median mdn the mode mod and the interquartile range iqr .
we applied the nonparametric wilcoxon rank sum test w to test if the distributions in the two groups di er signi cantly.
we did not use parametric tests because our variables did not have interval scaling and not all variables were normally distributed.
likert items for instance provide only ordinal data because the intervals between scale values are not equal .
as shown in the table all presented group pairs have signi cantly di erent distributions allp values .
we calculated spearman s rank correlation coe cient to test the statistical dependence between two variables.
this coe cient works on ordinal data and does not require normal distribution.
the values range between and .
a positive value indicates a positive correlation i.e.
if one variable increases so does the other a negative value of indicates a negative correlation i.e.
the variables vary in opposite directions.
our interpretation of the values of is based on the following scheme weak j j moderate j j and strong j j which is derived from cohen s de nitions .
apart from a few exceptions we only considered results having at least a moderate correlation.
to measure the e ect size we used cli s delta d .
its values range between when all values of the second group were higher than the values of the rst group and when the reverse was true.
moreover we provide the con dence interval of d at a con dence level.
the qualitative data was generated by the three openended questions in our questionnaire.
in total respondents answered to the questions why or why not they archived their sketch.
furthermore we received general remarks with diverse opinions on the respondents usage of sketches and diagrams.
we analyzed the answers using open coding and assigned them to categories.
in the following we will refer to statements made by participants in the open ended questions using their id e.g.
p12 meaning the participant with id .table structure of online survey.
asterisks indicate level of measurement no asterisk nominal scale one asterisk ordinal scale two asterisks ratio scale .
variable question values and coding creation cre !rq1when did you create your last sketch or diagram that you created for your professional work and that is related to a software project ?
less than minutes ago several weeks ago weeks several minutes ago minutes several months ago month several hours ago hours more than one year ago several work days ago days na i don t know revision rev !rq1has the sketch diagram been revised after its initial creation?
no yes once yes multiple times na i don t know e ort eff !rq1how much e ective work time went into the creation and revision of the sketch diagram up to now?
less than minutes several work days days several minutes minutes more than work days several hours hours na i don t know if several persons were involved add up the work times of all contributors.
contributors con !rq4how many persons contributed to the sketch diagram up to now including yourself ?
person to persons more than persons persons to persons na i don t know persons to persons medium med !rq4what medium did you use to create the sketch diagram?paper traditional whiteboard interactive whiteboard tablet or smartphone computer other lifespan lsp !rq2please try to estimate the lifespan of the sketch diagram how long did will you use it?
.
lifespan ended immediately after creation several work days days less than minutes several weeks weeks several minutes minutes several months months several hours hours more than one year na i don t know archiving arc !rq2has the sketch diagram been archived or will it be archived?
no yes on paper yes digitally yes digitally and on paper na i don t know furthermore we asked why or why not the sketch or diagram was archived openended .
formality for !rq3please try to specify the formality of your sketch diagram.
very informal to very formal na i don t know point likert scale item uml uml !rq3to which degree does the sketch diagram contain uml elements?
no uml elements to only uml elements na i don t know point likert scale item purpose pur !rq4the sketch diagram helped me to ... none or multiple answers possible understand source code understand an issue design a new architecture design new gui components design new features review source code refactor source code debug source code explain source code to someone else explain an issue to someone else analyze requirements support managing the project other task s artifacts art !rq5please select the software artifact s to which the content of the sketch diagram is related.
none or multiple answers are possible single or multiple statement s or expression s single or multiple attribute s parameter s propertie s or variable s single or multiple method s function s or procedure s single or multiple classe s object s or prototype s single or multiple package s namespace s module s unit s or folder s single or multiple project s other artifact s help self hes !rq5do you think that the sketch diagram could help you in the future to understand the related source code artifact s ?
it will de nitely not help to it will de nitely help na i don t know point likert scale item help others heo !rq5do you think that the sketch diagram could help other software developers in the future to understand the related source code artifact s ?
it will de nitely not help to it will de nitely help na i don t know point likert scale item area are !rq4what is the main application area of the project for which the sketch diagram was created ?software tools web development computer games public media telecommunications nancial services health retail manufacturing automotive systems aerospace real time systems civil service other team size tes !rq4how many persons work on this project?see variable contributors .
model driven mdr !rq4does the project team employ modeldriven software engineering?
never to always na i don t know point likert scale item agile agi !rq4to which degree does the team employ agile software development methods?
only using agile methods to only using other methods na i don t know point likert scale item usage use !rq1when did you use look at modify extend the last sketch or diagram that you did not create yourself?see variable creation .
gender gen your gender male female optional age age your age year s optional experience exp your professional work experience in software development year s optional please round up to full years.
work time tim how much of your work time is dedicated to software development?
optional occupation occ your current occupation?
none software developer software architect project manager ... other organization org what type of organization do you work in?government educational very small company employees small company employees medium company employees large company employees self emplyed country cou which country do you work in?
country code germany de united states of america us etc.
additional remarks open ended remarks regarding the sketch or diagram used to answer the above questions the questionnaire as a whole or the general usage of sketches and diagrams in software developmenttable quasi experiments wilcoxon rank sum test spearman s rho and cli s delta.
one asterisk indicates that the two tailed p value is smaller than two asterisks indicate a p value smaller than .cid con dence interval of cli s delta at con dence level.
g.var var group group w d cid value s n mdn mod iqr value s n mdn mod iqr revlsp no137 yes once yes multiple times for arc lspeff0 arc arclsp no139 yes paper yes digital yes both eff hes heo for medcon trad.
int.
whiteboard77 1paper .
.
con comp.
tablet .
.
medlsp paper trad.
whiteboard219 computer tablet int.
whiteboard155 arc eff for uml heo heslsp0 arc heolsp0 arc coucrede211 1other countries182 use .
survey participants overall persons male female unknown with a median age of lled in our questionnaire.
of the participants that indicated their age were between and years old and were older than but younger than .
the respondents worked in di erent countries most of them in germany or north america .
of our respondents worked as software developers as software architects.
the rest included project managers consultants industrial as well as academic researchers and students .
of them spent most of their work time developing software the median value was .
had more than years of professional work experience while had less than years.
the median professional work experience was years.
the respondents worked with companies of very di erent sizes with up to employees and with more than employees and the application areas of their projects included software tools web development nancial services automotive manufacturing and health to name a few.
since over half of our participants came from germany we were interested if their answers were consistent with the answers of non german participants.
to this end we employed quasi experiments to compare these groups and found beside demographic data no major di erences see table for the results of this test for variables creation and usage .
.
findings on research questions with the results of the quasi experiments the qualitative data and descriptive statistics we can now answer our research questions.
when using data from the table we provide the values of the rst two columns to identify the row we are referring to e.g.
rev for refers to the second row.
.
.
creation usage effort and revision rq1 to assess the frequency of sketch creation we asked the respondents when they created their last sketch.
created their last sketch on the same day another withina week another within a month and another created their last sketch more than one month ago.
hence of the sketches were created at most several days ago.
we also asked the respondents about the last time they used looked at modi ed extended a sketch that was not created by themselves.
used it on the same day within a week within a month and another used it more than one month ago.
thus of the respondents used a sketch made by someone else at most several days ago.
overall most respondents created and or used sketches within the last week.
to assess the e ort of creating a sketch we asked the respondents to estimate the e ective work time that went into the creation and revision of the sketch.
if several persons were involved we asked them to add up their individual work times.
more than two thirds of the sketches were created in less than one hour were created in several hours and in only four cases the creation of the sketch took more than ve days.
after creation about of the sketches were revised once and multiple times.
of the sketches that were not revised were created on analog media compared to of the revised ones.
the median lifespan of revised sketches was several weeks whereas the median lifespan of non revised sketches was several hours rev lsp .
revised sketches were also more likely to be archived rev arc and less informal rev for .
it was common that people created a new version of an outdated sketch extended an existing one or just captured their analog whiteboard drawings.
p75 named an example for the latter he wrote that he and his team always take a photograph of the sketch we all have smartphones!
and email the photo to the team members and place it in a shared wiki as well .
another transition was described by p193 who wrote that he started with a whiteboard drawing then a more detailed pencil paper sketch and eventually it was modeled in yed.
similar work ows were reported by p41 p52 and p149.sketches were not only redrawn but were also transcribed to other representations.
p173 noted that his sketch will be replaced by textual documentation similar to p222 who speaks of formalization in text form meaning source code comments.
a sketch may also be replaced simply by a mental model that the creator built with the help of the sketch see also p373 for instance wrote that his sketch supported knowledge transfer from explicit paper to tacit in head knowledge .
recreating sketches digitally for documentation seems to be a common use case.
p247 mentioned that his sketch has been transformed digitally by using a sketch tool and added to the development documentation .
similar work ows were for instance reported by p21 p23 and p290.
once the sketches were digital it was easier to update them.
p305 wrote about his digital sketch that over the next several months we will be working from it and changing it as we learn .
p89 stated that he always starts a new project with a diagram which is modi ed as work progresses .
creating and using sketches are frequent tasks among software practitioners.
most sketches were created in less than one hour and more than half of them have been revised.
transitions between di erent media were common.
.
.
lifespan and archiving rq2 we asked the participants to estimate the lifespan of their sketch i.e.
how long they did or will use it.
used it for less than one hour at most for one day for less than one month and another for one month or more.
the median lifespan was several weeks.
less e ort went into the creation of sketches with a short estimated lifespan lsp eff .
these sketches were also less likely to be archived than those with a longer estimated lifespan lsp arc .
overall more than of the sketches were archived only on paper digitally and both digitally and on paper .
almost all digital sketches were archived but also of the analog ones.
more e ort went into the creation of archived sketches arc eff and the lifespan of those sketches was estimated to be several months compared to several hours for sketches that were not archived arc lsp .
archived sketches were more formal arc for and would more likely help the respondent arc hes or others arc heo to understand the related source code artifact s in the future.
we asked the respondents to comment on why or why not they archived their sketch.
we categorized the answers to both questions independently and identi ed nine categories in total four categories indicating why a sketch was archived four categories indicating why not and one category for all answers with hints on the general archiving practice.
please note that the categories are not disjoint and have di erent granularity.
one answer may belong to several categories.
reasons for archiving a sketch to the rst category we assigned answers indicating that the sketch or diagram was kept as documentation .
the majority of answers in this category pointed out that the sketch documents the implementation e.g.
the architecture structure states or data ows.
many respondents explicitly mentioned the documentation of source code artifacts likeapis components or test cases.
some of them reported on the documentation of requirements and speci cations decisions ideas solutions or discussions.
p365 archived his sketch because it document the discussion and it will be used to further investigate into sketched idea .
however sketches may also document mistakes.
p327 wrote that he archived his sketch to trace the cause of decision and that the sketch could be useful to explain our mistake later .
p369 stated that he posted his diagram on the wall of his o ce because charts and diagrams document where you have been what were thinking and where you intend to go .
to the second category we added answers pointing out that the sketch was or will be archived for future use .
a common reason for archiving a sketch was to be able to reference it in the future.
other future uses included reusing the sketch as a template as well as updating re ning expanding or digitally recreating it.
furthermore sketches were used for planning bug xing as a reminder or for communication with customers or team members e.g.
as input for a discussion .
sketches and diagrams were also used during implementation or for code and interface generation.
several respondents stated that they archived their sketch to be able to explain parts of the software system or ideas to other stakeholders e.g.
for onboarding new sta .
the visual artifacts in the third category support understanding and were thus archived.
the answers showed that understanding the implementation was a central aspect.
some respondents archived their sketch because it helped them to understand the whole project others named the understanding of processes work ows problems ideas or decisions.
p162 wrote that his sketch greatly aids in understanding the basic architectural concepts .
p340 even stated that it will be di cult to understand the code without the diagram.
an interesting remark by p233 highlights the connection of sketches and ideation.
he wrote that he keeps sketches as a personal archive of knowledge and ideas .
the fourth category named visualization is closely related to the previous one.
however many participants explicitly mentioned that they archived their sketch because it visualizes a process problems requirements software or other concepts.
some mentioned that they prefer visual representations of software over text.
p21 for instance wrote that his sketch is stored in case i or someone else analyzes the sketched part of code.
this way it can be quickly understood due to the visual representation without hours of digging through complex source code .
p145 noted that his sketch explains a data ow better than in spoken words .
p162 even states that his sketch shows concepts that are not directly visible from code .
sketches reduce the cognitive load as p85 reported i generally use them to visualize a process that i can t keep in my head all at once .
the team of p65 uses ip chart sketches for code reviews because it helps to get a grasp on the structure and make the code concrete and available to the involved persons .
reasons for not archiving a sketch the main reason why respondents did not archive their sketch was that they thought it served its purpose and thus was not worth keeping.
the named purposes included understanding explaining visualizing designing communicating prototyping problem solving and structuring thoughts ideas or the implementation.
p2 for instance wrote thathe did not archive his sketch because he just created it to visualize a very special situation in the work ow of the program .
p6 mentioned that he used his sketch to think through a problem and it had no value as a long term reference .
interesting is the fact that sketches were also created where documentation was available p4 reported that his sketch served his own understanding of a well documented system .
the second category of answers indicated that the sketch was substituted by another representation e.g.
being replaced by a new or extended version redrawn on another medium or implemented in source code.
p204 stated that his sketch is useless after implementing the ideas of the sketch into source code .
this was a common reason for not keeping a sketch as it was reported by several participants e.g.
p7 p47 p217 p256 and p334 .
p332 wrote that the code will be the nal representation of the idea the sketch is just sca olding .
to the third category we added answers indicating that the sketch was outdated .
the main reason for this was the evolution of the related software.
p27 for instance noted that the software will be developed further and diverge from the sketch over time .
similar situations were reported by p39 p52 p102 and p339.
in the fourth category we summarized all answers that named some kind of technical issue as a reason for not keeping the sketch.
p78 for instance wanted to keep his sketch but wrote that he had no way to archive whiteboard drawings .
p123 reported that his sketch ended up in code and there is no good option to keep it together .
similarly p2 wrote that in case there was an easy way to combine both code and sketch i might have thought about archiving it .
p259 noted that there is no special place where to archive the sketch and he also addressed the issue that nobody would update it if the software artifacts change .
another problem is that contextual information may be necessary to understand a sketch as reported by p314.
archiving practice to this category we added all answers that contained hints to the respondent s general archiving practice or the systems used for storage.
sketches were stored for instance in wikis version control systems issue tracking systems or emails.
some participants reported that they try to archive as much as possible like p10 who stated that every artifact in the process of creating a software should be archived .
four participants named compliance or regulatory demands as a reason for keeping their sketch.
one third of the sketches had an estimated lifespan of one day or less one third of up to one month and another third of more than one month.
the majority of sketches were archived most of them digitally.
many sketches were kept because they document or visualize parts of the implementation or assist its understanding.
.
.
formality and uml rq3 in the questionnaire we de ned formality as the degree to which a sketch follows a pre de ned visual language e.g.
the uml .
of the sketches were rated as informal likert .
while rated their sketch as very informal likert only found their sketch to be very formal likert .
we also explicitly asked the respondents about the use ofuml elements in their sketches.
while of the sketches contained no uml elements at all consisted solely of uml elements.
overall found that their sketch contained few uml elements likert another found that their sketch contained more uml elements likert .
however of the sketches that contained more uml elements were still rated as informal likert .
see figure for a diverging stacked bar chart of the answers for the variables formality and uml .
umlfor count0 5var.
figure distribution of answers for for and uml in total of the respondents general remarks were about their use of uml or their general opinion on such formal notations.
the opinions ranged from completely rejecting formal methods p83 to very positive ones p194 .
one argument against uml or other formal notations was that most of the time you d have to read the code anyways p8 .
p102 states that uml is often not known and almost never used .
according to him people prefer to code or to get code even buggy rather than to draw little drawings .
on the other hand p194 stated that he thinks that diagrams help a lot in designing good object oriented systems .
p210 stated that he prefers having less text documentation and more diagrams because people tend not to read written speci cations accurately but spend more time understanding a diagram .
most of the remarks indicated an informal sketching practice meaning that if uml was used it was not used strictly as de ned in the standard e.g.
reported by p21 p94 p190 and p304 .
this is in accord with our qualitative results described above.
informal uml usage also in uenced the choice of medium as p210 reported that he creates most of his sketches on paper because they combine uml icons and mind mapping elements as well as graphical sketches to visualize functionality .
the majority of sketches and diagrams were informal.
whereas of them contained no uml elements at all contained at least some and only consisted solely of uml elements.
respondents remarks indicate that if uml is used it is often not used strictly as de ned in the standard.
.
.
media context and purpose rq4 almost of the sketches were drawn on analog media like paper or traditional whiteboards .
the remaining sketches were almost exclusively drawn on computers .
only ve sketches were drawn on an interactive whiteboard and only three on tablets or smartphones.
sketches created on paper or digitally were most likely created alone whereas sketching on traditional whiteboards was more likely to be done collaboratively med con .
the medium and lifespan of a sketch were also related sketches created on analog media paper or traditional whiteboards had an estimated lifespan of several work days whereas sketches created digitally computer tablet or smartphone had an estimated lifespan of several months med lsp .
furthermore digital sketches were more likely to be archived than analog ones med arc they were more formal med for and were more likely to contain uml elements med uml .
digital sketches were also rated as being more likely to help others in the future to understand the related source code artifact s med heo .
besides more e ort was put into digital sketches med eff .
while of the sketches were created by a single person by two persons and by three persons only were created by more than three persons.
actually only one sketch was created by more than persons.
sketches to which one or two people contributed were most likely created on paper .
of these sketches were created using a computer and on a traditional whiteboard.
when more than two people contributed to the sketch the ratio of computer sketches increases only slightly .
however the ratio of traditional whiteboards doubles and the ratio of paper sketches halves .
most sketches were drawn on analog media like paper or whiteboards.
half of them were created by a single person and another third by two persons only few were created by more than three persons.
paper was predominantly used alone whiteboards collaboratively.
to capture the creation context we asked for the application area team size and employment of model driven software engineering or agile methods in the software project for which the sketch was created.
the most common application areas were software tools followed by web development and nancial services .
in of the cases the project teams never or only rarely employed model driven software engineering likert whereas of the teams intensively employed agile methods likert .
as mentioned before the respondents worked with companies of very di erent sizes.
the most common team size was to of the respondents worked alone with one colleague and with two colleagues.
worked in teams of to people whereas only worked in teams with more than employees.
however we found no signi cant in uence of the team context on the sketching behavior of our participants.
we also asked the respondents about the purpose of their sketch.
they could choose multiple answers from a given list of tasks that the sketch helped to accomplish see table .
the most frequent tasks were designing a new architecture designing new features explaining an issue to someone else analyzing requirements and understanding an issue the least common tasks were reviewing source code and debugging source code .
overall most tasks were either related to designing explaining or understanding .
of the most frequent tasks only analyzing requirements cannot be assigned to these categories.
three participants mentioned sketches as a medium to outline the high level system architecture p8 p26 p304 .
p374 thinks that sketches and diagrams are critical to understanding software projects and architectures .
sketching is also used to communicate with clients p106 p112 or between business and development p224 .
the most common purposes for creating sketches were related to designing explaining or understanding.
furthermore analyzing requirements played an important role.
.
.
relation to source code and value rq5 we asked the respondents to select the software artifact s to which the content of their sketch was related.
they could choose multiple answers from a given list of artifacts which was sorted in order of increasing level of abstraction e.g.
statement method class package .
for each level we not only named terms used in object oriented programming but also similar concepts used in other paradigms see table .
furthermore respondents could indicate whether the sketch was related to a single instance or to multiple instances of the chosen artifact.
for the sake of brevity we will only name one representative of each level and do not distinguish single and multiple instances in the following.
if a sketch is related to a lower level of abstraction this normally implies that it is also related to the levels above.
thus we base our interpretation on the most speci c artifact the participant selected i.e.
the artifact with the lowest level of abstraction.
of the sketches were most speci cally related to statements to attributes to methods to classes to packages and to projects.
we can conclude that sketches rarely pertain to certain attributes or statements but rather to methods classes packages or projects.
we asked the respondents to assess if their sketch could help them or others to understand the related source code artifact s in the future.
of the sketches were rated as helpful likert for the respondent were rated as helpful for others.
helpful sketches had a longer estimated lifespan hes lsp heo lsp and were more likely to be archived than not helpful sketches hes arc heo arc .
sketches were rarely related to certain attributes or statements but rather to methods classes packages or projects.
about half of the sketches were rated as helpful to understand the related source code artifact s in the future.
.
correlations to estimate the strength of the correlations between the captured variables we used spearman s rank correlation coe cient see section .
.
to test the signi cance of each correlation coe cient we computed the two tailed p values and checked whether these p values were both less than and bonferroni correction as we computed a total of correlations .
since we didn t start with apriori hypotheses about the correlations we only consider moderate and strong correlations that are signi cant after bonferroni correction.
the results are shown in table the strongest correlation was found between formality and uml other strong correlations exist between archiving and lifespan and between e ort and lifespan .
furthermore all pairwise correlations of the four variables formality archiving e ort lifespan and the three variables e ort lifespan revision are at least moderate.
note that one has to be cautious when interpreting these correlations because correlation does not imply causality.
for example the above mentioned correlations of the variable e ort can be put in other words the more e ort is put into a sketch the more likely it is that it will be used for a longer time that it will be archived and that it will be more formal.
but for example we may not conclude that e ort is the cause for archiving a sketch.
as mentioned above the four variables formality archiving e ort and lifespan each correlate at least moderately.table correlation table with spearman s correlation coe cients one asterisk signi cant at the .
level two asterisks remains signi cant after bonferroni correction .
uml for arc eff lsp rev uml for arc eff lsp rev n we analyzed the open ended answers and searched the data for sketches illustrating these correlations p156 created his rather formal sketch formality using a traditional whiteboard and archived it digitally.
he spent several hours creating it and estimated its lifespan to be more than one year noting that it is a general architecture sketch that will help others understand communication and probably won t change in the forthcoming months .
another example is the formal sketch formality of p122 that was created in more than work days.
it was a state diagram created digitally that is needed as long as the program exists lifespan more than one year .
the above examples are sketches that have high values for the considered variables.
however there are also examples for sketches at the other end of the spectrum.
p73 created his informal sketch formality in less than ten minutes on paper.
the sketch had an estimated lifespan of only several minutes and was not archived since it was a temporary sketch for debugging .
the sketch of p80 had similar characteristics being a transient diagram used to explain an approach to a problem .
formality archiving e ort and lifespan each correlate at least moderately.
this is also the case for e ort lifespan and revision.
.
discussion creating sketches and using sketches created by others are common tasks among software practitioners.
most sketches were revised multiple times and had an estimated lifespan of more than one week.
this is backed up by qualitative data as respondents reported that sketches were often revised or redrawn especially when used for documentation.
qualitative data also indicates that it is common that the lifecycle of a sketch starts on analog media like paper or whiteboards and eventually ends as an archived digital version.
more than two thirds of the sketches were created in less than one hour mostly using analog media like paper or whiteboards.
this may be a reason for many sketches being rated as informal.
interactive whiteboards and tablets were almost never used.
the use of uml elements was higher than we expected after the eld study just like the lifespan.
another unexpected result was that most sketches were archived.
besides being archived many sketches were rated as helpful to understand the related source code artifacts in the future.
in the open ended answers many respondents stated that their sketch helped them to understand issues or implementation details.
thus despite the di cultyof keeping them up to date sketches are a valuable resource for developers.
with our survey we could validate insights from the interviews we made during our exploratory research one interviewed developer noted that in his team whiteboards are normally used as soon as more than two persons are involved.
otherwise the preferred medium is paper.
we found out that paper was the prevalent medium for one or two contributors and that whiteboard usage doubled when more than two persons contributed.
furthermore we observed that while half of the sketches were created by a single person the other half was almost entirely created by two or three persons only few sketches were created by more than three persons.
our preliminary assumption that sketches and diagrams primarily relate to classes and methods or other source code artifacts with the same level of abstraction was partly con rmed but projects and packages played also an important role.
.
threats to validity during the qualitative analysis we tried to mitigate the lone researcher bias by applying multiple coding two researchers performed the coding independently before they discussed the results and agreed on common categories.
furthermore most of the quantitative results were computed independently by both researchers.
nevertheless there exist possible threats to external and construct validity which we address in the following.
external validity it is obvious that drawing a random sample from the population of software practitioners was impossible for us.
we had to rely on available subjects which is known as convenience sampling or opportunity sampling .
since we asked people to spread the link to our online questionnaire we also applied a kind of snowball sampling .
we had only little control over the representativeness of our sample because the participants were selected by the channels we used to contact them.
however we tried to mitigate this threat to external validity by describing our sample in detail to ensure comparability to results of other studies and available demographic data about the target population.
furthermore we named the channels we used to contact participants.
construct validity in our eld study we explicitly asked about the usual frequency of sketching.
in hindsight we found that this question ignored that the sketching frequency most likely varies with the di erent software development phases and it may thus be di cult for the participants to give such a general estimate.
to reduce biases like social desirability and frequency illusion in our survey we decided not to ask participants about their typical sketching behavior e.g.
how often they sketch or whether they use uml notation but instead asked them about a concrete artifact namely their last sketch.
however a threat to construct validity may be the way we tried to capture the context in which the sketch was created.
beside asking for the team size and application area of the project we asked whether the project team employs model driven software engineering .
this question may be too vague as participants may have a di ering notion of what model driven software engineering is.
in hindsight we may have better asked for more concrete tools or practices e.g.
which programming languages are used.
furthermore the perception of what exactly uml elements are may di er between respondents.for most questions we asked the participants to think of the last sketch or diagram they created.
depending on how long the period of time between creation and lling out the questionnaire was a recall bias may a ect the answers.
as of our participants created their last sketch not longer than one month ago this bias is unlikely to in uence our results.
moreover we cannot rule out the possibility that we may have missed an important confounding variable.
however since our sketch dimensions are based on past studies and our preliminary research we think that this is unlikely.
.
related work over the past years studies have shown the importance of sketches and diagrams in software development.
however sketching is also an important task in other domains.
sketches in general artists sketch to clarify existing ideas and to develop new ones .
in mechanical design sketches not only document nal designs but also provide designers with a memory extension to help ideas taking shape and to communicate concepts to colleagues .
beside sketches being an external representation of memory and a means for communication they serve as documentation .
sch utze et al.
showed that the possibility to sketch has a positive e ect on the quality of solutions in early stages of the design process .
furthermore the ambiguity in sketches is a source of creativity and they support problem solving and understanding .
in our survey we found that the latter was one of the main reasons why participants archived their sketch.
sketches in software engineering software designers not only use sketches to design the appearance but also the behavior of software .
a study of brown et al.
revealed the importance of sketches for collaboration between user interaction designers and software developers.
chung et al.
showed that diagramming in distributed environments like open source projects di ers from diagramming in co located settings.
dekel and herbsleb studied software design teams at the oopsla designfest observing that teams intentionally improvise representations to ful ll ad hoc needs which arise during the evolution of object oriented design and thus diverge from standard notations like uml.
we can support this with our survey since most sketches were informal but often contained at least some uml elements.
walny et al.
analyzed eight work ows of software developers in an academic setting.
they report on a variety of transitions that sketches and diagrams undergo.
our quantitative as well as qualitative results provided insights into the transitions of sketches.
more than half of the sketches were revised.
furthermore respondents reported on sketches being shared with others or redrawn digitally.
in another study walny et al.
analyzed whiteboard drawings in a research institution to achieve a better understanding of what they called spontaneous visualizations.
our study suggests that one reason for archiving a sketch is that it helps to visualize the implementation issues or processes.
latoza et al.
conducted a survey with software engineers at microsoft.
they found that paper and whiteboards were perceived as most e ective for designing.
furthermore they state that understanding the rationale behind code is the biggest problem for developers.
in our study over half of the sketches helped the respondents to understand source code or general issues.cherubini et al.
interviewed eight software developers at microsoft identifying nine scenarios in which developers created and used drawings.
they explored these scenarios using a survey with participants also recruited at microsoft.
we based our list of purposes for sketch creation on their scenarios see table and found similar results.
however we asked for further purposes and found analyzing requirements to be an important task.
cherubini et al.
state that the use of formal notations like uml was very low.
this is consistent with petre who reports on a series of semi structured interviews with professional software developers on their uml use.
she states that the majority of interviewed practitioners did not use uml and those using uml tended to use it informally and selectively.
our study con rms the informal use of uml but we found that of the sketches contained at least some uml elements.
.
conclusion the main contribution of this paper is a thorough description of the manifold dimensions of sketches and diagrams in software development by presenting quantitative as well as qualitative results from a survey with participants.
this survey revealed that sketches and diagrams even if they are often informal are a valuable resource documenting many aspects of the software development work ow.
we showed that sketches are related to di erent source code artifacts and that roughly half of the sketches were rated as either helpful for the respondents or others to understand these artifacts.
furthermore the qualitative data showed that sketches often document or visualize the implementation and support people in understanding it.
as documentation is frequently poorly written and out of date sketches could ll in this gap and serve as a supplement to conventional documentation like source code comments.
tool support is needed to assist developers in archiving and retrieving sketches related to certain source code artifacts.
since more than half of the sketches analyzed in our survey were archived either digitally or digitally and on paper software professionals are willing to keep their visual artifacts.
however they also named technical issues e.g.
that there is no good technique to keep sketches together with source code.
a tool should support the evolution of sketches because more than of them were revised once or multiple times.
qualitative data indicates that it is a common use case for sketches to be initially created on analog media like paper or whiteboards and then potentially after some revisions they end up as an archived digital sketch.
our work is a good starting point for future research we plan to evaluate what distinguishes helpful from not helpful sketches and what contextual information is needed to understand them later.
moreover it would be interesting to examine if visualizations for certain source code artifacts share common characteristics.
this research may lead to recommendations for software practitioners on how to augment or annotate their sketches so that they can serve as a valuable software documentation.