jens knoop uwe zdun hrsg.
software engineering lecture notes in informatics lni gesellschaft f ur informatik bonn an empirical study on program comprehension with reacti veprogramming guido salvaneschi sven amann sebastian proksch and mira mezini1 abstract starting from the first in vestigations with strictly functional languages reacti veprogramming has been proposed as the pr ogramming paradigm for reacti veapplications.
the advantages of designs based on this style overdesigns based on the observer design pattern ha vebeen studied for along time.
over the years researchers ha veenriched reacti velanguages with more powerful abstractions embedded these abstractions into mainstream languages including object oriented languages and applied reacti veprogramming to se veral domains lik eguis animations webapplications robotics and sensor networks.
howe ver an important assumption behind this line of research that beside other advantages reacti veprogramming makes awide class of otherwise cumbersome applications more comprehensible has ne verbeenevaluated.
in this paper w ep resent the design and the results of the first empirical study that evaluates the effect of reacti veprogramming on comprehensibility compared to the traditional object oriented style with the observer design pattern.
results confirm the conjecture that comprehensibility is enhanced by reacti veprogramming.
in the experiment the reacti veprogramming group significantly outperforms the other group.
keywords reacti veprogramming controlled experiment program comprehension reacti veapplications are awide class of software that needs to respond to internal or external stimuli with aproper action.
examples of such applications include user interacti ve software lik eguis and webapplications graphical animations data acquisition from sensors and distributed event based systems.
over the last fe wyears reacti veprogramming rp has gained the attention of researchers and practitioners for the potential to express otherwise comple xreactivebehavior in intuitiveand declarati veway.rp has been firstly introduced in haskell.
influenced by these approaches implementations of rp ha vebeen proposed in se veral widespread languages including ja va javascript and scala.
recently concepts inspired by rp ha vebeen applied to production frame works lik emicrosoft reacti veextensions rx which recei vedgreat attention after the netflix success story .finally alot of attention in the front end de velopers community is re vealed by the increasing number of libraries that implement rp principles among others react.js bacon.js knockout meteor and reacti ve.coffee.
the rele vance of rp comes from the well known complexity of reacti veapplications which are hard to de velop and understand because of the mixed combination of data and control flo w.the observer design pattern is widely used for such applications.
it has the advantage of decoupling observers from observables.
but when it comes to program readability i tdoes not mak ethings easier because of dynamic registration side effects in call1technische uni versit at darmstadt fachbereich informatik fachgebiet softwaretechnik hochschulstr .
darmstadt deutschland lastname st.informatik.tu darmstadt.de70 guido salvaneschi et al.
backs and in version of control.
in contrast rp supports adesign based on data flows and time changing values the programmer states which relations should be enforced among thevariables that compose areactiveprogram and the rp runtime takes care of performing all the required updates.
dependencies are defined explicitly instead of being hidden in the control flo w.combination can be guided by types as opposed to callbacks that return void.
contrarily to the observer pattern control is not in verted and less boilerplate is required since collecting dependencies and performing the updates is automatized by the frame work.
based on these arguments it has been argued that rp greatly impro ves overthe traditional observer pattern used in oo programming both from the softwar edesign perspecti veas well as from the perspecti veoffacilitating the comprehensibility of the software.
yet little empirical evidence has been provided in favoro ft he claimed advantages of rp especially enhancement of comprehensibility .despite the intuition about its potential the reacti vestyle is not obviously more comprehensible than the observer design pattern.
forexample in the flapjax paper ajavascript application based on observer is compared against afunctionally equi valent rp version.
the authors argument that the rp version is much easier to comprehend.
howe ver the reader is warned that obviously the flapjax code may not appear any easier to afirst time reader .doubting at this point is legitimate does rp really mak ereactiveapplications easier to read?
also it is unclear howmuchexpertise is required to find ar pp rogram easier i fe ver.
tofill the gap this paper provides the first empirical evaluation of the impact of rp on program comprehension compared to the traditional technique based on the observer design pattern.
the experiment based on the rescala language in volves subjects that where divided into an rp group and an oo group.
the ywere shown areactiveapplication and their understanding of the reacti vefunctionalities wasmeasured.
tothe best of our knowledge such astudy has ne verbeen conducted before.
results sho wthat rp increases correctness of program comprehension comprehending programs in the rp style does not require more time than comprehending their oo equi valent and in contrast to oo where score results are correlated to programming skills with rp advanced programming skills are not needed to understand reacti veapplications.
the last result suggests that rp lowers the entrance barrier required to understand reacti veapplications.