engineering adaptive privacy on the role of privacy awareness requirements engineering adaptive privacy on the role of privacy awareness requirements inah omoronyia luca cavallaro mazeiar salehie liliana pasquale bashar nuseibeh publication date publication date published in published in icse proceedings of the international conference on software engineering pp.
licence licence this work is made available under the cc by nc sa .
licence and should only be used in accordance with that licence.
for more information on the specific terms consult the repository record for this item.
document version document version citation for this work harvardul citation for this work harvardul omoronyia i. cavallaro l. salehie m. pasquale l.and nuseibeh b. engineering adaptive privacy on the role of privacy awareness requirements available .
this work was downloaded from the university of limerick research repository.
for more information on this work the university of limerick research repository or to report an issue you can contact the repository administrators at ir ul.ie .
if you feel that this work breaches copyright please provide details and we will remove access to the work immediately while we investigate your claim.engineering adaptive privacy on the role of privacy awareness requirements inah omoronyia1 luca cavallaro2 mazeiar salehie2 liliana pasquale2 bashar nuseibeh2 school of computing university of glasgow uk lero the irish software engineering research centre university of limerick ireland department of computing the open university uk inah.omoronyia glasgow.ac.uk luca.cavallaro mazeiar.salehie liliana.pasquale bashar.nuseibeh lero.ie abstract applications that continuously gather and disclose personal information about users are increasingly common.
while disclosing this information may be essential for these applications to function it may also raise privacy concerns.
partly this is due to frequently changing context that introduces new privacy threats and makes it difficult to continuously satisfy privacy requirements.
to address this problem applications may need to adapt in order to manage changing privacy concerns.
thus we propose a framework that exploits the notion of privacy awareness requirements to identify runtime privacy properties to satisfy.
these properties are used to support disclosure decision making by applications.
our evaluations suggest that applications that fail to satisfy privacy awareness requirements cannot regulate users information disclosure.
we also observe that the satisfaction of privacy awareness requirements is useful to users aiming to minimise exposure to privacy threats and to users aiming to maximise functional benefits amidst increasing threat severity.
index terms privacy utility selective disclosure adaptation i. introduction consumers and enterprises increasingly rely on mobile and ubiquitous applications such as smart phones to satisfy their social and business needs.
this new generation of applications enable users to form localised short and long lived groups or communities to achieve common objectives.
these applications may need to gather and disclose users sensitive information such as location time proximity to nearby services and connectivity to other users.
the exposure of such information in an unregulated way can threaten user privacy .
this calls for a more systematic approach for considering the privacy requirements of users in software applications.
a representative class of such requirements is selective disclosure deciding what information to disclose in which context and the degree of control an individual has over disclosed information .
a key determinant of selective disclosure is frequently changing context e.g.
changing time location and group properties.
these changes blur the boundary between public and personal spaces and may introduce unforeseen privacy threats .
additionally users may be unaware of when and for what purpose sensitive information about them is being collected analysed or transmitted.
this makes it even more difficult for users and applications to adapt in order to continue satisfying their privacy requirements.
in this paper we present an adaptive privacy framework that aims to support the selective disclosure of personal information in software applications.
we follow the popular mape monitor analyse plan and execute loop for designing adaptive applications.
our framework consists of models techniques and tools and focuses on the role of privacy awareness requirements par that embody three concerns i the identification of what attributes to monitor in order to detect privacy threats ii the discovery of such threats before personal information is disclosed and iii a utility for the severity of discovered threats as well as for the benefit that can be derived if associated information is disclosed.
we suggest and demonstrate that an advantage of this approach is that decisions on whether or not to disclose information can be made based on reliable knowledge of both its cost and benefit to the user of the application.
our approach relies on software behavioural and context models and the privacy requirements of users to identify attributes to monitor in order to discover a privacy threat.
a privacy threat is discovered by searching the history of system interactions that may affect the satisfaction of a user s privacy requirements.
the severity of identified threat and the associated benefit of disclosure are determined by analysing the evolving properties of generated networks emerging from users interactions.
subsequently we investigate the relevance of such utility measure during the planning phase of software adaptation.
our approach for identifying monitored attributes had been implemented in an openly accessible automated environment .
in this paper we evaluated our framework using a comparative study to examine the consequence of the satisfaction failure of par during the planning phase of adaptive privacy.
first we showed that applications that fail to satisfy par are unable to manage privacy based on the utility of disclosure.
second we showed that applications that satisfy par are able to regulate the disclosure of information with changing context.
the remainder of the paper is organised as follows.
section ii presents some related work on privacy awareness and adaptation relevant to our overall approach which is then presented in section iii.
section iv describes the models that we use in our approach.
section v then presents par and the associated mechanisms used to derive monitoring and utility measures for adaptive privacy.
section vi focuses on experimental evaluation of our approach.
conclusions and further work are presented in section vii.
ii.
related work the core contribution of our research is to show that capturing privacy awareness requirements in software systems can be used to better engineer adaptive privacy.
in this section we present a review of related work in the area of adaptive privacy privacy engineering and privacy awareness upon which we build our approach.
a related notion of awareness requirements was described by souza et al.
as a class of requirements that predicate the satisfaction of other requirements.
albeit not focused on privacy the approach has been used to specify the need for adaptation of software systems.
in this paper we tailor the notion of awareness requirements and propose the use of par for adaptive privacy.
adaptive privacy was introduced by schaub et al.
as a system s ability to preserve privacy in presence of context changes by providing recommendations to the user or via automatic reconfiguration.
this reconfiguration is essential since the boundary delimiting the decision of a user disclosing or withholding information changes with context .
braghin et al.
used the concept of ambient to enforce privacy in a changing environment.
this was achieved by using policies to define boundaries of information disclosure.
braghin et al.
did not consider that changes in context may determine the need to change attributes that need to be monitored in the application nor the notion of utility.
privacy engineering was described by spiekermann and cranor as a systematic effort to embed privacy concerns into the design of an application.
following this principle kalloniatis et al.
proposed a methodology to build privacy preserving applications.
similarly liu et al.
proposed a requirement driven development methodology for secure and privacy preserving applications based on the i framework.
barth et al.
used the contextual integrity framework as a means to design privacy preserving applications.
contextual integrity features a context model and a formal model that uses temporal logic to define the communication between two entities and how the disclosure of information takes place.
these methodologies and framework did not consider that the system can adapt during its lifetime consequently the constructs for the satisfaction of privacy requirements can also change.
finally p tzsch defines privacy awareness as an individual s cognition of who when which what amount and how personal information about his her activity is processed and utilised.
p tzsch s view of privacy awareness helps to provide a set of constructs for building a context for which adaptive privacy can be assessed.
an empirical study about the impact of this view of privacy awareness has been carried out .
however privacy awareness constructs have not been investigated in adaptive privacy.
we suggest that privacy awareness is critical to enable users and systems to gain sufficient knowledge about how to act in privacy sensitive situations.
as they gain assurance that their privacy is broadly preserved and of the expected benefit of disclosure they may consider forfeiting their privacy when engaging in some interactions.
iii.
overall approach and motivating example the objective for adaptive privacy is to enable applications to detect privacy threats with changing context and subsequently carry out adaptation actions to ameliorate the consequences of the threat.
our approach to achieve this is based on the rationale that for useful adaptation to occur in software systems there needs to be monitoring analysis planning and execution .
these activities enable software systems to detect at runtime the changes in the system context and to appropriately react to them.
as shown in figure we propose that adaptive privacy firstly mandates that systems should be able to identify attributes to monitor in order to detect privacy threats monitoring .
secondly when privacy threats are discovered systems should have an understanding of the consequence of the threat analysis .
it is the ability of systems to satisfy their monitoring and analysis needs that we characterise as par.
the satisfaction of this requirement serves as a useful input into the system s ability to make informed decision on information disclosure planning .
finally based on disclosure decision mitigation actions can be carried out to ameliorate the consequence of the threat execution .
such mitigation actions can involve updating the behaviour of the system changing the context of operations or users carrying out explicit mediation actions.
in this paper we focus on the first three phases of the mape loop to highlight the par for making useful disclosure decisions.
specifically par are the requirements that need to be satisfied by a system in order to meaningfully adapt the privacy of its users as context changes.
in this research we demonstrate that the core of such requirements include the ability of systems to identify attributes to monitor in order to detect privacy threats the discovery of a privacy threat before information about a user is disclosed and the severity of the threat as well as the benefit of information disclosure amidst the discovered threat.
in this paper we first highlight the models useful for satisfying par section iv we then present an approach to par analysis based on these models section figure adaptive privacy framework v .
finally we present an evaluation of the usefulness of par at the planning phase of adaptive privacy section vi .
we achieve our objective using an example involving a track sharing application for runners and other outdoor activities.
similar examples of such application include b.icycle mytracks mytracks.appspot .com etc.
typically such applications enable a group of users to share live gps tracks and performance statistics with fellow users and other agents such as their fitness instructors and physicians.
for this example privacy management includes the capability of users to decide the limits of information disclosure to other users about their current location distance age heart rate burned calories weight loss etc.
effective adaptive privacy requires users sharing their outdoor activity experience to understand information flows weigh the consequences of sharing information and make informed context specific decisions to disclose or withhold information.
iv.
models for satisfying par as shown in figure the three main models we use to enable the satisfaction of privacy awareness requirements include behavioural and context model as well as a model representing user privacy requirements.
we discuss each of these models in detail.
a. context model a context model is useful for identifying interactions that can occur between users as well as the attributes of the users involved in achieving a common objective .
for adaptive privacy context models represent attributes that are subsequently manipulated on by the software system in order to support the activity of the users as they interact with one another.
the advantage of context models is their reuse for design of multiple systems.
in this research we formally define a context model as a tuple cm d y u r c .
where d is a set of attributes y is a set of entities u is a relation u y x y representing the association between entities r is a relation r d x 2d between attributes where 2d is the power set of d and c is a relation c y x 2d that associates entities to attributes.
an instance of context model for the case study in section iii.b is shown in figure .
an entity in our model represents an object that can be described by a set of attributes.
attributes here are viewed as atomic variables that cannot be further decomposed.
there are two kinds of entities entities that characterise the environment of interaction e.g.
the location entity represented in light boxes in figure and entities representing roles of users in the system.
as shown in the shaded boxes in figure we represent a set of users as agents.
these agents interact to exchange information attributes about an agent with other agents.
the agent responsible for sending the information is referred to as the sender while the receiving agent is the receiver.
the agent characterised by the sent information is the subject.
these interactions that occur between agents with a given role are modelled by the relation u. this relation also expresses how other entities relate with each other e.g.
track and a location or between agent and other entities e.g.
subject and activitytype .
attributes can relate with each other as modelled in the inference relation r. such inference relations are established rules that enable the deduction of previously unknown attribute from another disclosed attribute .
for example the rule loccords ave.speed trackname starttime infers that the location coordinates of a user can be inferred from the disclosure of the users average speed track name and start time.
another example is the rule bmi height weight.
finally an entity is related to a set of attributes as expressed in the relation c. an example in figure is the relation between the entity location and the attributes loccords trajectory and locname.
generally our approach to modelling context is amenable to other forms of inferences based on transitive euclidian or symmetric relations.
b. behavioural model a behavioural model represents the different states that an agent can reach and the transitions required to enter such state.
formally a behavioural model is a tuple b s e .
where s is a set of states e is a set of events where an event is defined by a tuple dn y ax sent received .
in that tuple dn is a set of cardinality n containing the attributes manipulated by the transition.
the set dn can be replaced by an entity that characterise the environment of interaction.
the subject ax identifies the agent the event is referred to i.e.
an agent with type subject and sent received expresses if the attributes are sent or received by the agent respectively.
finally is the state transition relation s x e s. the occurrence of a transition with an event transition means that the agent that the behaviour is referred to does not send or receive any attribute in that transition.
figure example of a context model an example of a behavioural model represented as a labelled transition system lts is shown in figure .
in table we illustrate the set of context attributes and the events associated to each transition of the lts in figure .
for example the transition t4 in table from state to in figure is triggered by the event shareraceresult.
the attributes used by the event are shown in the right column of the table.
these attributes are associated to the agent a1 which in our example is the subject.
finally the event features the sent keyword indicating that t4 sends the attributes in the event.
table also features some transitions that are signified by the representation .
also note that there can be transitions not associated with context attributes example t8 .
for detecting privacy threats we focus only on the information that the various agents in the system may exchange.
consequently we consider t1 t2 t3 and t8 as transitions since they do not send or receive any attribute.
c. user privacy requirements the user privacy requirements are individual expressions by agents to regulate the manner of information disclosure about their activity.
we view the possible failure of a privacy requirement in a specific context as a privacy threat that triggers appropriate mitigation actions see section v.b .
we build on the view presented in where the privacy of a subject is conditioned by the subject s and other agents past experiences and expectations of the future.
in this way we assume that privacy requirements are expressed as if then rules.
the if segment contains an event and the identity of its sender or receiver.
if the event is a sent event then a receiver of the event is identified.
alternatively if the event is a received event then a sender of the event is identified.
the then part is a linear temporal logic ltl formula that captures the past experiences or future expectations of a subject by using past and future operators .
the ltl formula predicates about the values that attributes of the context model can assume or the knowledge that can be gained by agents about a subject over time .
the formula kai daj is a modal representation of knowledge that the agent ai knows the value of the attribute d about a subject aj.
examples of privacy requirements for the selective disclosure of a subject s information can be stated as thus pr1 if location a1 received a2 then p starttime a1 .
hrs.
pr2 if weight a1 sent receiver then kreceiver bmia1.
the symbols p and are the ltl operators eventually in the past and globally respectively as defined in table .
pr1 is active if a2 sends a specific location attribute about the agent a1.
in that case the subject should have started his race before .
hrs at least once in the past.
similarly pr2 is active if the weight of a1 is received by any receiver then kreceiver bmia1 i.e.
the receiver does not know the bmi of a1 should hold globally i.e.
both in the past and in the future .
v. analysing par in this section we describe different analysis used for the satisfaction of par based on models described in section iv.
a. identifying attributes to monitor for the satisfaction of par we first need to identify the attributes to monitor for the detection of privacy threats.
we realise this by identifying the subset of attributes that are common to the context and behavioural model and in the privacy requirement of the user.
the identification process is composed of four steps .
for each privacy requirement prx a couple dx ax or yx ax present in the event of the if segment is collected in a set m. where dx and yx identify an attributes or an entity referenced by the event in the if part of prx and ax is the subject in the event.
.
for each couple yx ax in m the tuples cdx contained in the relation c of the context model and featuring yx are selected.
for each tuple cyx in c a new couple dj ax is added to m where dj is an attribute in cyx.
finally the couple yx ax is removed from m. .
for each couple dx ax in m the tuples rdx contained in the relation r of the context model and featuring dx is selected.
for each tuple rdx a new couple dj ax is added to m where dj is an attribute in rdx.
it is noted here that each dj can also be part of some other tuples in the relation r. in this case the step is repeated for those tuples.
.
finally for each couple dx ax in m the behavioural model of the agent ax is considered.
the transitions in the transition relation ax that are triggered by events associated to dx are selected and associated to prx.
the output of these steps consists of the monitored attributes contained in the set m and the marked transitions in the behavioural model of an agent that operate on monitored figure3 a behavioural model b1 table attributes associated with state transitions ti t event event t1 establishgpsfix loccords starttime activitytype t2 recordtrack currenttime ave.speed loccords t3 uploadtrack avespeed trackname loccords starttime endtime t4 shareraceresult avespeed trackname loccords starttime endtime weight a1 sent t5 sharepersonalinfo gender height age a1 sent t6 requestusertrack subjectname a1 sent t7 viewusertrack avespeed trackname starttime endtime loccords weight height gender age a1 sent t8 hibernate attributes.
these marked transitions identify where specifically in the behaviour of an agent the monitoring needs to occur.
considering pr1 in section iv.c the if part of the requirement contains the event location a1 received .
the first process step adds the couple location a1 to the set m. the second step considers those tuples in the relation c of the context model that include the location entity.
as showed in figure the tuples are location loccords location trajectory and location locname .
the couples loccords a1 trajectory a1 and locname a1 are then added to m. the third step considers the relation r in the context model and looks for attributes already in m also contained in a tuple in r. for instance as highlighted in section iv.a the loccords attribute is included in the tuple loccords ave.speed trackname starttime of the relation r. thus the couples avespeed a1 trackname a1 and starttime a1 are added to m. the final step considers the transitions of the agent a1 as shown in table .
the transitions t4 and t7 are marked since they contain the attributes trackname loccords and starttime.
b. privacy threats detection privacy threats detection is aimed at discovering if an interaction between agents can result in the failure of a privacy requirement.
we define an interaction as the exchange of information about a subject between a sender and a receiver.
given the set of monitored attributes and the associated transitions in agent behaviours our approach analyses the interaction history of the system.
the outcome ascertains the satisfaction or failure of a given privacy requirement in a moment of the system s history.
in this subsection we first characterise an interaction between two agents followed by how a sequence of such interactions can be used to describe a history of the system.
finally we demonstrate the detection of privacy threats based on the defined history.
characterising an interaction between two agents an interaction is a single information flow between two agents a1 and a2.
formally such flow is defined as either of the following i a couple ts tr where ts is a transition sa d1 d2 ... dy ax sent sb belonging to the transition function of a1 and tr is a tuple s a d1 d2 ... dy ax received s b belonging to the transition function of a2 ii two couples ts tr .
the latter represents interactions where an agent sends information that is eventually received by a receiver in the system.
we have assumed asynchronous interaction.
it is possible that synchronous interaction can yield different behavioral runs and knowledge models for example assume that in a system there exist an agent a1 whose behavioural model is represented by b1 in figure and a second agent a2 whose behavioural model b2 is presented in figure .
the transition t4 in b2 is identical to the transition t4 in b1 and the transition t4rec features a receive events with the same attributes as the event in t4.
assuming the events in b1 and in b2 have the subject a1 i.e.
a1 is sending information about itself to a2 .
then the interaction between a1 and a2 is the tuple t4 a1 t4rec a2 .
defining the history of the system a history of a system is a sequence of information flows between agents in the system.
the history keeps track in each time instant of the predicates holding in that instant and the values of context attributes describing each subject.
formally a history is defined as h h1 h2 ... hn.
each hi is a history step described by the sets where sa1 ... sam contains the states of the agents in the system in that history step contains the contextual attributes values for each agent and contains the predicates that hold in hi .
in h the transition from hi to hi signifies an interaction between two agents in the system.
that interaction changes the states of the agents involved in the transition and can modify the predicates holding in the arrival state.
consider the partial history of a system involving interactions between a group of agents a1 a2 and a3.
an instance of that history is shown in figure .
the behaviour of a1 a2 and a3 is as described in b1 b2 and b3 of figures and respectively.
the behaviour of a3 features the transition t4rec which we assume identical to the one already introduced for a2 and the transition t5rec whose event has the same attributes as t5 in table but is a received event.
in h1 of figure the agent a1 is in state b1 as a result of uploadtrack event while a2 and a3 are in idle states i.e.
b2 and b3 respectively .
the interaction t4 a1 t4rec a2 involving a1 disclosing its weight to a2 brings the history into h2.
at this point a2 knows the weight of a1 i.e.
ka2weighta1 since a1 has sent that attribute in t4 a1 and a2 has received in in t4rec a2.
at h3 a2 sends a1 s weight to a3 via interaction t4 a2 t4rec a3 .
consequently the knowledge model or what other agents know about a1 is ka2weight a1 and figure example of a history of a system involving interactions between agents a1 a3 where a1 is the subject figure behavioural models b2 and b3 t4rec t4 t4rec t5rec ka3weighta1.
finally when the interaction t5 a1 t5rec a3 involving a1 disclosing its height to a3 occurs then ka2weighta1 ka3weighta1 and ka3heighta1 hold.
discovering privacy threats from a history of the system given a history and a privacy requirement a privacy threat is detected if the ltl formula in the then segment of the privacy requirement is not verified in the history.
note that only privacy requirements for which the if segment matches the event associated with an incumbent interaction are considered.
the verification of a ltl formula on a finite history has been introduced in literature .
in this research we extend the semantics defined in to introduce a three valued logic.
the semantics of our logic is given in table .
we assume the formula f on h is evaluated in the current step of history and denoted as h i. defined semantics for our logic has the following rationale i if the evaluation of a formula in the current instant i of the history of the system offers enough evidences that a formula f will be true respectively false in all the possible continuations of the history then the formula is true respectively false ii otherwise the evaluation of the formula is inconclusive and the formula will be unknown.
if the formula evaluated is true then the privacy requirements are verified and the analysis detects no threat in case the formula evaluated is false then a privacy requirement is violated and the analysis consequently identifies a privacy threat.
in case the formula evaluated is unknown then our analysis signals a potential privacy threat.
this means that there are not enough evidences to conclude that the privacy requirements are violated.
such evidences can though be present in the following steps of the history.
consequently our analysis derives a new instance of the formula scaled of one step in the future and tries and verifies the new instance in the next history step.
consider the history shown in figure also assuming the interactions that generated h1 and h2 have occurred.
then at h3 pr2 is active since its if segment matches one of the events in the interaction t4 a1 t4rec a2 .
the formula in the then segment is consequently evaluated in h3.
for the formula to be verified the predicate kreceiverbmia1 should hold in every previous and future steps of the history.
furthermore based on the inference rule bmi height weight for kreceiver bmia1 to hold then kreceiver weighta1 or kreceiverheighta1 should hold where receiver identifies a generic agent receiving the information.
if we assume that the interaction t5 a1 t5rec a3 has not yet occurred the predicate ka3weighta1 holds at h3.
the information contained in the history up to h3 is not sufficient to demonstrate that pr2 will not hold in all the possible continuations of h so our analysis marks it as unknown and signals a potential threat.
the analysis will also continue to check the formula in the future until further evidences can bring it to a conclusion.
those evidences are provided in h4 where ka3heighta1 holds.
in that step there are enough evidences to conclude that the condition does not hold in any possible continuation of h and the analysis will consequently signal a privacy threat.
c. determining utility of disclosure when a privacy threat is discovered the decision to disclose or not disclose needs to be made.
a vital input into this decision making process is the insight on the severity of the discovered threat and the benefit of disclosure amidst the discovered threat.
the utility of disclosure is then the difference between benefit of disclosure and the severity of discovered privacy threat.
in this research we determine the utility of disclosure using the properties of the network generated from the history of the system.
for example the shaded section of figure is the network generated using the history of the system for a1 a3 shown in figure .
here an undirected and unweighted network is assumed.
in this network nodes are agents while a link between nodes is a relation formed between an information sender and a receiver.
specifically we determine the benefit of disclosure based on the clustering coefficient of the generated network while the severity of the threat is determined based on the degree centrality of receiving agent.
the clustering coefficient of an agent in a network is the ratio of the number of actual links between the agent s neighbours and the possible number of links.
the overall clustering coefficient of the network is then an average of the clustering coefficients of each agent in the network.
clustering coefficient typically describes the concentration of the neighbourhood of an agent in the network.
such concentration has been used as an indicator to show the extent to which an agent shares common properties and or plays similar roles with other agents in the network .
for example assuming a1 a2 and a3 have interacted with other agents as demonstrated in figure .
the dotted link illustrates a scenario where the agent a1 is to disclose the attribute x to ar1 or ar2.
the clustering figure a1 disclosing x to ar1 or ar2 having different clustering and centrality properties table ltl semantics on the system history h expression semantics h i f f holds at the step i of h h i lasttime f f holds at the step i of h h i p f j i and h j f h i p f j i and h j f h i next f unknown and check h i f h i f f true if h i f. otherwise unknown and check h i f f h i f f false if h i f. otherwise unknown and check h i f f h i f false if h i f j i and h j f otherwise unknown and check h i f coefficient of a1 if the attribute x is sent to the receiver ar1is .
.
alternatively the clustering coefficient if sent to ar2is .
.
thus using the clustering coefficient as a measure of benefit for the network in figure it will therefore be more beneficial if a1 discloses x to ar1 compared to ar2.
the degree centrality of an agent describes the number of direct links that an agent has with other agents.
generally it has been shown that an agent with higher degree centrality can gain access to and or influence over others.
such agents can also serve as a source or conduit for larger volumes of information exchange with other agents .
thus a receiver with higher degree centrality stands a greater chance of disseminating inappropriately disclosed information to more agents hence representing a higher threat severity.
using the illustration in figure the degree centrality for ar1 is .
and hence it represents a lesser threat severity compared to ar2 which is .
.
given that a potential privacy threat is distinguished from a privacy threat that can be proven from existing history a damping factor is applied to the former.
such factor ensures that a potential privacy threat does not have equal measure of severity compared to a realised one.
overall the utility of disclosure is then difference between benefit and threat severity.
the utility of disclosure if a1 discloses the attribute x to ar1 is .
while that of ar2is .
.
thus depending on a utility value users or systems may consider disclosing or withholding specific information.
in this manner they are either forfeiting or reinforcing their privacy when engaging in some interactions.
vi.
evaluation of par in disclosure decision making we conducted an evaluation to demonstrate if par can be a useful input to the planning part of adaptive privacy.
one way of evaluating this outcome is to use specific adaptation strategies that regulate an acceptable utility threat severity or benefit thresholds for a subject.
the effectiveness of these strategies can then be checked for scenarios where the failure satisfaction of par are realised.
table illustrates the set of strategies used in this study.
case1 represents an agent that does not satisfy par.
for this case an agent initiates privacy management without an understanding of threat severity benefit or the ultimate utility of disclosure.
case2 represents an agent satisfying par and triggering the adaptation action that terminates all interactions with other agents once the utility reaches the value .
at this point for h privacy threat severity ts equals benefit.
practically case2 represents an agent disassociating itself from a group objective because the benefit does not exceed the privacy threat resulting from information disclosure.
for case3 the agent satisfies par and triggers the adaptation action similar to case2 once ts is greater than a specific threshold thi .
practically case3 represents an agent disassociating itself from a group objective irrespective of the benefit derived because a specific threat severity level is reached.
finally case3 is similar to case2 but the adaptation action triggered is not to disclose information to other agents with specific properties.
for this evaluation the property we examine is the number of neighbours n of the receiving agent.
practically case4 is a strategy that does not stop the increase in threat severity but curbs the rate at which the increase occurs while still deriving some utility.
based on the four highlighted cases we conduct an experimental study that evaluates the following research questions rq1 what is the difference between an agent that does not satisfy par i.e.
no par and an agent that does i.e.
with par ?
to address this question we consider case1 no par and case2 with par .
rq2 is there any advantage that case3 has over case4 or vice versa.
considering that case3 and case4 manipulate on varying th and n values the aim is to understand the impact of these variations on utility.
finally rq3 investigates the impact that the number of agents in a group has on the utilities of case3 and case4.
a. experimental setup in this evaluation we used netlogo a programmable modelling environment for simulating natural and social phenomena to simulate interactions across nine groups of agents.
the number of agents in each group ranged from .
this choice was inspired by studies on the average number of links that an agent has with other agents in typical group networks where agents are human .
the behaviour of each agent is a variant of the behavioural model shown in figure .
during the simulation multiple interactions can occur over a single link.
thus the actual number of links is less than the total number of simulated interactions.
each group had a single subject with multiple senders and receivers.
thus every interaction either involved a subject sending information about itself or another agent information sending information about the subject.
also the simulation of interactions followed the power law distribution which is typical in group networks where a small number of agents have very large number of links.
our simulation of interactions and subsequent networks were tailored to closely resemble mobility based networks where links arise mainly from spatial or temporal proximity of agents.
for each group we associated pr2 section iv.c to the selected subject.
we assumed a conservative scenario where every interaction resulted in a privacy threat.
furthermore we fixed th .
and evaluated case3 for th th th th th and th respectively.
similarly we fixed n and evaluated case4 for n n n n n and n respectively.
b. findings and lessons learned the topology metrics for each group network based on the above experimental setup are shown in table .
tsno par refers table adaptation triggers and disclosure decision trigger action case1 no par case2 utility terminate all disclosure case3 ts thi terminate all disclosure case4 utility terminate only messages to receiver with more than n neighbours in the network to privacy threat severity where par are not satisfied.
the 2nd and 3rd columns show that the number of agents in a group increases with increasing links between agents.
similarly the number of interactions required for privacy threat severity to reach for a scenario where par are not satisfied increases with the number of agents.
this is because given the power law and increasing the number of agents in a group one would expect a decrease in the degree centrality of most receiving agents and hence in the associated privacy threat severity.
in the remaining of this subsection we used this result to address each of the designated research questions.
while the results generated for the different groups were related for space limitations we show results for only group in rq1 and rq2.
in rq3 we then demonstrate the impact of the number of agents in a group on the effectiveness of adaptation actions.
rq1 findings figure shows the plots of threat severity benefit and utility for case1 and case2 for a subject in group .
in both cases it can be seen that the benefit of information disclosure reaches a tipping point and gradually decreases thereafter.
this outcome is explained considering that the more a subject engages in interactions and form new links with other agents the less likely the neighbours of the subject will have links to each other.
this results in a lower benefit measure.
in contrast given no par for case1 the threat severity continues to increase with a continuous decrease in the utility.
this continuous increase in severity results from the receiving agent having more neighbours with increasing interactions.
for case2 with par as shown in figure the subject is able to curb the continuous increase in threat severity.
in summary the core distinction between an agent with par and no par is that agents with par can regulate information disclosure.
such regulation is based on tolerable levels of threat severity or on the minimum expected utility.
for case2 this has been achieved by terminating all subsequent interactions at the point where utility reaches .
however terminating all subsequent interactions can be viewed as an extreme risk averting behaviour which can hinder agents from reaping the benefit of disclosure.
thus a more appropriate scenario falls somewhere between extreme cases of risk taking and averting.
we investigate these scenarios in rq2 with varying values of th and n. rq2 findings figure illustrates the impact of a subject terminating information disclosure to receiving agents with n neighbours in a group case4 .
it is noticed here that increasing n results in tending utility towards what we observed in the no par case.
again this outcome can be explained by the assumption of power law distribution where a smaller number of receiving agents will have high n. thus at higher n values this adaptation action is less effective.
the outcome for case3 involving a different adaptation action is depicted in figure .
here all interactions are terminated when ts is more than a specified th.
for this case the subject does not need to wait until utility .
as a result the utility curves associated with the two lower thresholds th1 and th2 outperform the utility of case2.
similar to case4 as th values increase the utility for the subject tends towards the no par utility.
to achieve a better understanding of the statistical significance of the results generated for varying th and n values we ran a non parametric anova test.
the choice of non parametric anova was because the utility data of different cases did not have normal distribution.
figure shows the box plots for the different utility function of case1 case4.
the kruskal wallis test showed significant difference between these cases but pair wise comparison revealed that the three higher th values for case3 i.e.
th4 th5 and th6 are not statistically different neither from no par nor from each other.
conversely th1 th2 and th3 are statistically different from no par and each other.
this outcome suggests that for a risk averting behaviour th1 is better than th2 and th3.
conversely for a risk taking behaviour th3 is the limit table simulated network topology metrics group no.
agents no.
links no.
interactions tsnopar figure utility of terminating disclosure to agents with different number of links n agents .
no.
interactions figure a plot of threat severity ts benefit b clustering coeff.
and utility u vs history of system hi for agents .
!no.
interactions!
!no.
interactions!
compared to th4 th5 and th6 for which if applied then some benefit can be derived without being similar to no par.
again the two higher n values for case4 i.e.
n5 and n6 are not significantly different from neither no par nor from each other.
conversely n1 n4 are statistically different from no par as well as each other.
this outcome suggests that for a risk averting behaviour n1 is better than n2 n4.
conversely for a risk taking behaviour n4 is the limit compared to n5 and n6 for which if applied then some benefit can be derived without reaching the no par utility.
in summary for a risk averting behaviour it can be said that lower values of th or n are better than higher values.
in contrast for a risk taking behaviour the intension is for a subject to accommodate the decline in the utility and the increase in threat severity in order to leverage on the benefit.
then there is a limit to which such a subject can risk information disclosure over which it is as good as the subject not satisfying par.
rq3 findings table shows a comparison of case3 and case4 against no par for different groups considered in this study.
this table illustrates that for groups and consisting of and agents respectively none of the adaptation actions in case4 was significantly different from the no par.
from groups to the outcome showed a different trend of decreasing numbers of n that was not significantly different from the no par case.
the rationale for this outcome is derived from the view that for a specific n value and as the number of agents in a group increases there is also an increased likelihood of the number of receiving agents whose neighbours would be more than n. conversely for a smaller group of agents groups and smaller values of n are required to achieve a statistically different utility.
a pattern similar to case4 is also roughly observable for case3 that involves varying th values across groups.
as such for groups with smaller number of agents smaller values of th are required to achieve a statistically different utility.
the key observation is that n and th are mutable factor that change depending on the number of agents in the group.
as the number of agents in a group increases the resulting utility of an adaptation action for a specific n and th also become more significantly different from no par.
vii.
conclusion and further work in this paper we presented an adaptive privacy framework that enables the runtime selective disclosure of personal information.
our approach is based on the rationale that for the appropriate disclosure of information from a sender to a receiver some privacy awareness requirements par need to be satisfied.
such requirements underpin the ability of applications to identify the attributes to monitor in order to detect privacy threats the discovery of a privacy threat before information is disclosed and an understanding of the utility of disclosure which includes the severity of the threat as well as the benefit of disclosure in the face of the discovered threat.
we evaluated our framework from two viewpoints.
first we showed that applications that fail to satisfy par are unable to regulate information flow based on the utility of disclosure.
secondly we showed that applications that satisfy par can regulate the disclosure of information.
we demonstrated the usefulness of par that crosscuts a spectrum where at one end is risk aversion with the aim of user applications minimising exposure to privacy threats and the other end is risk taking with the objective of maximising benefit amidst increasing threat severity and declining utility .
although we used a single motivating example to evaluate our approach we suggest that our approach is generalisable to other domain where disclosure can be modelled as the transfer of information between agents.
the key benefit of our approach to engineering adaptive software is that par can serve as useful input into the planning and execution phases of the adaptation cycle.
par are useful figure box plots of different th and n values agents table case3 and case4 vs no par for different groups not significantly different from no par group case4 case3 n1 n2 n3 n4 n5 n6 th3 th4 th5 th6 n1 n2 n3 n4 n5 n6 th3 th4 th5 th6 n1 n2 n3 n4 n5 n6 th3 th4 th5 th6 n2 n3 n4 n5 n6 th4 th5 th6 n3 n4 n5 n6 th4 th5 th6 n4 n5 n6 th4 th5 th6 n5 n6 th4 th5 th6 n6 th4 th5 th6 th4 th5 figure utility of terminating disclosure to all agents when threat severity is more than a certain threshold th no.
interactions for planning as it provides an understanding of the utility of information disclosure.
we also expect par to be useful for execution.
this is because it provides a rationale for software models that need to change in order to preserve privacy.
while we have not focused on the semantics of such change we expect it to involve an adaptation manager carrying out some actions.
these include altering or removing disclosure behaviour by updating the lts representation of the application.
other execution approaches may include refining user privacy requirements or learning new inference rules in the context model to subsequently enable better adaptation.
another benefit of our approach to software engineering is that it relies on a minimal subset of general software engineering models.
for example there is no need to explicitly model a malicious user in order to discover privacy threats.
generated interaction networks used in the evaluation of our approach closely resemble random networks that are typical of mobile applications.
further work will be required to generalise our approach to other forms of networks such as the small world or networks where the power law distribution is not assumed.
furthermore our framework is extensible to utilise richer models of context.
thus we aim to investigate other models that addresses possible uncertainties that can be introduced by mobility and changing context.
the wider question that our framework poses is that of engineering existing legacy application into an adaptive privacy protecting one.
in future work we plan to investigate an aspect oriented and component based approach to adaptive privacy that is amenable to legacy systems.
finally we intend to investigate the notion of entropy and transience in adaptive privacy.
this is necessary because the sensitivity of information may decay over time for a number of reasons.
these include the transient nature of the knowledge of human agents and the disclosed information becoming out of context or more inaccessible over time.
acknowledgment this work was supported in part by sfi grant ce i1855 for cset2 to lero microsoft seif award and the european research council.