zurich open repository and archive university of zurich university library strickhofstrasse ch zurich year supporting developers with natural language queries w rsch m ghezzi g reif g gall h c posted at the zurich open repository and archive university of zurich zora url conference or workshop item originally published at w rsch m ghezzi g reif g gall h c .
supporting developers with natural language queries.
in 32nd acm ieee international conference on software engineering cape town south africa may .
developers with natural language queries michael w rsch giacomo ghezzi gerald reif and harald c. gall wuersch ghezzi reif gall ifi.uzh.ch s.e.a.l.
software architecture and evolution lab department of informatics university of zurich switzerland abstract the feature list of modern ides is steadily growing and mastering these tools becomes more and more demanding especially for novice programmers.
despite their remarkable capabilities ides often still cannot directly answer the questions that arise during program comprehension tasks.
instead developers have to map their questions to multiple concrete queries that can be answered only by combining several tools and examining the output of each of them manually to distill an appropriate answer.
existing approaches have in common that they are either limited to a set of predefined hardcoded questions or that they require to learn a specific query language only suitable for that limited purpose.
we present a framework to query for information about a software system using guided input natural language resembling plain english.
for that we model data extracted by classical software analysis tools with an owl ontology and use knowledge processing technologies from the semantic web to query it.
we use a case study to demonstrate how our framework can be used to answer queries about static source code information for program comprehension purposes.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming environments integrated environments interactive environments programmer workbench d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement restructuring reverse engineering and reengineering h. .
information search and retrieval query formulation i. .
knowledge representation formalisms and methods semantic networks general terms human factors languages keywords software evolution software maintenance source code analysis semantic web natural language conceptual queries tool support permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may cape town south africa copyright acm ... .
.
.
introduction program comprehension plays an important role when performing software engineering activities on large bodies of source code.
both industry and research therefore have aimed to integrate various tools into modern integrated development environments ides to support software engineers in understanding a software system during their daily development and maintenance tasks.
especially for novice developers mastering all the powerful features that are delivered by an ide such as eclipse or visual studio requires a great deal of learning effort.
when solving a program comprehension task developers usually have particular questions in mind such as where is this method called?
or what fields are declared as being of this type?
.
unfortunately such questions often can not be answered directly using existing functionality offered by ides.
instead as explained by de alwis and murphy in developers first need to map these conceptual queries to one or several concrete queries .
even if a particular conceptual query is directly supported novice programmers are often not yet aware of the capabilities of their ide.
for example although experienced developers can easily answer where is this method called with eclipse newcomers still need to be aware that the find