temporalanalysisofapiusageconcepts gias uddin barth el emy dagenais and martin p. robillard school of computer science mcgill university montr eal qc canada gias bart martin cs.mgill.ca abstract software reusethroughapplicationprogramming interfaces apis is an integral part of software development.
the functionality offered by an api is not always accessed uniformly throughout the lifetime of a client program.
we proposetemporal api usage pattern miningto detect api usage patterns in terms of their time of introduction into client programs.
we detect concepts as distinct groups of api functionality from the change history of a client program.
we locate those concepts in the client change history and detect temporal usage patterns where a pattern contains a set of concepts that were added into the client program in a specific temporalorder.weinvestigatedthepropertiesoftemporalapi usage patternsthroughamultiple casestudyof threeapis and theiruseinupto19clientsoftwareprojects.ourtechniquewas abletodetectanumberof valuablepatternsintwooutofthree of the apis investigated.
further investigation showed some patternstoberelativelyconsistentbetweenclients producedby multiple developers and not trivially derivable from program structure or api documentation.
keywords api usage api usability usage pattern software reuse mining software repositories i. i ntroduction software systems often reuse functionality provided by libraries and frameworks.
the client program reuses functionality through application programming interface api .
despite advances in api documentation and assisting technologies large apis are still hard to learn .
a major challenge for api users is to discover the subset of the api that can help complete a task.
for large apis there typically exists an overwhelming number of ways to combine different api elements.
hence it can be particularly helpful to identify commonusage patternsfor the api.
although many approaches have been proposed to detect common ways to use an api see section vii existing technology does not provide guidance aboutwhenpatterns are relevant in the life cycle of clients or whether there exist temporal relationsbetweendifferent api functionalities.
we proposetemporal api usage pattern mining.
our notion of temporal api usage is founded on the observation that