improving software developers fluency by recommending development environment commands emerson murphy hill department of computer science north carolina state university raleigh north carolina emerson csc.ncsu.edurahul jiresal and gail c. murphy department of computer science university of british columbia vancouver canada jiresal murphy cs.ubc.ca abstract software developers interact with the development environments they use by issuing commands that execute various programming tools from source code formatters to build tools.
however developers often only use a small subset of the commands o ered by modern development environments reducing their overall development uency.
in this paper we use several existing command recommender algorithms to suggest new commands to developers based on their existing command usage history and also introduce several new algorithms.
by running these algorithms on data submitted by several thousand eclipse users we describe two studies that explore the feasibility of automatically recommending commands to software developers.
the results suggest that while recommendation is more di cult in development environments than in other domains it is still feasible to automatically recommend commands to developers based on their usage history and that using patterns of past discovery is a useful way to do so.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
coding tools and techniques keywords discovery software developers commands ides .
introduction software tools can help developers meet users increasing demands for better software.
for instance research suggests that documentation tools can help developers use unfamiliar application programming interfaces to create code several times faster code smell tools can help developers make more informed judgments about design and debugging tools can help developers x bugs more successfully .
to use these tools developers issue commands to their development environment whether that environment is an permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
sigsoft fse november cary north carolina usa.
copyright acm ... .
.editor like emacs or an integrated development environment like eclipse .
commands may range from simple text editing functions such as copying text to sophisticated programming actions such as generating code or synchronizing with a repository.
in logs collected from over million users interacting with the eclipse development environment indicate the use of over distinct commands.
although the community of all software developers use a wide range of commands any given developer tends to use only a small number.
after reaching their own personal xpoint developers tend to face di culties discovering and becoming aware of other helpful commands.
consider the open resource command in eclipse that allows a developer to simply type the rst few characters of a le press return and the desired le is opened almost instantly.
several bloggers have praised open resource including eclipse navigation shortcuts every java programmer should know .
other bloggers have noted it is the biggest time saver i ve stumbled upon and a command i use religiously .
however despite the acclaim given to this command based on eclipse usage data collector data for may of the more than people who used eclipse more than do not use open resource .
this command discovery problem can be addressed in many ways.
one way is through searchable documentation yet the developer must know of a command s existence in order to search for it.
another way is to improve the visibility of a command such as through a special toolbar yet this comes at the expense of the discoverability of other commands that are not on the toolbar.
another way is through tip of the day messages which recommend a random command at regular intervals yet the suggested command may have no bearing on what a developer actually needs.
in this paper we address the command discovery problem by making custom command recommendations to a developer by analyzing the developer s past history of command usage and comparing it to a larger community s use of development commands.
this approach builds on a similar approach taken by matejka and colleagues to recommend commands useful in a computer aided drawing application autocad.
since eclipse includes about distinct commands while autocad contains about recommending commands in development environments appears to be more challenging indeed our results in section suggest that existing algorithms do not perform as well with eclipse data as they do with autocad data.
we extend matejka and colleagues work by introducing four novel algorithms for recommending relevant commands tosoftware users.
we evaluated six algorithms in two evaluations one automated evaluation and the second with live software developers.
in the automated evaluation we found that our best novel algorithm made recommendations with about accuracy which is about higher than recommendations produced by the best previous algorithm.
although accuracy may seem low we believe adopting a small number of commands at a continual rate is an appropriate way to learn new commands and that delivery mechanisms are available to make it possible for developers to learn those recommendations that are relevant.
we discuss these points in further detail in section .
we rst review previous work on feature awareness and command recommendations section .
we then present a proof of concept study that explores discovery trends in eclipse to help explain the motivation behind our novel algorithms section .
we then describe the existing algorithms we applied and the novel algorithms we developed section before presenting the results of an automated exploration of the e ectiveness of the algorithms section .
we also performed a study with developers to gain human insight into the value of the recommendations section .
we discuss various aspects of our approach section and future work section before summarizing the paper section .
.
related work several pieces of previous research have attempted to investigate the problem of command awareness and ways to recommend commands to users of complex software.
we divide the latter work into three categories human to human ine ciency based and history based recommendation.
.
software feature awareness the challenge of making software learnable has been a topic of considerable study among the human computer interaction community.
one aspect of learnability is awareness of what functionality is available in a user interface.
when grossman and colleagues conducted a study of learnability issues for users of autocad a computer aided drafting application they found that a typical problem was that users were not aware of a speci c tool or operation which was available for use .
although less well documented the awareness problem has been described in integrated software development environments as well such as campbell and miller s discussion of discoverability as a barrier to refactoring tool use .
.
human to human recommendation perhaps one of the most natural most overlooked and most e ective ways to learn is from a peer.
in the general educational literature situated learning where a person learns something new from another person during routine activities has been suggested as a mechanism by which knowledge may spread exceedingly rapidly and e ectively .
learning software from peers appears to be e ective as well.
suppose hilaria needs to submit a bug report but she does not know the command to use to attach a patch to the bug report.
hilaria asks a colleague who shows hilaria the menu item and hotkey for attaching a patch.
this scenario is known as over the shoulder learning or otsl for short where a software user learns from another user at the same computer .
in the context of software develop ment cockburn and williams as well as m uller and tichy have suggested that software developers learn e ectively in this way during pair programming .
for example hilaria might be programming with a peer notice that the peer is refactoring without using the refactoring commands and may then recommend to the peer that they try a refactoring command.
our research has suggested that although discovering tools from peers in such a way is e ective it is relatively rare .
moreover a software developer cannot discover a new command using otsl nor pair programming when she is working without other developers or she is the most uent command user in her peer group.
the approach that we propose in this paper using a recommender system does not depend on a developer s peer group.
.
inefficiency based recommendation one approach that does not rely on peers is a recommender system that makes command recommendations based on ine cient behavior.
the spyglass system for example works in a manner quite similar to the way that hilaria recommended a refactoring command during pair programming .
for example when hilaria is using eclipse spyglass might notice that she often uses the nd