towards quantitative software reliability assessment in incremental development processes toshiya fujii hiroshima university kagamiyama higashi hiroshima japantadashi dohi hiroshima university kagamiyama higashi hiroshima japan dohi rel.hiroshimau.ac.jptakaji fujiwara fujitsu quality laboratory kamikodanaka nkahara ku kawasaki japan fujiwara.takaji nifty.com abstract the iterative and incremental development is becoming a major development process model in industry and allows us for a good deal of parallelism between development and testing.
in this paper we develop a quantitative software reliability assessment method in incremental development processes based on the familiar non homogeneous poisson processes.
more specifically we utilize the software metrics observed in each incremental development and testing and estimate the associated software reliability measures.
in a numerical example with a real incremental developmental project data it is shown that the estimate of software reliability with a specific model can take a realistic value and that the reliability growth phenomenon can be observed even in the incremental development scheme.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
software program verification reliability statistical methods validation general terms reliability this research was partially supported by the ministry of education science sports and culture grant in aid for scientific research c grant no.
.
mr. fujii is now working as a technical staff in the hitachi software engineering co. ltd. japan after obtaining his m.sc.
engineering from hiroshima university japan in .
dr. dohi is a full professor with the department of information engineering hiroshima university japan.
dr. fujiwara is a project manager with audit division fujitsu quality laboratory ltd. japan permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may waikiki honolulu hi usa copyright acm ... .
.keywords software reliability incremental development non homogeneous poisson processes software metrics maximum likelihood estimation data analysis .
introduction it is well known that software development paradigm is one of the most significant factors affecting not only the software reliability but also almost all quality attributes of software.
since it is difficult to catch up the user s requirement perfectly before development in general the waterfall paradigm may often fail in the complex software development processes with the change of requirement specification by the users.
in consequence it becomes more and more important to be flexible in handling changing requirements so as to meet the current customer needs and to be able to deliver software products quickly to the market.
basili and turner discuss a practical effectiveness of iterative and incremental software development.
the incremental development can identify parts which can be developed from specification to executable code.
it also leads to dividing the requirements into suitable parts during the specification allowing for independent development of the different increments and allows us for a good deal of parallelism between development and testing .
in fact the similar but somewhat different software development models such as the spiral model and the clean room model are introduced as variations of iterative and incremental development model to improve the common waterfall model.
recently agile development models have been becoming much popular in industry so that recent research trend in software engineering has focused on evaluating iterative and incremental development framework.
benediktsson et al.
and mohagheghi et al.
consider the cost effort estimation for iterative and incremental software development.
the productivity of incremental and iterative software development processes is investigated by tan et al.
.
royce reports an example of an ada process model for incremental development of large software systems.
in this way considerable attentions have been paid for incremental software development models.
however it should be really surprised that the quantitative software reliability assessment method in incremental development processes has not been studied sufficiently in the past literature in spite of its recent demand.
wohlin permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may waikiki honolulu hi usa copyright acm ... .
develops a very simple probability model to calculate the mean time between software failures mtbsfs and compares the incremental development model with the common waterfall model from the view point of software reliability modeling.
since his model is an intuitive and static model in time it would be impossible to conduct the accurate software reliability assessment with time series software faultdetection data observed in the incremental testing phases.
bhawnani et al.
guide software release decisions in an incremental development using the existing software reliability models srms though they also fail to provide satisfactory answer on how to represent the corresponding srms in such a non trivial situation.
it is worth mentioning that the software reliability assessment method in incremental development processes has not been referred in the standard text books of software reliability engineering .
the most difficult problem in applying the srms to incremental development is to deal with the software fault detection data observed iteratively in each incremental testing phase because the common srms focus on only one software fault detection data recorded as a time series in the system testing and are based on only the one sample path.
in other words it may not evidently make sense to treat only one time series data by connecting multiple software fault detection data sets obtained in respective incremental testing phases since the fault detection rate is different in each incremental development phase and the remaining number of software faults or the initial software intensity at the end of each incremental testing phase may influence the subsequent increment.
another idea may be to regard the incremental development phases as an aggregation of similar development projects.
it is known that most work on srms is directed towards software complexity metrics in spite of their criticism where the complexity metrics require that srms are built from the previous similar projects or increments.
however the above