tool support for essential use cases to better capture software requirements massila kamalrudin department of electrical and computer engineering university of auckland private bag auckland new zealand ext mkam032 aucklanduni.ac.nz john grundy centre for complex software systems and services swinburne university of technology po box hawthorn victoria australia jgrundy swin.edu.au john hosking department of computer science university of auckland private bag auckland new zealand ext john cs.auckland.ac.nz abstract capturing software requirements fro m clients often leads to error prone and vague require ments documents.
to surmount this issue requirements engineers often c hoose to use uml models to capture their requirements.
in th is paper we discuss the use of essential use cases eucs as an alternative user centric representation which was devel oped to ease the process of capturing and describing requirements.
however eucs are not commonly used in practice becaus e to our knowledge no suitable tool support has been develope d. in addition requirements engineers face difficu lties in finding the correct essential requirements abstract interactions in a time efficient manner.
in order to overcome these problems we have developed a prototype tool for automated tracing of abst ract interactions.
we describe the tool and compare the performance and correctness of the results provided by it to that of manual essential use case extraction efforts by a group of requirements engineers.
the results of an end user study of the tool s usefulness and ease of use are also discussed.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirements specificati ons d. .
design tools and techniques d. .
programming environments general terms design human factors keywords requirements extraction esse ntial use cases automated tracing tool.
.
introduction when capturing software requirements from clients requirements engineers often use some form of natural language written either by clients or themselves.
these form a human centric representation of the requirements accessible to both engineer and client.
however due to both the ambiguities and complexities of natural language and the process of capture these requirements often have inconsistencies redundancy incompleteness and omissions.
engineers thus often use models to represent these informally expressed require ments which allow for better checking analysis and structured representations ideally leading to higher quality systems engineered from them.
there are many ways of representing software requirements.
most common practices use some form of structured model.
models for our purpose can be defined as s implified representations of a complex reality and actually are forms of abstraction where the act of abstraction is a pro cess of focusing on those features that are essential for the task at hand and ignoring those that are not .
uml models are a common way of capturing software requirements especially use case diagrams which are widely used by developers and require ments engineers to elicit and capture requirements.
uml use cases capture functional requirements and as applied in software engineering deal with actor system interaction .
various studies have determined that eliciting requirements and extracting their use cases can be arduous and can lead to rather imprecise analysis .
due to these deficien cies constantine and lockwood were motivated to develop the essential use case euc modeling approach to overcome some of these problems.
although the usage of eucs is not as widespread as are conventional use cases several researchers have recommended their adoption as their use helps in integrating the requireme nt engineering and interaction design processes .
some of the main reasons eucs are not commonly used are a lack of tool support engineers lack of experience in extracting essentia l interactions fro m requirements and a lack of integration with ot her modeling approaches .
this motivated us to conduct a user study to gauge requirements engineers abil ity to use the euc modeling approach to extract structur ed requirements from natural language develop a tool to support them to do euc modeling permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
ase september antwerp belgium.
copyright acm ... .
.
and evaluate the tool to demonstrate that it enhances their ability to us eucs effectively.
in this paper we begin by describing the initial user study with requirements engineers using the euc approach to extract requirements and comment on some surprising findings.
then we present our prototype extraction tool and describe an experiment comparing its performance in extracting euc models from the same requirements sample.
we discuss implications of these st udies and prototype and discuss our intended future work extending the tool.
.
background .
essential use cases the euc approach is defined by its creators constantine and lockwood as a structured narrative expressed in a language of the application domain and of us ers comprising a simplified generalized abstract technology free and independent description of one task or in teraction that is complete meaningful and well defined from th e point of view of users in some role or roles in relation to a system and that embodies the purpose or intentions unde rlying the interaction .
an euc takes the form of a dialogue between the user and the system.
the aim is to support better communication between the developers and the stakeholders via a technology free model and to assist better requirements capture.
this is achieved by only allowing specific detail that is relevant to the intended design to be captured .
compared to a conventional uml use case an equivalent euc description is ge nerally shorter and simpler as it only comprises the essential steps core requirements of intrinsic user interest.
it contains user intentions and system responsibilities to document the user system interaction without the need to describe a user interface in detail.
the abstractions used are more focused towards the steps of the use case rather than narrating the use case as a whole.
a set of essential interactions between user and system are organized into an interaction sequence.
consequently an euc specifies the sequence of the abstract steps and captures the core part of the requirements .
furthermore the concept of responsibility in euc aims to identify what the sy stem must do to support the use case without being co ncerned about how it should be done .
by exploiting the euc concept of responsibility a fruitful research area on the consistenc y issues between responsibility concepts in requirements and their related designs is opened which can potentially be used to improve traceab ility support.
eucs also benefit the development process as they fit a problemoriented rather than solution oriented approach and thus potentially allow the designers and implementers of the user interface to explore more possibilities .
it also allows more rapid development to happen as by using euc it is not necessary to design an actual user interface .
figure shows an example natu ral language requirement left hand side and an example essent ial use case right hand side capturing this requirement adapted from .
on the left is the natural language requirement from which important phrases are extracted highlighted .
from each of these a specific key phrase essential requirement is abstracted and is shown in the essential use case on the right as user intentions and system responsibilities.
these abstract away from specific technologies such as typing in login information to a more abstract expression of each requirement such as i dentify self .
this opens up the possibility of alternative designs su ch as using biometrics as an identification method th at still meet the esse ntial requirements.
although eucs simplify captured requirements compared to conventional uml use cases requirements engineers still face the problem of finding the correct le vel of abstraction which also takes time and effort .
re quirements engineers need to abstract the essential requireme nts using the euc concept of abstract interactions manually.
this means dealing with understanding the natural langua ge requirements and then extracting an appropriately abstract essential requirement embedded in an appropriate inte raction sequence.
to understand better the difficulty in achieving this we have conducted a user study of postgraduate students experienced in requirements elicitation and observed both their correctness and time duration in undertaking essential use case analyses manually.
figure .
left example natural language requirements and right example essential use cases.
.
applying essential use cases a study previous research on the euc appr oach and practice in their use to model software requirements ha ve indicated that requirements engineers have some challenge s in identifying the abstract interactions used by eucs a nd their sequencing .
this observation while intuitive is anecdotal so to obtain a more rigorous understanding of these di fficulties we decided to conduct a user study of several requirements engineers carrying out the extraction of an euc model from a set of requirements specified in natural language in order to observe their performance and experiences in using eucs.
we used the same requirements as described in and compared the abstracted eucs in that work to the results developed by our euc model developers.
the study participants were post graduate software engineering students several of whom had previously worked in industry as developers and or re quirements engineers.
all were familiar with uml use case modeling and most had used uml use cases to model requirements pr eviously.
none were familiar with the euc modeling approach.
each participant was given a brief tutorial on the euc approach and some examples of natural language requirements and derive d euc models.
the participants were asked to develop an euc model from the natural language requirements and we tracked their time taken and analyzed the correctness of their resulting mode ls.
the particular scenario we gave them to analyze in this evaluation was constantine and lockwood s getting cash scenario.
this is a common template of user system interactions co mmon in many web based systems as well as atms and other kiosk like systems.
intuitively the extraction of a set of essential user system interactions from this 256example to form an essential use case structured model of the requirements should be straightforward.
table summarizes the results of our study.
the correctness y for correct x for incorrect and time taken was recorded for each person.
a correct answer y means that the answer provided by the participant is same or very similar to the interaction pattern provided by a library pattern that we obtained from constantine and lockwood .
summarizing these results .
the number of correct interactions identified y out of total correct interactions or i.e.
were incorrect .
.
the number of completely correct euc interactions all ys out of or .
.
the average time taken to accomplish the euc development task was .
minu tes.
the longest time taken was about minutes and the shortest time taken was about minutes so there was si gnificant variability in the time taken.
table .
euc extraction study results based on these results participants were more likely to generate incorrect euc interactions than correct ones and very unlikely .
to produce a completely correct euc.
all except one of the participants failed to identify some of the essential interactions present in the natural language requirements many failed to assemble these into an appropria te interaction sequence and only one participant managed to obtain a solution the same as or very similar to the model answer of the getting cash scenario of constantine and lockwood.
the root cause of most problems was that participants tended to incorrectly determine the required level of abstraction for their essential interactions the user intentions and system responsibilities of the euc model .
the study also demonstrates that it is quite time consuming for participants as they need to figure out appropriate keywords that describe each abstract interaction and to organize these into an appropriate sequence of user intentions and system responsib ilities.
we can see that there is considerable variation in time taken and the longest time taken also does not ensure the correctness of the answer.
for example the participant who took the longest minutes to accomplish the task only provided correct essential interaction characteriza tion out of a poor result while one of the better participants took onl y minutes to produce out correct interactions.
our survey thus supports the anecdotal findings reported in with more quantitative evidence.
.
our approach we were quite surprised by the results in section .
many of the participants were experienced in dustry and academic requirements modelers and all were familiar w ith and most experienced with using uml use case modeling.
given this background we expected much more accurate modeling of the example requirements using the euc tec hnique.
this study while being quite small in nature does s upport previous claims about the challenges in extracting natural language requirements into euc models .
this has provided us with the motivation to develop an approach and supporting tool with which to enable requirements engineers to extract accurate euc abstract interactions automatically from textual natural language requirements.
key research questions we had included existing natural language proc essing nlp based tools to convert textual requirements into models are of ten limited in terms of interactivity the structure of the derivative models produced and the quality of th e extracted models.
can a lighter weight extraction process be adopted that considers the target euc based requirements representation model and or requirements domain to provide an accurate abstraction of text requiremen ts to essential interactions?
can this extraction technique be embodied in a tool that allows requirements engine ers to extract essential interactions from textua l requirements quickly and accurately refine the extracted interactions visualize the interactions as euc models and make changes to the models and or textual re quirements keeping these consistent?
do target users evaluating this euc requirements extraction tool find it assists the extraction of euc models and the improvement in quality of both the extracted models and the textual natural language requirements?
in determining our approach to this we decided not to use a heavy weight natural language processing nlp tool and formal method technique to do this extraction.
this is based on a number of studies showing both the difficulty in this is and that the results of such an approach are often imprecise and inconsistent .
while our approach described here does not itself employ heavy weight nlp it also does not preclude using such techniques to a ugment our tool in future.
instead of using conventional nl p based approaches we adopted a more domain specific approach.
extracting euc essential interactions from natural languag e text constrains the problem domain to a set of suitable interaction descriptions.
this meant we chose to develop a library of p roven essential interactions expressed as textual phrases phr ase variants and limited regular expressions.
this library of abstract interaction patterns was developed from a collection of such patterns previously identified by constantine and lockwood biddle et.al.
and also patterns that were developed by us and which together are applicable across various domains.
answers can dida te identif y user verify identit y offer choices choos e dispen se cash take cash time taken minu tes x x x y y y y x y y y x x x y x y x x x x y y x x y x x y x x x x y y x y y y y y y y x x y y x y y y x x x .
x x x x y x .
y y x x x y average time .
257each essential interaction pattern in the library was also associated with a collection of alternative sequences of textual requirement phrases that could matc h to the pattern.
each of these sequences relates to a more conc rete version of the abstract interaction pattern.
the textua l natural language requirements were then analyzed by matching against the concrete versions looking for a good match.
abstract ion could then be undertaken by instantiating an instance of the more abstract interaction pattern associated with the c oncrete one.
the matching process used is similar to the process of keyword searching.
collectively this provides a more lightweight approach to analyze the natural language requirements than nlp approaches but which is able to provide a set of meaningful ab stract interactions to the requirements engineer.
the abstract interaction patterns can be added to in order to improve ou r ability to recognize essential interactions in textual natural la nguage requirements.
we can also segment the library into different patterns for different application domains as patterns are also commonly used for expressing reusable design.
by using the patt erns the user will be more likely to get the outcomes right and sensib le eucs.
this is as opposed to the results from the preliminary study reported in section .
where most users tend to provide wrong answers rather than right answers.
after extracting a set of candidate essential interaction phrases and assembling these into a candidate sequence of abstract interactions the requirements engin eer is presented with this list of interactions with the original textual natural requirements juxtaposed on the screen.
the engineer can then select abstract interactions and see th e natural language text these were derived from or vice versa.
the engineer can move interactions and add or delete interactions.
limited update of the natural language text is also supported the engineer can modify the natural language text and see the impact on the re extracted essential interactions.
an essential use case visualization is also provided conforming to constantine and lockwood s approach .
it can also be edited with limited update of the essential inte ractions it is derived from and consequently the natural language text phrases.
update of the natural language text results in update of the extracted essential interactions and essential use case models.
n atura l la ng uag e requirements e s s e nt ia l u se ca se req uiremen ts library essenti a l use cases extr ac ti on highlig h t cha nge figure .
our essential interaction extraction approach.
figure illustrates this extraction trace forward trace back process that we provide to requirements engineers.
natural language expressed requirement s are fed through an extraction process which uses a library of essential interaction phrases and expressions produci ng a sequence of euc essential interactions .
the engineer can select items in textual natural language requirements of euc in teractions and see corresponding items .
we plan to add further analysis of the euc requirements using e ssential use case patterns and support mapping of the euc models to ot her requirements models in the next stage of our research.
.
tool support we have developed a prototyp e euc essential interaction extraction tool based on the approach we outlined in the previous section.
the idea is for requireme nts engineers to use the tool to do an initial essential interaction extraction from textual natural language requirements producing an initial euc model.
selecting phrases in the textual requireme nts shows the resulting extracted essential interactions.
selecting essential interaction s shows the textual natural language phrase s the essential interactions were derived from.
this provides a traceability support mechanism between textual natural languag e requirements a nd derived euc models.
the engineer can then modify th e resultant euc model and or the original textual natural languag e requirements.
this includes adding phrases and interacti ons re ordering phrases and interactions deleting phrases a nd interactions and modifying phrase and interaction descriptiv e text.
the engineer then reextracts the essential interactions and associated traceability links.
engineers can add new essential interaction phrases to their library or even develop different essential interaction libraries for different problem domains.
guidelin es of using the tool and the patterns are also codified.
moreover engineers need to have an understanding of the essential us e case concept and methodology before using the tool.
the former allows our tool to improve its extraction support for users over time and the latter allows specific domain interaction patterns to be used.
.
tool process the framework for extraction and trace forward and trace back between the abstract interactions from the textual natural language requirements and vice versa is illu strated in figure .
we use the scenario of getting cash by as an example of extracting textual natural language requirement s to essential use cases.
the tracing engine searches for key textual phrases typically verbnoun phrases such as withdraw cash or request amount contained within the library within the textual requirements.
having identified such matching phr ases it looks for orderings of these within the requirements that match orderings in the library associated with particular euc interaction specifications.
for example in figure the phrases insert an atm card and client enters pin are both associated in that order with the identify self abstract interaction.
having identified such essential interactions the tracing engine instantiates an instance of the abstract interaction into the euc model to the right in figure and associates it with the identified key phrases in the textual requirements.
this association allows trace forward or trace back to be supported with appropriate matching elements highlighted in the other view when key phrases or abstract interactions are selected.
this supports both traceability between textual natural language and euc model elements but also assist engineers and clients in reasoning about the quality of the requirements.
for example phrases with missing interactions and incomplete interaction sequences can be seen interactions or interaction sequences with incomplete textual phrases or ordering structure in natural language identified and eu c models with inconsistencies or incompleteness such as missing system responses to user requests highlighted.
258figure .
an example of performing an essential interaction ex traction to a euc model and suppo rting trace forward trace back figure .
our automa ted tracing tool .
tool example we have developed a prototype automated extraction and tracing tool in order to reduce the time taken to generate abstract interactions and increase the correctness level of each specific abstract interaction.
several screen dumps of the tool in use are shown in figure .
textual na tural language requirements are written in the textual authoring tool .
a list of corresponding essential requirements abstract interactions is generated automatically as shown in .
users can trace back each abstract interaction to the corresponding textual requirements phrases as shown in .
the textual natural language requirements are expressed in natural language phrases.
these may be including headings numbered items bullet points as well as sentences.
in this example for clarity we use a numbered list of sentences but in general the textual natural lang uage requirements can contain other layout as appropriate.
th e requirements engineer authors this textual natural language requirement either in our authoring tool an external word processor or extracts the text from an existing document e.g.
pdf word and power point files.
the engineer then asks the tool to extract all recognized euc essential interactions expressed in the textual requirements using an essential interaction pattern database.
the extracted essential interactions are shown in sequence as recognized in the text .
depending on the complexity of the submitted requirements text several euc inte raction sequences or essential use cases may be recognized.
these can be divided up or represented as a collection of eucs.
we used a listing of these essential interaction phrases.
these can be represented as an euc model with user interaction sy stem response divisions using constantine lockwood s approach if desired.
users can interact with either the textual natural language requirement segments or the essential interactions extracted in order to trace between the text ual phrases and the essential interactions.
essentially this provides a traceability mechanism between each abstract interac tion to the corresponding textual natural language requirements phra ses as shown in the example of highlighting in .
this tracing process helps users to be able to check for correctness completeness and consistency of the requirements.
phrases with missing euc essential interactions may be incorrect or incomplete.
phrases with too many corresponding essential interac tions may be imprecise.
a sequence of essential interactions w ith phrases in different parts of the textual requirements may mean the text requirements are out of order.
a sequence of essential interactions that is incomplete or redundant may mean the textual requirements have inconsistencies or undue repetition.
we implemented our extraction and tracing tool in java.
we have recently integrated this into a further prototype in eclipse marama essential wh ich provides integrated textual requirements visualization along with graphical essential interaction and euc visualization.
an example of using this tool to trace between textual requirements and extracted essential interaction and euc model elements is shown in fi gure .
this prototype was built using our marama meta tools platform .
.
essential interactions extraction in order to facilitate this ex traction we have developed an interaction pattern library for storing all the essential interactions and abstract interactions.
we collected and categorized phrases from a wide variety of textual natural language requirements documents available to us and stored them as essential interactions.
currently we ha ve collected approximately phrases from various requirem ents domains including online booking online banking mobile sy stems related to making and receiving calls online election systems online business online registration and e commerce.
the collection and categorization of the phrases are on going.
based on these phrases we have come up with close to patterns of abstract interaction.
on average there are phrases or essential interactions associated with each abstract interaction.
however some refinement on the patterns has been done and we ha ve currently approximately patterns.
the full examples of patterns are documented and we may place this online at a later date.
figure .
example of integration into a prototype eclipse based euc tracing a nd visualisation tool maramaessential.
260for example the abstract interaction display error is associated with four different essential interactions display time out show error display error me ssage and show problem list .
the essential interactions were not categorized based on one scenario.
they have associations with five different concrete scenarios such as online busine ss e commerce online booking online banking and online voting syst em.
this example shows that one particular abstract interaction can be associated with multiple concrete scenarios.
on average in our interaction pattern library concrete scenarios are associated with one abstract interaction.
in order to store the essential interactions in the interaction pattern library selected phrases key textual structures are extracted from the natural language text base d on their sentence structure.
the key textual structure uses verb phrases vp and nounphrases np in the sentence structures to categorize the essential interactions.
any phrases that follow this structure will be acceptable as an essential interaction pattern in the interaction library.
the tree structure of the key textual structure is illustrated in figure .
the tree structure in figure shows that our library comprises three different sentence structures based on the location of the verb phrase vp and noun phra se np .
the noun phrase can contains structure elements such as articles art and adjectives adj or only nouns noun .
figure .
tree structure for key textual phrase the three different sentence structures are i. verb v noun n only e.g.
request v amount n ii.
verb v articles art noun n e.g.
issue v a art receipt n iii.
verb v adjective adj noun n e.g.
ask v which adj operation n this key text structure aims to provide flexibility in the library s capability to accommodate variou s types of sentences containing essential requirements.
with this a broad range of phrase options can be extracted by the tracing engine while still affording a lightweight implementation usi ng string manipulation and some regular expression matching.
to date we have performed this essential interaction pattern libr ary development manually.
scope exists for semi automating this process.
.
evaluation we carried out an evaluation of our automated tracing tool in order to compare its accuracy and performance with the manual extractions undertaken by our original euc extraction study participants.
in addition these same participants were asked to use and evaluate the automated tracing tool using the same scenario as before.
we then surveyed them to gain their perceptions of the tool s ease of use and utility for the extraction and tracing tasks evaluated.
the results in table compare the accuracy of the automated tracing tool against the previous results for manual extraction.
the tool failed to identify one of the abstract interactions take cash but identified all others providing an accuracy almost double that of the participants average and better than all except one of the participants.
the automated extraction process took just over second to execute in comparison with the .
minutes average taken by the manual study participants.
results of the participant survey of the tool usefulness and ease of use are shown in figures 7a.
a nd 7b.
respectively.
all eleven participants found that the tool was either very useful or always useful for generating and tracing the list of abstract interaction.
however in qualitative feedback most participants wanted the interaction pattern li brary to support a broader set of domains in the future.
table .
comparison result of correctness between manual extraction and automated tracing tool no.
correct answers no.
wrong answers answers manual extraction automated tracing manual extraction automated tracing identify user verify identity offer cash choose dispense cash take cash correctness ratio figure 7a.
the tool usef ulness of the automated tracing all participants found the automated tracing tool to be very easy .
or always easy .
to use.
qualitatively they stated that the tool was easy and simple to understand but they would have liked to have had a better user interface with a more userfriendly design rather than the pr eliminary prototype they used.
sentence verb phrase vp noun phrase np none noun articles adjective 261most suggested that the tool coul d usefully be embedded within a tool that visually displays the eucs in order to improve usability.
they expected that such visualizations would allow them to better understand the interaction between th e user intentions and system responsibilities in the euc model.
the participants also evaluated the response time of the automated tracing tool for the trace back pro cess.
all found the tool to be fast or very fast but noted some va riation in speed with different scenarios when they had a chance to experiment with these.
figure 7b.
the ease of use of the automated tracing tool to further investigate the utilit y of our tool we evaluated its accuracy when applied to use case scenarios in different domains derived from different researchers developers and ourselves online cd catalog cellular phone voter registration cash withdrawal online book checkout book library seminar enrollment transfer transaction deposit transaction assign report problem create problem report report problem booking room and place order .
the tool correctness was evaluated by comparing the answers with the actual interaction pattern provided in the source pattern documents that was developed by constantine and lockwood biddle et al.
and also with patterns that developed by us following constantine and lockwood s methodology.
the evaluation results are shown in figure 7c.
figure 7c.
shows the correctness ratio for the automated tracing tool for each scenario.
this shows some variability across the range of scenarios but the average correctness across all scenarios and interactions is approximate ly so the getting cash scenario used in the earlier evaluation was not atypical.
the automated tracing tool does not and cannot produce correct answers due to the incorrectness and incompleteness issue of textual requirements.
the correctness and incompleteness issue is related to various linguistic issues such as phrases or sentences using a passive pattern parentheses existence such as and grammar issues such as plural singular adjective or adverb issues.
these problems however also lead requirement engineers to misunderstand requir ements and can be one of the reasons why different requirement engineers or users will provide inconsistent results.
for example our automated tracing tool did not derive a completely correct euc for the scenario getting cash because of the grammar used in the sentences in the textual natural language requirements.
the phrase receive cash from sentence number client receive cash is not readable by the tool as in the database it is stored as receives cash .
this problem can be improved either by giving guidelines to users for writing a good requirement document or allowing the library to be expanded to accept grammatically incorrect sentences for patterns that correspond to common grammatical e rrors.
additionally we have experimented with using simple regular expressions in the essential interaction pattern repository e.g.
receive s cash indicating should have s but ma y accept without.
this however complicates both the library phrase representation and authoring.
figure 7c.
accuracy across different scenarios using our tool requirements engineers will notice that the receive cash phrase in the textual requirements does not have any corresponding essential intera ction phrase s .
alternatively they will see an incomplete interaction sequence between the user and the system where no response is provided to a user submission by the system in the euc model extracted and visualized.
in our eclipse based prototype we have experimented with adding checking for such a pparent inconsis tencies between requirements text and essential interactions.
this is also complicated by textual requirements typically having portions of text that do not correspond directly to interactions e.g.
headings introductory or concluding remarks comme nts example input output data etc.
.
related work there have been several areas of work done in extracting uml use case models and other di agrams from natural language requirements.
fantechi et al.
proposed linguistic techniques for supporting the use of semantic analysis of the use cases.
their tool succeeds in the evaluation of the natural language requirement but does not suppor t the problems related to the requirement consistency and comp leteness .
this work also does not deal with extracting and generating natural language requirement to the correct level of abstraction needed for an essential use case model.
harmain and gaizaukas developed a tool called cm builder to assist the analyst in an object oriented environment by having a natural language processing technique that is able to analyze textual requirements written in english.
an initial uml class diagram is extracted from the object classes that are described in the textual requirement.
there are a number of limitations for this tool such as the limited style of linguistic analysis and the limited beneficial generic knowledge used in interpreting the software requirement text the grammar a nd lexicon are not adaptive not extracting the dynamic aspect of a system and no graphical case is integrated to this tool .
this tool is different from 262our work as it is using nlp techniques in handling the natural language requirement as opposed to our lightweight approach.
ilieva and ormandjieva proposed a methodology to process natural language requirements and map them automatically to an oo analysis model.
the extracted requirement is presented in a tabular form and then transformed to the semantic network which able to be translated to an oo model class diagram .
the concept of this work is similar to our work as they are also processing natural language requirements and then transforming the requirements into a model.
the differences are in terms of the technique used and the representational model that they are transforming to.
we generate abst ract interactions for an euc model but they are transforming the requirement to a semantic network diagram and then a class diagram.
they do not attempt to support consistency be tween model and the natural language.
in addition to extracting uml diagrams from natural language requirements eucs can also be used to capture or elicit requirements written in natural language.
using essential use cases euc is actually not new and has been applied by some researchers in limited domains.
for example gelperin has used the essential use case for analyzing and testing requirements.
gelperin agrees th at eucs effectively support user interface design .
he applie d eucs for checking the precision of use case.
in addition patricio et al.
have used essential use cases for designing multiplatform services.
they mention that the association between the identified essential use cases and the experience requirement s is beneficial to understanding customer preferences.
although euc modeling helps in identifying areas of interaction that need to be improved together with the information which provides the concrete and objective guideline for the work all of this is done manually without any tool support.
biddle et al.
believe that eucs provide a good reusable requirements approach and they have developed a tool called ukase a web based use case mana gement tool in order to support reusability of eucs.
guidelines and a glossary are provided for reusable use cases by exploring the requirements pattern.
this tool supports the re use of use cases but just provides templates for users to key in the abstract interaction and does not generate the abstract interaction and euc diagram automatically.
in biddle et.al.
provide a set of styles or patterns to follow when writing eucs.
one of the objectiv es of this paper is to help the user to write good eucs quick er.
however these researchers stated that the patterns need further development.
this work also does not use any tool support and it is done by investigation and discussion based on a few scenarios.
the drawbacks of this work are small and incomplete patterns for the essential and abstract interactions.
we have tried to overcome the problem by developing an interaction pattern library that comprises a broader set of essential interaction patterns and abstract interaction.
our work also concentrates on developing a tool support for generating the abstract interaction automatically.
.
conclusion in this paper we have discussed the motivation for using essential use cases euc to help model and structure textual natural language requirements.
we have also identified some of the problems faced by requirements engineers and end users while using the euc approach.
a prelim inary study of requirements engineers indicated they face problems in identifying essential interactions sequencing these interactions and using common name and phrase structures to de scribe them.
they also have difficulty in tracing forwards and backwards between natural language and euc expre ssed requirements.
we developed a prototype euc e ssential interaction extraction and tracing tool.
the key aims of our tool were to support euc by extracting the essential requirements abstract interactions automatically and facilitate tracing between euc and textual natural language requirements to a ssist engineers in identifying and managing inconsistencies and incompleteness.
another aspect of our research involved the co llection and categorization of terminology for the library of abstract interactions.
this both assists in structuring euc expr essed requirements using common terminology and also helps prevent the textual requirements from being vague and error prone by tracing back from the euc structured representations to th e natural language text phrases.
we evaluated our prototype tool using the same group of participants as we used for the manual extraction survey.
the participants evaluated the tool usefulness and ease of use with promising results.
this confirms other researchers claims about the importance of having tool support for engineers working with euc models.
our results found that such an automated extraction and tracing tool appears to increase the ratio of correctness in extracting euc requirements fro m textual natural language requirements and eases the effo rt of users or requirements engineers in handling the euc significantly re ducing the time taken to develop euc models from textual natural language requirements.
as part of our future work we are embedding our extraction approach into an integrated euc diagram tool marama essential developed using the mara ma meta tool as shown in figure .
this will enable users to generate and maintain the consistency of visual euc mode ls automatically from lists of abstract interaction.
as show n in table our tool cannot guarantee correctness due to linguistic issues and common incorrectness and incompleteness of textual requirements.
in order to overcome these problems a gl ossary and template authoring support will also be embedded in the tool to assist improved natural language based requirem ents authoring and update.
we will also try considering a pre processing phase where all different forms can be unified.
we want to add additional support for inconsistency incompleteness and redundancy detection using our extraction approach and round trip engineering of natural language and euc model requireme nts.
we plan to explore a complementary approach using a composite euc pattern template library to assist with this.
as mentioned in section the euc requirements modeling approach opens up a fruitful research direction involving the consiste ncy issue of requirements and design encouraging engineers to check the consistency of requirements using this representa tion later.
we plan to explore relating eucs to further artefact views including generating ui and oo design models in our eclipse prototype with round trip engineering support to consistenc y with textual natural language requirements.
.