feature cohesion in software product lines an exploratory study sven apel university of passau germanydirk beyer university of passau germany simon fraser university b.c.
canada abstract software product lines gain momentum in research and industry.
many product line approaches use features as a central abstraction mechanism.
feature oriented software development aims at encapsulating features in cohesive units to support program comprehension variability and reuse.
surprisingly not much is known about the characteristics of cohesion in feature oriented product lines although proper cohesion is of special interest in product line engineering due to its focus on variability and reuse.
to fill this gap we conduct an exploratory study on forty software product lines of different sizes and domains.
a distinguishing property of our approach is that we use both classic software measures and novel measures that are based on distances in clustering layouts which can be used also for visual exploration of product line architectures.
this way we can draw a holistic picture of feature cohesion.
in our exploratory study we found several interesting correlations e.g.
between development process and feature cohesion and we discuss insights and perspectives of investigating feature cohesion e.g.
regarding feature interfaces and programming style .
categories and subject descriptors d. .
software engineering metrics d. .
software architectures domain specific architectures general terms design measurement keywords feature oriented software development software product lines feature cohesion visual clustering feature visu .
introduction a growing community of software engineering researchers and practitioners theoretically investigates and industrially develops software systems as product lines.
a software product line is a set of software intensive systems of a domain that share a common set of features .
a feature is an end user visible program characteristic that is relevant to the stakeholders of the application domain.
features are used to describe the commonalities and variabilities of the products of a product line .
for example in a database product line individual database systems share a compermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may waikiki honolulu hi usa copyright acm ... .
.mon set of features e.g.
basic data structures but differ in other features e.g.
transaction management .
recently there have been many attempts to make features explicit in the product line s code base .
for example compositional approaches such as component based systems and featureoriented programming encapsulate the code that belongs to a feature not more not less in a cohesive and composable unit.
annotative approaches such as preprocessors and frame processors tag code that belongs to a feature with annotations and allow programmers to remove or include code conditionally.
compositional and annotative approaches have many individual strengths and weaknesses but they share the common goal of making features explicit in design and code and exploit this property across the development process e.g.
for editing generation and type checking .
ideally the features of a system align with the underlying system structure e.g.
the class structure although this is not entirely possible due to crosscutting features e.g.
transaction management in a database system .
we define feature cohesion as the degree to which the elements e.g.
methods fields classes of a feature depend on other elements of the same feature.
in the past it has been assumed that decomposing a system according to its features improves naturally the quality of the system structure and yields benefits in terms of understandability and maintainability .
however we argue that a misalignment of features and system structure can outweigh the benefits of feature decomposition.
in the development and analysis of several product lines we witnessed examples in which features align very well with the system s structure that is the average feature cohesion is relatively high and other examples in which the opposite is true.
however little is known on how product lines are structured and how a product line s structure aligns with its features.
but this is of special interest because compared to engineering standalone software products software product line engineering particularly aims at variability and reuse.
to investigate the characteristics of feature cohesion we conduct an exploratory study on forty software product lines of different sizes and domains.
as a technological basis we use our exploration and measurement tool feature visu which computes all measures that we use in our exploratory study and which can visually relate the structural elements of a product line to its features using layout based clustering techniques.
the idea is that beside classic cohesion based measures layout based clustering can provide additional insights into the structure of software product lines and in particular into feature cohesion.
our novel feature cohesion based measures consider not only the number of