are your incoming aliases really necessary?
counting the cost of object ownership alex potanin monique damitio james noble victoria university of wellington new zealand alex monique kjx ecs.vuw.ac.nz abstract object ownership enforces encapsulation within object oriented programs by forbidding incoming aliases into objects representations.
many common data structures such as collections with iterators require incoming aliases so there has been much work on relaxing ownership s encapsulation to permit multiple incoming aliases.
this research asks the opposite question are your aliases really necessary?
in this paper we count the cost of programming with strong object encapsulation.
we refactored the jdk .
collection classes so that they did not use incoming aliases following either the owner as dominator or the owner as accessor encapsulation discipline.
we measured the performance time overhead the refactored collections impose on a set of microbenchmarks and on the dacapo specjbb and specjvm benchmark suites.
while the microbenchmarks show that individual operations and iterations can be significantly slower on encapsulated collection especially for owner as dominator we found less than slowdown for owner as accessor across the large scale benchmarks.
as a result we propose that well known design patterns such as iterator commonly used by software engineers around the world need to be adjusted to take ownership into account.
as most design patterns are used as a building block in constructing larger pieces of software a small adjustment to respect ownership will not have any impact on the productivity of programmers but will have a huge impact on the quality of the resulting code with respect to aliasing.
i.introduction encapsulation is a crucial attribute of object oriented programming and design.
object ownership enforces encapsulation by explicitly identifying the internal representation objects an object owns its representation and owned objects are protected behind the object s interface.
an object should act as a single entry point for its representation considering the heap as a graph an owner dominates the objects that it owns in other words there can be no incoming pointers to an owned object that bypass the object s owner.
figure illustrates this graphically the nodes making up a linked list are owned by the list while the element data in the list can exist outside the list.
the most restrictive form of object ownership enforced by the ownership types is both strong anddeep strong or prescriptive because external