from out place transformation evolution to in place model patching alexander bergmayr javier t roya and manuel wimmer vienna university of t echnology austria big.tuwien.ac.at abstract model transformation is a key technique to automate software engineering tasks.
like any other software transformations are notresilient to change.
as changes to transformations can invalidatepreviously produced models these changes need to be reflected onexisting models.
currently revised out place transformations arere executed entirely to achieve this co evolution task.
however this induces an unnecessary overhead particularly when compu tation intensive transformations are marginally revised and if ex isting models have undergone updates prior the re execution theseupdates get discarded in the newly produced models.
to overcome this co evolution challenge our idea is to infer from evolved out place transformations patch transformations that propagate changes to existing models by re executing solely theaffected parts based on an in place execution strategy.
thereby existing models are only updated by a patch instead of newly produced.
in this paper we present the conceptual foundation of ourapproach and report on its evaluation in a real world case study.
.
introduction model transformation is a key technique to automate software engineering tasks .
transformations enable reverse engi neering and forward engineering scenarios and facilitate exchang ing models between tools .
they are often implemented as outplace transformations where the output models are built from scratch by executing the transformation on the input models.
like any other software transformations change over time .
as changes to transformations can invalidate previouslyproduced models these changes need to be propagated to existingmodels.
we refer to this challenge as transformation output model co evolution where changes to a transformation imply an evolu tion.
consequently output models need to co evolve.
currently revised out place transformations have to be entirely re executedto achieve this co evolution task.
however this induces an unnec essary overhead particularly when computation intensive transfor mations are marginally revised and if existing models have un dergone manual updates prior the re execution these updates getdiscarded in the newly produced models.
furthermore if modpermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributedfor profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita tion on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others thanacm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or re publish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permissionand or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.ase september v asteras sweden.
copyright acm ... .
.
reference each other based on identifiers re creating the output models from scratch can break these inter model