programmers build errors a case study at google hyunmin seo the hong kong university of science and technology hong kong china hmseo cse.ust.hkcaitlin sadowski google mountain view ca usa supertri google.comsebastian elbaum university of nebraska lincoln ne usa elbaum cse.unl.edu edward aftandilian google mountain view ca usa eaftan google.comrobert bowdidge google mountain view ca usa bowdidge google.com abstract building is an integral part of the software development process.
however little is known about the compiler errors that occur in this process.
in this paper we present an empirical study of .
million builds produced during a period of nine months by thousands of developers.
we describe the work ow through which those builds are generated and we analyze failure frequency compiler error types and resolution e orts to x those compiler errors.
the results provide insights on how a large organization build process works and pinpoints errors for which further developer support would be most e ective.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
software engineering metrics d. .
processors compilers h. .
user machine systems human factors general terms human factors experimentation measurement keywords software builds build errors empirical analysis .
introduction building is a central phase in the software development process in which developers use compilers linkers build les and scripts to assemble their code into executable units.
this assembly process can be quite complex as it may involve multiple subsystems and programming languages and rely on evolving libraries and platforms.
for example one build we studied included build targets and languages.
permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for third party components of this work must be honored.
for all other uses contact the owner author.
copyright is held by the owner author s .
icse may june hyderabad india acm speed of a build directly a ects programmer productivity.
programming is often described as an edit compiledebug cycle in which a programmer makes a change compiles and tests the resulting binary then repeats the cycle until the program behaves as expected.
slow compiles may cause the programmer to be distracted by other tasks or lose context and reduce the number of changes that can be attempted during a day.
failed compiles whether because of errors in the source code or incorrect