uml in practice marian petre centre for research in computing the open university milton keynes uk m.petre open.ac.uk abstract uml has been described by some as the lingua franca of software engineering .
evidence from industry does not necessarily support such endorsements.
how exactly is uml being used in industry if it is?
this paper presents a corpus of interviews with professional software engineers in companies and identifies patterns of uml use.
index terms uml software development software design notation empirical studies.
i. introduction where s the uml ?
the unified modeling language uml has been heralded by many as the lingua franca e.g.
or the de facto standard e.g.
sj berg interviewed in of software engineering.
and yet there are others who argue that it is not fulfilling this role because of issues such as size complexity semantics consistency and model transformation e.g.
.
budgen et al.
in their systematic literature review of empirical evidence about uml conclude that there is little to give confidence that the uml has really been evaluated as an artefact in its own right and there are few studies of adoption and use in the field p. .
how exactly is uml being used in industry is it in practice the universal notation that it is intended to be?
this paper presents a corpus of interviews with professional software engineers about their use or not of uml.
introduced in uml arose from the unification of three object oriented design methods the booch method the object modelling technique omt and the objectory method .
the uml standard was set and is managed by the object management group omg .
uml offers a framework to integrate many kinds of diagrams but it also inherits many interpretations.
if we treat uml use as a variable it would have to be continuous not discrete.
some people use class diagrams some scribble sequences on a whiteboard some use uml for model driven development.
to someone arguing that uml is the lingua franca any such use might be sufficient but the different uses are not equivalent they have different purposes and different consequences.
the issues associated with interpreting what it means to use uml are familiar.
one informant related a story about attending a workshop for software professionals in which the speaker was a uml exponent from ibm who asked how many people in the audience used uml.
of the or so people in the audience about raised their hands.
the ibm speaker understood this to mean that people had adopted full use of uml with rigor as he later expressed to the informant .
in contrast the informant concluded that probably of the were like him selective borrowers ... who use some of the principles sometimes .
the ibm speaker and the informant had very different models of what using uml means in practice with different implications.
budgen et al.
point out that uml development has been guided more by expert opinion than by empirical evidence or cognitive theory.
they call for more and deeper studies of longer term use in the field p. .
the work reported here is based on the notion that understanding the nature of actual uml use is important to the discipline and that understanding how software professionals use uml can inform the development of software design notations and tools.
the study reported in this paper has its origins in a discrepancy of experience.
after conducting empirical studies of software design in industry for decades the author found recently that some of her papers on design representation were challenged by academic referees who asked where s the uml?
discussions at conferences such as icse and esec fse reinforced the discrepancy with delegates surprised or even distrustful that the reported professional software design practice did not include use of uml.
the response was predictable to seek new evidence.
ii.
background uml use in industry for their systematic review budgen et al.
identified papers published up to the end of that report empirical studies of uml.
the majority of papers reported studies concerning uml metrics papers comprehension .
and model quality .
with half values indicating papers addressing more than one focus only papers addressed adoption per se.
they note a preponderance of laboratory experiments and correspondingly little use of field studies.
they identify deficiencies in the evidence base noting that the reported experiments tend to have a single focus and make extensive use of student participants and that the few reported studies in realistic settings used relatively simple forms of data collection.
they concluded that there is therefore a real need for more and deeper studies of its longer term use in the field.
p. there are some case study accounts of experiences employing uml on substantial projects e.g.
and there are a few surveys of uml use in industry described below.
similarly grossman et al.
in introducing their own web based survey of uml adoption and use in the software development community argued that much of the existing literature elating to uml usage focuses on ... shortcomings and that there is still very little empirical evidence available describing the actual usage patterns or performance impacts of uml.
p. they surveyed only participants who were directly involved with uml p. accessing their informants via various online newsgroups.
they report a wide diversity of opinion regarding uml for example on one hand respondents did not find uml s complexity an impediment to its usage on the other nearly of those surveyed agreed with the statement that uml is insufficiently specified which allows for misinterpretation.
p. they conclude developers clearly seem eager to use this highly hyped technology...yet they are lacking an adequate enough understanding of the technology to determine if it is making any real difference in the way they are performing their development tasks.
p. dobing and parsons report on a survey of uml users plus who use uml components within another oo methodology undertaken in and .
they reported that their respondents used a subset of the modelling notations available in uml .
only class diagrams are being used regularly by over half the respondents with sequence and use case diagrams used by about half.
p. .
collaboration communication diagrams were the least popular.
they also report disappointing effects of uml on communication with saying that uml was at best moderately successful in facilitating communication with clients.
explanations given by their respondents for not using uml included that it is not well understood by analysts and insufficient value to justify the cost.
nugroho and chaudron also argue that despite the fact that uml is widely used in practice little is known about how uml is actually used.
their survey of professional software developers who use uml from the netherlands from companies focused on the impact of uml modeling styles on quality and productivity issues from the point of view of software engineers.
p. they found that most uml models are incomplete they specify only part of the required system elements.
developers tend to focus modelling efforts on the more complex or critical parts of systems.
of their respondents reported that problems of understandability of uml models led to problems in implementation often or very often .
a further reported that it happened sometimes .
their previous survey focused on synchronization between model and code and found that systematic approaches to maintaining correspondence are rarely used in practice.
lange et al.
conducted a web based survey of software architects supported by analysis of uml models in industry case studies.
their study focused on uml use and model quality in actual projects rather than on its adequacy as a notation.
on the basis of the responses they identified four main classes of problems encountered scattered information e.g.
design choices dependencies incompleteness disproportion more detail for some parts than others inconsistency.
additional contributory issues included diagram quality informal use lack of modeling conventions.
forward and lethbridge surveyed software practitioners in to uncover their attitudes and experiences regarding software modelling p. .
uml was identified as the dominant notation in their survey with usage.
they found that modeling tools are used primarily for early design work code generation is not widely used.
the participants seem to really want to incorporate modeling into their processs but...at present they are not so.
p. the biggest perceived problem of model centric approaches is keeping the model up to date with the code agreement .
their sub sample analysis is particularly interesting finding that ... programmers are more likely to agree that modelling tools are too heavyweight participants working on real time systems are more likely to agree that their organizational culture does not like modelling and participants that generate code from models are less likely to agree that modelling tools hide too many details.
p. it must be noted that many of these studies focused on software developers who use uml there is little consideration in the academic literature about how representative that sub population is of the software development community as a whole.
in contrast two industry surveys by mediadev and bz research addressed the issues of penetration and obstacles.
mediadev carried out a cross european survey of developers to investigate the penetration of uml into the marketplace and the usage of uml tools within software development.
the majority said that uml tools are not considered as an important part of their development process.
more specifically of the developers that participated in the survey claimed that they did not regard uml as important to the way they work.
regarded the uml tool as important but emphasized that it was not essential to the development processes.
viewed uml as an essential development tool and that the tool was an important part of their development processes.
the survey found that there are conflicting views about the importance of uml even within the same department and that views and preferences are highly individual .
cost was an important issue that impeded use.
a survey of developers conducted in by bz research found that in fact only about one third of developers recently surveyed said they use uml and not a single respondent believes that code generated from models is production ready.
why don t those percent of developers use uml?
the largest number percent said that they didn t see any benefit while percent said that their tools do not support uml.
an almost equal number percent said that uml based modeling was too expensive to implement while percent said that it s too complex to use.
interestingly percent complained that the code generated by modeling tools isn t production ready while percent said that uml is too complex to learn.
also percent of respondents said they had additional reasons for not adopting uml and percent said they didn t know why it wasn t used.
the discourse on uml has been informed largely by expert reflection and opinion rather than empirical evidence.
there have been repeated calls for deeper investigation of actual uml use in realistic settings.
studies of use in industry so far typically reflections on individual cases or surveys identify both examples of effective use and a number of concerns the software development community appears divided in its assessment of uml.
whether or not uml is the de facto standard there remain questions about the extent to which it is used and the nature of its use.
the study reported here attempts to add to the body of empirical evidence about actual use in professional practice addressing an omission identified by budgen et al.
and others with richer practitioner accounts drawn from interviews.
iii.
method the empirical study reported here is a series of interviews conducted over years with more than practicing professional software developers.
informants were identified with an eye to gathering a broad range of perspectives from corporate large scale commercial software developers to independent consultants and across a variety of application areas.
informants came primarily from countries in europe and north america but there were also informants from brazil india and japan and many had worked in more than one country.
informants were identified opportunistically via networks of collaborators colleagues and contacts people who could act as brokers for introductions of various kinds at meetings and conferences via mailing lists via social networks such as the requirements engineering specialist group resg on linkedin and via personal emails.
all informants were practising professional software developers in roles ranging from requirements engineering to software architecture software development and quality assurance and most identified themselves as fulfilling more than one role .
only one informant per company was included in the reported data reducing the sample size to .
the sample is arguably broadly representative of professional software engineering covering a variety of organizational contexts and sizes practitioner roles and application areas.
the industries represented included financial services including insurance and banking search engines and browsers social networking digital audio digital video computer games automotive systems aerospace cad systems real time systems enterprise software control systems telecommunications web development software tools civil service heritage medical information systems retail systems automation.
company sizes ranged from independent consultancies to global household name corporations.
if anything the sample may be biased slightly toward informants who had something to say about uml given that some participation was solicited via mailing lists and social networks.
for example one volunteer replied we could probably find a couple of people who use uml for you to talk to.
as such any counts in the paper are offered for the purpose of description and are not held to be statistically characteristic of the whole population of software engineers.
simple semi structured interviews were conducted over the phone on skype or in face to face meetings as convenient.
the protocol was straightforward starting with background questions about the professional s experience role organizational context and software projects.
the key question was do you use uml?
depending on the response the second question was either can you tell me about how you use it?
or why not?
subsequent questions followed up responses and elicited examples of use of uml or other design representations.
when appropriate the informant was asked if his or her usage was typical of the organization.
hand written or typed notes were captured for all interviews and subject to the informant s preference some interviews were audio recorded.
some informants provided actual examples of design representations within confidentiality agreements.
discussions at times extended beyond the informants current practice to past projects past organizations or other experiences.
at times the discussion distinguished between the use by the informant and the use preferred or mandated by the organization.
all accounts of uml use offered by the informants were collected but a distinction was made in the data collection between the informants own current use identified in this paper as declared current use and accounts of their own practice in the past or in other organizational contexts accounts of organizational preferred practices or accounts of their colleagues practices which they have observed directly identified as secondary reports .
this paper focuses on responses to do with current practice but includes where relevant discussion on secondary reports .
the analysis was inductive allowing categories of use to emerge from the data.
the initial sorting into use and non use was obvious.
additional categories were identified in terms of what the informants presented as characteristic of their use.
the categories along with a representative selection of anonymized data were presented to two experienced professional software developers for independent review as a form of validation.
iv.
overall results five patterns of use were identified.
the numbers in parentheses repeated in table i indicate informants whose declared current usage fits within that category.
.
no uml .
retrofit don t really use uml but retrofit uml in order to satisfy management or comply with customer requirements .
automated code generation uml is not used in design but is used to capture the design when it stabilizes in order to generate code automatically typically in the context of product lines .
selective uml is used in design in a personal selective and informal way for as long as it is considered useful after which it is discarded .
wholehearted but described in secondary reports organizational top down introduction of uml with investment in champions tools and culture change so that uml use is deeply embedded.
table i. declared current uml use among professional software developers from companies.
category of uml use instances of declared current use no uml retrofit automated code generation selective wholehearted each will be described and discussed in turn using representative excerpts from the interviews.
the counts address declared current usage only although information from secondary reports are included in the discussion where relevant.
v. no uml the majority of informants do not use uml.
one stated categorically that his global corporation doesn t use uml .
there is a consistent pattern to the responses concerning why practitioners do not use uml they have considered it often having adopted it for a project or two and found that it did not offer them advantages over their current evolved practices and representations.
as one informant phrased it and many others expressed what was good about uml was not new and what was new about uml was not good.
another identified where elements of uml notation originated pre uml arguing that use of those prior notations alone does not constitute uml use.
some felt that uml came with too much philosophy or ideology that it required them to make changes to their culture or ethos that were not warranted by adding benefits why would i ?
doesn t add anything except religion.
although phrased strongly these opinions were not baseless.
most informants spend time regularly engaging with the literature and investigating proposed methods tools and representations.
a number of informants in this group remarked that they had studied and used uml within formal education.
one informant who summarized that uml does things we already had ways of the notation doesn t really matter also set out a specific series of equivalences in his practice for elements of uml e.g.
flowcharting activity diagrams i see them as equivalent swim lanes have been around since the 1920s er diagrams or class diagrams roughly equivalent state diagrams we ve been expressing state machines for decades the whole front of identifying context a context diagram is rather better than trying to do anything with classes .
some of the informants who do not currently use uml offered specific criticisms.
the most frequent were a. lack of context informants remarked that uml deals primarily with software architecture rather than the whole system and hence that it lacks context.
for example you don t get context with uml.
it assumes if they all do their own bit to the spec it will work.
that s a bad assumption.
another informant reported that his company had worked on variations and extensions of uml to address their needs before abandoning it for another in house formalism that addresses the whole system i.e.
software hardware and how they fit together along with context requirements functional and non functional decisions risks etc.
b. the overheads of understanding the notation.
issues of comprehension included both software developers and stakeholders.
uml is considered unnecessarily complex .
several informants reported variations in understanding and interpretation among developers that led to problems.
for example there are challenges in the formal semantics of uml e.g.
align means different things to different people.
in another example we worked with a group of people from and what they did was rubbish.
their use of uml was so distorted that it was unrecognizable.
others noted that the complexities of the notation limited its utility or demanded targeted use in discussions with stakeholders including highly technical stakeholders .
two informants gave detailed accounts of past experiences of adopting uml on projects in response to client requests.
however those experiences were described as disastrous the clients ...refused to sign it off just too much detail and they couldn t make sense of it .
this was echoed by a third informant the best reason not to use uml is that it is not readable for all stakeholders.
how much is uml worth if a business user the customer can not understand the result of your modelling effort?
he would be asked to sign off something that he isn t able to comprehend... a related issue is the intrusion of the notation into the discussion or reasoning process.
one informant explained uml seems to be very much based on programming concepts rather than analysis concepts making it problematic for discussions with stakeholders.
if you re talking to a client you map out the concepts that are there in what their business does you can use an entity model or an object model.
the entity model allows you to more or less map the concepts that someone has directly onto a piece of paper whereas a class model... some of the concepts they have don t appear in the diagram and some of the things you end up putting in the diagram are not things the person has told you about.
you start making decisions about how you re going to implement classes inheritance and so on when you need to be mapping out what their business does.
a number of informants remarked on the intrusion of the notation into design discussions with both clients and colleagues because it required explanation or alignment of interpretation because the notational choices constraints were not a good fit for the context or because the use of uml diverted attention from the primary focus onto notational concerns.
c. issues of synchronisation consistency.
a number of informants identified issues of synchronization or consistency as a barrier for wholesale adoption of uml.
one informant described the issues this way ...as mentioned by both clifford and geoffrey uml is a graphical representation.
there is no check on consistency redundancy completeness or quality of the model what so ever.
modeling a small project may not be a problem but handling large projects in uml forces you to go over the entire model every time you want to change anything to see what the consequences for the rest of the model will be.
another expressed it in terms of commitment need to use it all the way in order to maintain sync.
several informants volunteered preferred alternatives.
for example object models... they re not a compelling way of describing things.
i prefer entity diagrams which are a bit better.
another argued there are a number of advantages of core that are not available using uml.
the key difficulties are the inability to assess cross system performance prior to the detail design stage and the ability of domain experts to access information from uml models.
failure to assess system performance early in the design process during the system architecture definition phase leads to increased rework costs.
a third reported i ve previously used ssadm entity modeling data flow diagramming and i m afraid i ve reverted to using those rather than uml.
a bit more rigorous more suited to taking something through from requirements to design.
vi.
retrofit one informant plus three secondary reports report using only uml because it is demanded by the bill payer either management or a client.
retrofit uml use means by and large documenting things after the fact.
these informants report using their own practices during design and then retro fitting uml when the design has stabilized either to satisfy a corporate edict in a large company where the decision to use uml and the business decisions are separated from design practice or to satisfy a client who is complying with some form of industry or corporate standard.
for example one informant responded to do you use uml?
with well not unless the client demands it for some reason before clarifying that his relevant examples were in the past rather than in current practice.
in his examples clients asked for uml for requirements documents or design proposals.
another explained that use case diagrams are primarily used only to please the it auditors compliance documentation.
one considered that uml is requested because it gives an illusion of accuracy .
in the context of retro fitting the translation into uml is usually handed to a junior member of the team i.e.
it is treated as a mechanical low priority task .
vii.
automated code generation in this case uml is not used in software design i.e.
not typically during the creative stages of design but is used to capture the design when it stabilizes in order to generate code automatically.
the three informants who described this usage were all working in product lines or embedded software all contexts in which the software was a sub system rather than the main product in its own right and in which software per se was not the sole business or primary focus of the company.
in product line development uml is used to capture a complete architecture with all of the options and variants in it so that a selection can be made.
this also implies a mapping onto the code base and using the uml spec to drive the derivation process.
one informant reported that his company operates on the assumption that there will be later releases and so turn around on releases was valued above producing optimal or complete software.
viii.
selective use most of those informants who do use uml and who use it in software design in particular i.e.
in the creative phase rather than just for documentation or code generation use it in a personal selective and informal way characterized by one informant as soft use .
some use it infrequently for example one informant described his use as very rarely and very selectively emphasis on rarely which he quantified as three to four times in seven years.
others use it regularly.
they use it for as long as it is considered useful after which it is set aside or even discarded.
for many this means that uml features only in early design when the problem is explored requirements are elicited and design alternatives are considered.
sometimes it is for personal use only as a thought tool .
sometimes it is used to prototype ideas .
more often it is used in design discussions whether in the instruction of ideas i.e.
conveying ideas to others or in collaborative dialogues.
some find it useful for requirements elicitation with key stakeholders where the stakeholders tend to be highly technical then discard the uml diagrams when they are through with the discussions.
for other informants selective uml use carries on throughout the design and development process with uml representations being included in the technical documentation.
different aspects of selective use are discussed in the sections that follow.
a. uml as a thought tool many of the selective informants use uml as a thought tool to help me think about code ... it s a scratch pad .
one informant clarified i use the concepts.
another explained architects use uml for context for describing detailed solutions in the relationship between different components and the description of components and how they interact.
the formality of the notation helps them think about all the interactions ... a thought framework ... kept in their documentation but not carried forward into design.
b. communicating with stakeholders most of the informants talked about using uml in communication with stakeholders especially technical stakeholders.
as one summarized uml mainly sequence diagrams is useful for requirements elicitation with key stakeholders.
the dominant elements of uml in this context were sequence diagrams and activity diagrams used to elicit requirements and to consider key behaviors.
several informants pointed out that their uml use varied depending on the context including the audience for example i change the diagrams for different dialogues the boss colleagues stakeholders .
conversely another informant articulated the danger of not varying uml use to adapt to the context a diagram for a purpose re applied ends up with a mess.
all of the informants who talked about using uml in communication with stakeholder emphasized the importance of keeping diagrams focused and as simple as possible e.g.
it can be very hard to communicate with people except in a very simplified way.
another informant emphasized that to be effective for dialogues with clients uml needs to be used to communicate not just to represent or as a product in its own right.
another emphasized abstraction and context key diagrams with structure at a high enough level.
gives them a way in... another echoed this approach while also acknowledging the need to avoid premature implementation decisions full blown modeling is too much for most cases and for most people...the aim is getting people to ask tough questions why who wants that are there conflicts that need to be resolved?
using goal modeling all the way through is jumping the gun a bit.
you end up pre judging design decisions and you may easily get them wrong.
c. collaborative dialogues many informants reported using uml in collaborative dialogues.
for example architecture colleagues use it as part of the design description to make an implementation proposal.
another reported especially when working with teams use cases decomposition help us talk through the project .
another described a large integration project that combined software from two different teams when uml was useful for presenting ... our own system in class diagrams and sequence diagrams so people understood the lifecycles of the data.
one informant found uml particularly helpful in international collaborations uml helps a lot when talking to speakers it provides a language bridge allowing participants to ...resolve the ambiguity using lower language skills .
in each of these cases uml is used to provide a common representation from which to drive discussion and build a shared model of the problem context and design proposals potentially overcoming discrepancies in perspective history culture or language proficiency.
d. adaptation selective users are explicit about taking license with the notation or using it not by the book .
many echoed the report of one informant that i adapt uml to the task.
many identified variations or annotations that they use.
for example i use variants of activity diagrams for communication purposes or ... as part of the thinking process to map out what needs to be done.
i use something that s in between a use case view and an activity view the user roles the things going on in the computer the things in other places like the back office of the customer.
in another example i do a swim laney thing for web applications or showing what s in the front end of the application and the back end.
one reason for adaptation was to make explicit the relationships between views how can i connect all those pictures ... interaction between the pictures?
another reason is to address perceived deficiencies in uml difficult to represent tasks threads processes... e. keeping it small selective traction those who reported using uml most enthusiastically use it in a focused way that narrows the scope and hence keeps the uml artefacts manageable in size and fit for purpose.
for example uml is useful for some architecture and little conceptual models are nicely expressed.
another informant articulated a principle for choosing the focus rule express that key part of the system that gives context for everything else.
another explained that he uses it only for a very high level view of the classes and the flow because otherwise it clutters the information it complicates the view .
many expressed the principle of using uml as long as it was useful and only that long i do as much as the problem demands.
issues of synchronization and consistency arose in this discussion and focused use was described as a way of avoiding such issues relations between representations?
inconsistency between different views?
interactions between abstraction layer and detailed layers?
i focus on functions and create one possible candidate of the class diagram... and i don t elaborate if a high level description is sufficient for decision making.
the interest is in providing traction for solving problems or making decisions without incurring undue costs i like to help people do things better than they do now without big overheads.
there were repeated