multi layered approach for recovering links between bug reports and fixes anh tuan nguyen anhnt iastate.edutung thanh nguyen tung iastate.eduhoan anh nguyen hoan iastate.edutien n. nguyen tien iastate.edu electrical and computer engineering department iowa state university ames ia usa abstract the links between the bug reports in an issue tracking system and the corresponding fixing changes in a version repository are not often recorded by developers.
such linking information is crucial for research in mining software repositories in measuring software defects and maintenance efforts.
however the state of the art bug to fix link recovery approaches still rely much on textual matching between bug reports and commit change logs and cannot handle well the cases where their contents are not textually similar.
this paper introduces mlink a multi layered approach that takes into account not only textual features but also source code features of the changed code corresponding to the commit logs.
it is also capable of learning the association relations between the terms in bug reports and the names of entities components in the changed source code of the commits from the established bug to fix links and uses them for link recovery between the reports and commits that do not share much similar texts.
our empirical evaluation on realworld projects shows that mlink can improve the state ofthe art bug to fix link recovery methods by and in f score recall and precision respectively.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement general terms algorithms documentation experimentation measurement keywords bug to fix links bugs fixes mining software repository .
introduction during the development of a software system software engineers produce and manage their source code in a version permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
sigsoft fse november cary north carolina usa.
copyright acm ... .
.repository such as cvs or svn .
when erroneous behaviors are found in the system the users testers developers reported the issues which are stored in a different repository called a bug tracking system e.g.
bugzilla .
the links between bug reports in a bug tracking system andcorresponding committed xing changes in a source code repository called bug to x links are not often recorded .
this type of links is crucial for many research approaches in mining software repositories msr because the information on software quality and maintenance efforts such as the measurements on software defects and bug fixing changes can be derived from those links .
recognizing the importance of bug to fix links several approaches have been proposed to recover such links from bug reports in a bug tracking system and commit logs in a version archive.
the widely used traditional link recovery approach is based on the mining of key phrases and common text patterns that the fixers have noted in the change logs such as fixed the issue xyz fix bug id ... etc.
unfortunately recent studies have found that those traditional pattern based heuristics likely result in biased data with many false negatives i.e.
missing links .
the authors reported that developers may not always document bug