software design sketching with calico nicolas mangano alex bake r mitch dempsey emily na varro andr van der hoek department of informatics university of california irvine irvine ca u.s.a. nmangano abaker mdempsey emilyo andre ics.uci.edu abstract despite the availability of a host of software design notations and associated tools software develo pers are known to frequently turn to the whiteboard when faced with a specific design problem.
there they typically engage in an informal form of software design that relies heavily on sketching.
however whereas whiteboards afford flexibility and fluidity they at the same time limit a designer in only being able to draw and erase content.
this paper presents calico a novel software design tool that leverages electronic whiteboards to enhance the design experience with explicit support for the creative explorator y aspects of design.
specifically calico offers a grid scraps and a palette together with gesturebased input to address several natural behaviors exhibited by software designers including freque nt shifts in focus use of lowdetail models and use of a mix of notations.
to evaluate calico we performed a laboratory experi ment involving eight pairs of graduate students and collected a nd analyzed six corporate design sessions that employed calico.
re sults are promising and indicate the benefits of calico while they at the same time highlight several ways in which it can be enhanced.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
design tools and techniques computer aided software engineering case .
general terms design human factors.
keywords design software design sketching creative exploration electronic whiteboard informal drawing calico.
.
introduction while many software design tools exist and are in use daily when faced with a design problem more often than not developers will turn to the whiteboard informally sketching and writing to work through potential solutions .
this is typical during the conceptual stages of software design when no code exists yet but frequently also takes place during maintenance design when a code base has been developed but must be modified to for in stance incorporate new functiona lity or optimize some key part.
design issues also may arise spontaneously such as when a developer works on a task becomes st uck and has to involve one or more colleagues in an impromptu design session at the whiteboard to work through the issue .
one reason developers turn to the whiteboard is the flexibility and fluidity it offers in the design ex perience.
existing software design tools with their requirement to precisely use predefined notations focus on correctness and completene ss and can be said to primarily support documenting a design after it is thought out.
however software design as any ki nd of design is a highly creative endeavor .
on a whiteboard developers can freely sketch branch off to another part of the design problem return to a previous part erase some portion of their work redraw it and so on all without being forced into using a specific notation or being required to provide any more detail than they want.
at the same time the whiteboard does not help the exercise either.
particularly whatever is drawn or written remains static and cannot be manipulated other than draw ing over it or erasing it.
this is a less than desirable situation as it is known that software designers often wish to manipulate a de sign at hand in more advanced ways than merely adding or erasing content .
in this paper we present calico a novel software design tool for the electronic whiteboard that offers a number of features explicitly designed to support software de signers in the process of sketching.
calico offers a set of feat ures that address several natural behaviors exhibited by software designers when they sketch a design.
particularly so ftware designers regularly shift focus typically draw low detail mode ls and generally use a mix of notations as we shall motivat e in section .
in response to these we introduce four major features each of which we designed to advance the design experience yet preserve the same flexible and fluid nature of sk etching on a regular whiteboard.
these features are a grid to manage multiple canvases in the workspace scraps to represent various notations and enable advanced manipulation of sketched content a palette to support reuse of emerging notations and a gesture based interaction scheme to tie all features to simple stylus based input.
without use of these features calico behaves much like a standard whiteboard.
it has a white canvas provides a set of pen colors identical to standard whiteboard markers and supports designers in immediately drawing and writing without calling on them to enter any mode or selecting any wi dget to create new content.
its novel features however significant ly enrich this experience well beyond a generic sketching activity into one particularly matched with creative software design.
permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
ase september antwerp belgium.
copyright acm ... .
.
to evaluate calico we performed a two stage evaluation.
we first conducted an exploratory laborator y experiment using eight pairs of graduate students.
thereafter we collected six corporate design sessions that used calico while the corporate designers worked on a real problem they faced at that time in their respective organizations.
we videotaped each of th e sessions in the laboratory experiment with the videotapes and de tailed logs generated by calico serving as the basis for our analysis and evaluation.
we used the corporate design sessions to de termine whether the phenomena we observed in our experiment also a ppeared in the wild .
some key differences arose but the overall results point to calico s features being highly supportive of softwa re designers design behaviors.
this paper builds upon two short workshop papers in which cali co was introduced previously one of which is available in the acm digital library the other unpublished.
these papers described calico s features from a sketching perspective.
here we frame calico in a much deeper framework of design behaviors provide more discussion of the motivation for and design decisions underneath calico and include a first detailed evaluation.
.
background to position our work we discuss in this section background regarding the role of sketching in design and software design as well as sketch tools for software design and other design fields.
.
sketching sketching plays an important role in the design process regardless of discipline for several re asons.
first sketching provides a mechanism to quickly externalize thoughts both for the individual and group so that abstract ideas can be viewed analyzed and discussed .
second sketching enables designers to move from the abstract to the concrete while still flexibly controlling the order in which they explore a design problem and its solution.
in particular design is not linear involving both horizontal and vertical moves through which de signers initiate explore combine transform refine and indeed reject different ideas .
third sketching allows designers to not commit to ideas too early.
if ideas are too structured too soon or even just appear too formal when they are put into drawing form they tend to become unconscious barriers to change .
in general sketching enables designers to engage in non symbo lic thinking that does not necessarily rely on some predefined notation and enables them to more readily diverge and reconsider their thoughts.
the value of sketching does not come from the artifacts produced but from the insights gained through the activ ity of sketching itself .
.
sketching in software design software designers sketch too and we are not the first to observe this.
dekel and herbsleb s work for instance has resulted in observations on how software design ers use sketches .
the advantages of sketching from section .
are also starting to be echoed in studies of software designers in action.
for example cherubini et al.
articulate goals such as sharing thoughts grounding ideas manipulating concepts and brains torming as reasons why software designers sketch .
petre observes that software designers use sketches because they serve as natural extensions of design thinking by allowing flexible sele ction of focus having implied provisionality and enabling juxta position of elements .
these and other studies are starting to s how that sketching plays as crucial a role in software design as it does in other design disciplines.
other studies have shown that th e tools that software designers use have an impact on the quality of their design decisions be cause of the different limitations those tools place on the designer s exploration of a design prob lem.
for instance zannier et.
al.
examined various factors involve d in the design decisions that software teams make and found that tools which encouraged conversation but did not force stru cture promoted decisions with a broader consideration of alternatives .
as elaborated in section the collective findings of these studies represent key influences on the design of calico.
they particularly document how software designers de sign and give insight into the largely subconscious behaviors e xhibited by software designers when they sketch.
.
sketch tools for software design with the increased attention to sketching it is unsurprising that a number of sketch tools have emer ged that aim to support software design.
early tools such as silk or denim offer sketching support for designing respectively user interfaces and web sites.
both tools immediately interpret the contents drawn by the user turning rough shapes in to exact model elements.
later tools such as sumlow and marama sketch were designed to leave sketches in their original rough and uninterpreted form postponing translation of sketches into more formal diagrams until explicitly asked by the user.
inkkit pushes the transformation from sketches to more formal diagrams further by supporting multiple intermediate levels of formality.
numerous other uml oriented sketch tools have been created generally following similar strategies for a survey see .
while tools using such lazy interpretation approaches provide a degree of freedom for expression ultimately they remain focused on producing a diagram in a specific notation.
the need for auto matic recognition of shapes drives what can and cannot be sketched.
it can be said that these tools focus on the design artifact.
the work presented in this pa per on the other hand focuses on the design activity .
by letting go of automatic recognition calico can focus on supporting designers in more flexibly creat ing manipulating and exploring a design in progress.
.
sketch tools in general sketching on electronic whiteboards has also been an active topic of research in the computer supported cooperative work cscw community.
work there tends to focus on the general sketch activity and the interaction facilities with which users can best manipulate material on the board.
earl y work explored gesture based input in a variety of settings as well as how multiple users can actively collaborate .
auto mated recognition of sketched content also was the subject of much research e.g.
.
more recent work has focused on exploring novel interaction mechanisms such as multi level pie menus automatic space minimization and integrating tablet pc bas ed input on a large display for a group of designers .
beyond these examples numerous other sketch tools have been proposed and built.
johnson et al.
present an extensive discussion of these tools their aims and underlying approaches and algorithms .
while calico certainly draws inspiration from these kinds of tools it also differs from them both in goal and functionality.
cscw sketch tools tend to foster a crea tive environment but aim to do so generically.
calico is concerned with software design and in particular the innate behaviors of software designers and the notations they use.
.
objectives to identify the primary requireme nts for calico we studied how software designers work at the whiteboard.
specifically we took and examined photographs of whiteboard design content at a local software company examples shown in figure and correlated our interpretations with results in th e literature e.g.
.
the purpose of this paper is not to pres ent the details of this analysis as the paper focuses on calico the tool.
we therefore simply summarize the three key findings.
software designers frequently shift focus .
when working on a design problem designers sw itch context continuously for instance when switching from user interface design to internal data structure design to ar chitectural issues and back to user interface design.
this is an essential part of design as designers must consider altern atives explore different perspectives and develop detail where and when necessary to create a satisfactory solution .
software designers use low detail models during exploration at the whiteboard .
all three images shown in figure highlight this observation.
most boxes remain unlabeled various forms of shorthand are used and the sketches remain abstract in nature.
while exceptions exist and at times more de tailed models are indeed draw n other studies confirm the prevalence of low detail models noting that they allow ideas to be both expressed quickly and modified easily .
software designers use a mix of notations .
the image on the left in figure contains both a user interface in black and an architecture in orange each with its own conventions and graphical elements.
the im age on the right similarly contains a module breakdown client plugin and an internal data structure the diagram with the l s inside circles that connect to slots on the right .
such mixing of notations is commonplace .
notations may even emerge on the fly .
the internal data structure of l s and slots for instance uses an impromptu notation that does not resemble any known approach e.g.
um l entity relations .
.
calico our overarching objective in deve loping calico was to design its features in such a manner that they preserve the fluid nature of sketching on a whiteboard yet at the same time amplify the behaviors described in section .
this means that designers should be able to readily create manipulate and explore a design of interest without the typical limitations i nduced by standard whiteboard use.
in order to achieve this we introduce three novel features the grid scraps and the palette.
the grid provides an interface to manage multiple canvases and fluidly move between them.
scraps provide a mechanism to represent user defined structures and group sketched content and additionally permits advanced manipulation actions on that sketched content.
lastly the palette stores scraps and permits their reuse acro ss the grid.
as a guide table shows a mapping between the main features of calico and each of the three behaviors of section .
before we discuss the features in detail we reiterate that calico is meant to be used on an electronic whiteboard or tablet pc in the case of single person use and is optimized to take its input from a digital stylus not a mouse.
the designers stand in front of the electronic whiteboard and use the di gital stylus to draw write and control calico see figure .
.
basic features figure presents calico as it first appears when a developer starts it.
users can immediately draw or write without needing to enter any mode or selecting a widget to create new content.
just as on a standard whiteboard they make any marks they wish anywhere in any shape.
the drawing canvas has just a few visible widgets to maintain the appearance of a standard whiteboard.
seven colored buttons at the bottom left allow a us er to change colors colors that were carefully chosen to be in direct correspondence to the standard pen colors available on a regular whiteboard.
in addition to changing colors calico provides a small handful of features familiar to computer users.
users can pan a canvas undo and redo actions save and load designs and export sketches as jpeg images for use in other pr ograms.
we do not discuss these figure .
example whiteboard co ntent from a design session at a local softwa re company confidentia l details obfuscated .
table .
calico features as they address the behaviors discussed in section need feature shifting focus grid sketching effort can be partitioned across multiple canvases tabs permit quick shifting between and copying of canvases low detail models scraps user drawn shape is maintained to enable highly informal models implicitly groups strokes and sketches and makes them moveable stackable and relatable mix of notations scraps palette scraps capture emerging notations palette facilitates reuse of notations figure .
calico appearance at the start of a design session.
basic features any further as they largely speak for themselves.
.
grid calico s first novel feature is the grid which is our answer to the designer s need to not only easily shif t focus but to also be able to keep track of their design at hand.
shown in figure the grid provides the designer with a bird s eye perspective of the design process as it has unfolded by showing multiple canvases at once.
by tapping on a grid cell the devel oper enters that particular canvas where they can create new sketches or modify any sketches already in existence.
by tapping the grid icon see top right of figure the designer returns to the grid.
the grid naturally leads to a parti tioning of design effort while at the same time supporting straight forward movement between the emerging parts of this overall effo rt.
for instance a designer can make a to do list in one canvas use other canvases to work out each item on the to do list in isolation and return to the to do list periodically to check and mark progress.
as another example they could choose to examin e a design problem from various perspectives or at varying levels of detail in different cells.
the grid becomes the record keeper of this exploration allowing rapid shifting from one perspective or level of detail to another.
the grid advances on the filmstri p metaphor used in previous tools by transitioning from a time based metaphor to a spatial metaphor.
users can not only locat e individual canvases based on where they exist in the grid relative to each other but also navigate to adjacent canvases without first having to switch to the grid.
they can move left right up or down one canvas at a time by using the tabs that are located in the middle of each edge of the canvas see figure .
tabs also support a different form of shifting focus exploration of alternatives.
on a standard whiteboa rd it is difficult to fork ideas.
one has to manually replicate a sketch elsewhere before modifying it.
this is clearly undesirable and either leads to less exploration or direct manipulation of th e sketch in question the latter destroying the original from which the departure is being made and making it difficult to return to a previous state.
by tapping the grey half of a tab a canvas conten t is copied in its entirety to the corresponding adjacent canvas which in turn is placed into focus.
with a single click thus the de signer is provided with a fresh copy of an entire canvas which they can then further explore refine or modify.
using this tec hnique repeatedly a trail of his torical revisions is built that documents how an idea evolved and provides a safety net to always re turn to any previous version.
these shifts in focus are further aided by the fact that canvas cells are moveable on the grid allowing a user to rearrange the various cells according to whichever concern they wish to address.
that is they may move old ideas aside cluster canvases by phases of design group topics or even ju xtapose different perspectives.
.
scraps scraps address two of the behavior s discussed in section the use of low detail models and the use of a mix of notations.
designers tend to use approximations of notations and to fluidly move from some partial list to a uml like diagram to a user interface sketch to perhaps even pseudo code.
tools that use precise specifications or only support a single notation fall short in supporting these behaviors.
scraps are our answer.
scraps leverage a key action that users of a whiteboard naturally perform circumscribing some area of sketched or written content .
they typically do this to indi cate some object of sorts or to simply mark an area as important.
in calico the act of circum scription using the right mouse button on the digital stylus has visually the same result the area that is circumscribed is hig hlighted with a thin border and grey background.
in addition however the area becomes an object in calico that can be further manipulated and has several pre a ssigned behaviors.
in particular scraps are implicit groups that ar e movable stackable and relatable.
we review these properties one by one.
implicit groups.
scraps build upon the approach taken in translucent patches which allows users to explicitly declare an area as a group.
anything that is either entirely circumscribed in the first place or otherwise written or drawn in this area afterwards is automatically part of the group.
consider the literal sketch of a car visible in the bottom right of figure .
it was first drawn on the canvas then circumscribed by the stylus to become a scrap.
the scrap is now a persistent object with a grey background.
any fur ther additions to the car automatically become part of the scrap.
movable .
scraps are movable.
right c licking and dragging using the digital stylus will move a scrap and its contents to a different location on the board.
this seemi ngly innocuous action in reality represents a dramatic improvement over the standard whiteboard drawn content can be rapidly reorga nized.
it particularly is impor figure .
designers using calico.
26tant that such reorganization ta kes place in the language of the user elements that they have deemed of sufficient importance to promote to being a scrap rather than just being raw scribbles on the canvas are the elements that are moved.
stackable.
moving a scrap to a position where some part or all of it overlaps another scrap attaches it to the scrap behind it allowing users to quickly create a stack of scraps thereby modeling hierarchically composed groups as one would a pile of papers.
for instance the scraps labeled speed and position in figure are part of the scrap labeled car component.
dragging a scrap off of another scrap un groups it.
moving the scrap labeled position from its current location on the canvas to where it overlaps the scrap containing the inters ection will ungroup it from car component and group it with the intersection scrap in one fluid motion.
note that dragging a scrap implicitly moves it to the top of the order of scraps scraps do not slide under other scraps.
note also that compared to most drawing tools no explicit group or ungroup selection with associated menu choice has to be made.
relatable.
by dragging the stylus from one scrap to another an arrow is created between the two.
the arrow is persistent and anchored to the two points.
when scraps are moved the arrows move accordingly and keep the two scraps related.
in figure the scrap position relates to the intersection scrap and the scrap car component relates to the car scrap.
complementing these basic scrap behaviors are several more specialized behaviors accessible via a small radial menu on the scrap itself.
for one a scrap s conten t can be dropped onto a scrap behind it or if there is not a scrap behind it back onto the canvas.
this allows designers to combine content from multiple scraps.
through the radial menu scraps can also be given a more regular box shape and scraps can be made transparent.
this latter functionality supports divergence at the micro level of individual scraps as opposed to the macro le vel of entire canvases through the grey tabs .
by drawing on a translucent scrap that overlays another scrap developers can expl ore modifications to this other scrap s content without overwriting the content.
if they are satisfied with the result they could choose to combine the two scraps by dropping the content of the translucent scrap.
alternatives can be compared in this manner as well via multiple translucent scraps capturing different deviations.
one key design choice we made with respect to scraps is that they do not attempt to recognize sketch ed content nor do they require designers to give them a certain meaning.
empty scraps can persist for as long as the user chooses not to add content not even a label is required.
this behavior is motivated by our observation of designers using low detail models recall the example photos in figure and the discussion in sect ion detail is only added at the initiative of th e user not when the program demands it.
the decision to not attempt to recognize sketched content is cru cial since designers tend to mix multiple notations during a single design session.
a box that is drawn could represent anything from a uml class to an entity in an er diagram to a button in a ui diagram.
automated recognition in the face of such mixed notations is nearly impossible a nd guessing wrong would seriously interfere with the design flow.
scraps are also fundamental to a ddressing the behavior of using a mix of notations.
by virtue of having physical presence scraps provide a natural basis for serving as a representation for more structured though still informally drawn figures such as user interface sketches or class diagrams.
since scraps are amorphous and take on the shape of a designer s stroke shaping them in visually identifiable forms e.g.
boxes circles buttons allows the designer to informally convey a certain meaning.
particularly when combined with arrows this supports sketching of numerous types of box and arrow like diagrams.
figure .
set of scra ps.
figure .
grid in use.
.
palette the palette is the third feature that we incorporated in response to the behaviors discussed in section .
it specifically addresses the issue of various notations.
palettes are not new but their typical incarnation in drawing programs is to include a pre populated set of figures that are not configurable beyond changing the entire set.
in design however it is not uncommon that a spontaneous notational convention emerges that does not necessarily adhere to any pre existing or fixed set of figure s. calico s palette thus starts empty and is filled with content by the designer enabling the reuse of sketched elements.
this allows a temporary vocabulary to be created and leveraged within a design session as exemplified by the impromptu notation used by the designers in figure 7c as further described in section .
the palette leverages scraps for this purpose.
designers can store a scrap simply by dragging it into the palette on the side of calico s canvas visible on the right hand side of figure .
the palette has a number of cells each of which may hold one or more scraps.
by dragging from a palette cell onto the canvas any scraps inside that cell are copied to the canvas at the position of the stylus.
the palette serves as a global clipboard scraps can be stored and reused from any canvas.
.
gesture based input permeating across the three design behaviors discussed in section is the need for gesture based input.
many of the creative exploratory activities that calico intends to support rely on the fluidity and quickness of sketching.
inter actions supplemental to the primary sketching activity should be equally quick.
the design flow must be maintained and shapes should be created the way designers want them.
essentially the viscosity of elements or the cost of making changes has to be low.
unfortunately the traditional menu driven system poses a serious hurdle to a free flowing activity.
in order to maintain the natural feel of sketching in the interaction we have chosen instead to use a mixed mode approach many features are ready at hand through simple gestures but so me more esoteric functionality that would otherwise require integration of co mplicated gestures is available in a pie menu off of scraps which requires only two taps for any selection from the menu one tap to open it and another to make a choice which constitutes a relatively low overhead .
interaction is driven by context sensitive gestures.
each stroke of the stylus performs a unique action depending on where it travels.
dragging the stylus along the canva s draws directly onto the canvas but slashing it across a scrap will delete it.
the gestures which are documented in full in the calico user manual available on the web site take into consideration where the stylus begins which object s it intersects alon g its path and where the stylus ends.
this is sufficient to build a straightforward interaction scheme that allows the user to create scraps manipulate them in various ways draw arrows from one scrap to another and navigate the entire calico interface with ease.
each action has a priori ty such that stylus strokes spanning multiple interactions behave predictably.
for instance when a user draws a line from one scrap to another that crosses an existing arrow a new arrow is created and the existing arrow is not deleted despite the fact that the stroke struck through it.
we prioritized the actions based on ob1 served user expectations and the frequency with which they are used relative to one another.
.
evaluation to evaluate calico we performed a laboratory experiment involving eight pairs of graduate stude nts using calico to design an educational traffic simulator and collected and analyzed six corporate design sessions that employed calico.
our goal in conducting the laboratory and corporate evaluati ons was twofold we first wished to verify that users utilize the full range of calico s fea tures during a design activity as oppos ed to just using calico as if they were using a regular whiteboard which we explore in section .
.
and we were interested in how users use each feature with respect to the design behaviors that we outlined in sec tion which we explore in section .
.
.
together these two show that calico s features are not just useful but useful towards the purpose for which they were designed thereby demonstrating that the objectives laid out in section can be met.
.
laboratory experiment .
.
experiment design participants in our study were cs graduate students with varying levels years of industr ial experience.
to create balanced teams we grouped the participants into pairs with similar amounts of industrial experience.
each t eam received the same design prompt asking for the design of an educational traffic signal simulator to be used by students in a civil engineering course.
teams were given one hour and fift y minutes of design time after which they briefly recapped their design in their own words minutes .
each participant was given as an incentive and a prize was awarded to the team with the best design.
as a result all teams took the exercise seriously and were fully engaged throughout the design exercise.
because of unfamiliarity with the medium electronic white board and tool calico we trained the students for thirty mi nutes before each design session first through a scripted tutorial and then through open experimentation during which we encouraged participants to practice.
each session was recorded on vide o camera for subsequent analysis.
additionally calico produced detailed logs that captured each individual user action e.g.
scribb le drawn scrap created moved or deleted switch in grid cell .
.
.
feature use we first focused on whether partic ipants would move beyond just basic sketching to using the novel fe atures of calico.
this point is important given that there was no incentive for participants to use any of the advanced features other than the features being useful to their task at hand they could have instead chosen to sketch as they sketch normally on a standard whiteboard.
figure shows the result marking each time the grid a scraps b or the palette c was used.
from the graph we note that the grid was unanimously used by all groups with heavy usage from most teams and moderate by some.
the teams predominantly switched to the grid view first for navigating to different grid cells though as time went on several incorporated use of the tabs to navigate to adjacent canvases.
there was a wide distribution in th e frequency of scrap use with some teams strongly relying on scraps others exhibiting more prompt available at http sign workshop 28moderate use and a few barely using them.
the palette was the least used feature with just two teams using it some.
.
.
design behaviors clearly the videos and associated audio are a rich source of material for a broad range of asse ssments on software designers behaviors.
here we limit our analys is to examining the use of calico s features.
given our goal of supporting the specific design behaviors identified in section the rest of this section focuses on these behaviors and how calico supports them.
shifting focus.
as the heavy use of the grid would suggest calico assisted designers readily in shif ting focus.
all sessions resulted in grids similar to the one shown in figure with the designers moving back and forth among grid cells frequently.
teams switched to a new grid cell to either address additional detail generated by the current sketch or generate a new alternative.
in the majority of cases it did not matter which new grid cell a team used for continuing their de sign activities as a consequence of which we observed numerous linea r chains of grid cells in use.
several interesting cases did eme rge however.
for example each of the team members shown in figure 7a content shown in figure owned a grid row of design content in that they were the primary designer for all of the sketches in their row.
as another example not shown one team used the spatial metaphor extensively with team members talki ng about moving in a given direction i.e.
left right up down to navigate to certain sketches.
while not all teams operated as explicitly in terms of direction the grid s spatial orientation did provide a consistent layout that enabled the teams to shift focus by navigating to different grid cells.
the contents of the grid cells tended to break down in three categories requirements gathering code structure and ui design.
every team used the first cell to lay out their requirements in a list after which they would move to another cell to embark on the design proper.
they would frequently return to the requirements for inspection and assessment of their progress.
the ability to copy grid cells proved useful not only to generate alternatives one can see several variant sketches in figure but also when it was desirable to divide the contents of a canvas between two canvases so to be able to work on each part separately.
copy followed by subsequent deletion of the respective halves of the copied content achieved this desired result.
one of the teams used the copy feature to create back ups of individual canvases and moved these back up copies out of the way by dragging the cells to the outer edges of the grid.
several other teams moved grid cells around to more clearly organize their design.
overall we observed that participants use the grid as a tool to divide design content across cells where a shift in attention was commonly accompanied by a change of cell and long periods of attention were marked by extended periods of continued activity in a single cell visible as gaps be tween points in figure 6a .
additionally we observed the spatial layout helping designers both in providing clear