non essential changes in version histories david kawrykow and martin p .
robillard mcgill university montr al canada dkawry martin cs.mcgill.ca abstract numerous techniques involveminingchange data capturedin software archives to assist engineering efforts for example to identify components that tend to evolve together.
we observed that im portant changes to software artifacts are sometimes accompani ed by numerous non essential modifications suchaslocalvariablerefactorings or textual differences induced as part of arename r efactoring.
we developed a tool supported technique for detecting nonessential code differences in the revision histories of sof tware systems.
we used our technique to investigate code changes in ov er 24000change sets gathered from the change histories of seven long lived open source systems.
we found that up to .
of a system s method updates were due solely to non essential d ifferences.
wealsoreportonnumerousobservations onthedistri bution of non essential differences in change history and their po tential impact on change based analyses.
categories andsubject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement general terms measurement experimentation algorithms keywords mining software repositories software change analysis d ifferencingalgorithms .
introduction sourcecoderepositorysystemshavebeeninusesincethe197 0s to keep track of the different versions of a system s artifac ts and by extension of the changes made between versions .
num erous techniques now involve mining change data captured in so ftware archives to assist software engineering efforts.
for e xample mining change data has been used to measure code decay in agin g systems to predict defects in modules and to de tect permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of thi s work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage an d that copies bear this notice and thefull citation on the firstpage.
tocop y otherwise to republish topostonserversortoredistribute tolists re quires priorspecific permission and or afee.
icse11 may waikiki honolulu hi usa copyright acm ... .
.non obvious relationships between code elements .
we refer to approaches operating on change data as change based approaches.
typical version control systems store changes as line base d textualdeltasbetweencommittedcodefiles.
incontrast chang e based approaches generallyaimtooperate onmore meaningful repr esentationsofchange suchas forexample theindividualmeth odsthat wereupdatedaspartofadevelopercommittotherepository.
more meaningful representations of software changes support mo re accurate reasoning about software development activityand e ffort.
acriticalproblem forchange based approaches isthustobr idge this conceptual gap between the low level deltas stored in v ersion control systems andthe abstractions used torepresent soft ware development activity.
a first step implemented by most modern change based approaches is to ignore trivial low level ch anges likethoseinducedbywhitespacesorotherformatting rela tedmodifications.
thegeneralassumptionbehindthisstrategyist hatthese groups of low level differences are less likely to yield mea ningful abstractionsoftheactualdevelopment effortbehindacode change.
forexample manychange basedapproaches ignoretrivialu pdates when determining the set of methods that were modified as part of a code commit.
aspartofourongoinginvestigationofsoftwarearchives w eobserved that manyadditional kinds of minor or non essential code changes can also cause change based approaches to infer ina ccurate high level representations of software development e ffort.
for example everytimeadeveloper performsarenamerefactori ng all methods that include