automating the formalization of product comparison matrices guillaume b can nicolas sannier mathieu acher olivier barais arnaud blouin and benoit baudry inria irisa campus de beaulieu rennes cedex france guillaume.becan irisa.fr nicolas.sannier inria.fr mathieu.acher irisa.fr olivier.barais irisa.fr arnaud.blouin irisa.fr benoit.baudry inria.fr abstract product comparison matrices pcms form a rich source of data for comparing a set of related and competing products over numerous features.
despite their apparent simplicity pcms contain heterogeneous ambiguous uncontrolled and partial information that hinders their e cient exploitations.
in this paper we formalize pcms through modelbased automated techniques and develop additional tooling to support the edition and re engineering of pcms.
participants used our editor to evaluate the pcm metamodel and automated transformations.
the results over pcms from wikipedia show that a signi cant proportion of the formalization of pcms can be automated .
of the cells are correctly formalized the rest of the formalization can be realized by using the editor and mapping cells to existing concepts of the metamodel.
the automated approach opens avenues for engaging a community in the mining re engineering edition and exploitation of pcms that now abound on the internet.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
reusable software d. .
management software con guration management keywords metamodeling product comparison matrices domain analysis automated transformation .
introduction in her book the art of choosing sheena iyengar discusses cultural and social factors that lead people to choose their products among many others .
in this endeavor of choosing people rely on their own experiences dedicated permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september vasteras sweden.
copyright acm ... .
.. reviews or even general product comparison materials.
one common representation that can help to make a choice is to visualize all the products characteristics through a matricial representation the so called product comparison matrices pcms see figure 2for an example .
the intrinsic theoretical good properties of such matrices are notably simplicity no particular training is required to understand how it works synthesis all the expected information is present without any verbose claim easy to write and de ne from existing sources widely used independent from any particular domain or support.
though apparently simple synthetic or easy to design pcms hide in practice an important complexity while expressing commonalities and variabilities among products .
pcms can be seen as a special form of spreadsheets and thus share some of their problems .
speci cally the underlying reasons of the complexity of pcms are ambiguity pcms are mainly written in uncontrolled natural language mixing scopes granularity and heterogeneous styles lack of scalability as a pcm grows up its readability dramatically decreases too much equality all the information is equally presented as textual assets lack of support and services the previous points are emphasized by the limited number of advanced services tackling these limits.
a systematic engineering approach with dedicated tools is needed to improve the current practice of editing maintaining and exploiting pcms.
our initial work proposed a preliminary analysis of pcms and characterized the nature of the problem.
yet the key challenge remains providing a more structured and formal expression of pcms.
the general problem of transforming raw data to formal model has a long tradition .
in this paper we address three research questions see figure rq1 how to formalize data that are contained in large and uncontrolled natural language pcms?
rq2 how to automatically transform pcms into more formal representations?
rq3 what tools and services can be built on top of this formalization?
our approach is to take the speci cities of pcms into account redundant tricks and constructs for documenting supported features of products in a pcm are empirically identi ed and formalized into a domain speci c modeling language a metamodel .
then automated techniques are developed to encode raw data as models conformant to the metamodel.
a series of tools are built on top of the metamodel to ease the re engineering of pcms or pro433 raw data wikipedia pcms rq1 rq3 editor for supporting the re engineering edit of a pcm model of the cells do not correspond to an existing metamodel concept rq2 .
of the cells can be correctly interpreted with a full automation rq1 rq3 some applications built on top of the metamodel are now made possible by the formalization models formalized pcms figure from raw data to models of pcms overview of the contributions and the evaluation vide services that are now made possible by the encoding of pcms as models.
the contributions of this paper are as follows .
a metamodel that acts as a unifying canvas by proposing a more formal description of pcms semantics with respect to their content but also to the variability information they contain .
a set of automated transformations and analyses that leverage the domain data of pcms composed of various and uncontrolled concepts.
these transformations allow to build from raw pcms corresponding pcm models that can be then enriched with further editing and validation services.
in particular we develop a comprehensive pcm editor .
an empirical evaluation for validating the two previous contributions.
this evaluation is based on a set of pcms extracted from wikipedia a large and open source of general and heterogeneous pcms.
participants use our pcm editor to evaluate the pcm metamodel and automated transformations.
the results see figure show that a signi cant proportion of the formalization of pcms can be automated .
of the cells are correctly formalized the rest of the formalization can be realized by using the editor and mapping cells to existing concepts of the metamodel.
we also analyze qualitatively and discuss the missing concepts of the metamodel reported by the participants we believe the automated approach is a signi cant step towards engaging a community in the mining re engineering edition and exploitation of pcms that now abound on the internet.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
section2gives background information about pcm and formulates the research problem.
section introduces our modelbased approach for formalizing pcms.
section 4presents the results of our empirical evaluation.
section 5discusses threats to validity.
section 6discusses related work.
section 7concludes the paper and presents future work.
.
from raw data to models the case of pcms in this section we describe the current limits of product comparison matrices pcms .
we rst detail the complexity of analyzing the content of pcms.
then we explain that raw data representing pcms o er a low level of formalization hindering their subsequent exploitation.heterogeneity and ambiguity.
analyzing the information of a pcm leads to the problem of heterogeneity and ambiguity of the pcm content.
pcm stakeholders can master pcms while the number of features and products is limited.
figure 2illustrates the ambiguity of content with the matrix that describes several features of di erent portable media players.
we can observe very di erent kind of values within the cell from boolean cells unknown values cells with comas parentheses