discovering essential code elements in informal documentation peter c. rigby department of software engineering concordia university montreal qc canada peter.rigby concordia.camartin p. robillard school of computer science mcgill university montreal qc canada martin cs.mcgill.ca abstract to access the knowledge contained in developer communication such as forum posts it is useful to determine automatically the code elements referred to in the discussions.
we propose a novel traceability recovery approach to extract the code elements contained in various documents.
as opposed to previous work our approach does not require an index of code elements to find links which makes it particularly well suited for the analysis of informal documentation.
when evaluated on stackoverflow answer posts containing code elements the technique performs with average .
precision and .
recall.
as a major refinement on traditional traceability approaches we also propose to detect which of the code elements in a document are salient or germane to the topic of the post.
to this end we developed a three feature decision tree classifier that performs with a precision of .
.
and recall of .
.
depending on the subject of the document.
i. i ntroduction an increasing amount of knowledge about software gets conveyed and archived in informal developer communications such as forum posts and mailing lists.
unfortunately while the informal structure promotes conviviality and discourse it also makes it more difficult to index search and analyze.
a particular problem is searching for discussions of a specific software api element to find good usage patterns bug workarounds or alternatives.
to address this problem many recent research projects have targeted the recovery of traceability links between source code elements and informal documentation .
this work comes in the wake of more general attempts at linking source code and documents .
recent traceability work has focused on the problem of identifying a known set of code terms in developer communication.
for example if a post or email message mentions execute does this term correspond to for example an execute method in a code base of interest?
in this case success is strongly influenced by intrinsic factors of both the message and of the names of the source code elements.
in the example above execute will be easier to correctly extract as a method if the author of the message includes the parentheses after the method name.
similarly elaborate names such as equalsignorecase are easier to correctly link than pervasive terms such as add.
the state of the art of traceability techniques for developer resources shows very good accuracy see section ii .
however this work was done while rigby was a postdoctoral researcher at mcgillall existing traceability approaches developed to date have two important limitations for the detection of