creating and evolving developer documentation understanding the decisions of open source contributors barth l my dagenais and martin p .
robillard school of computer science mcgill university montr al qc canada bart martin cs.mcgill.ca abstract developer documentation helps developers learn frameworks and libraries.
to better understand how documentation in open source projects is created and maintained we performed a qualitative study in which we interviewed core contributors who wrote developer documentation and developers who read documentation.
in addition we studied the evolution of documents by analyzing more than document revisions.
we identi ed the decisions that contributors make the factors in uencing these decisions and the consequences for the project.
among many ndings we observed how working on the documentation could improve the code quality and how constant interaction with the projects community positively impacted the documentation.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement general terms documentation experimentation human factors .
introduction developers usually rely on libraries or application frameworks1when building applications.
frameworks provide standardized and tested solutions to recurring design problems.
for example hundreds of applications like google code search and twitter use the jquery framework to provide an interactive user experience with javascript and ajax.
to use a framework developers must learn many things such as the domain and design concepts behind the framework how the concepts map to the implementation and how to extend the framework .
various types of documents are available to help developers learn about frameworks 1unless otherwise speci ed we use the term framework to represent any reusable software artifacts such as libraries and toolkits.
using jquery permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
fse november santa fe new mexico usa.
copyright acm ... .
.ranging from application programming interface documentation to tutorials and reference manuals.
we nd though that very little is known generally about the creation and maintenance of developer documentation.
for example the spring framework manual3has approximately words twice the size of an average novel and has gone through ve major revisions.
creating and maintaining this documentation potentially represents a large effort yet we do not know the kind of problems documentation contributors encounter the factors they consider when working on the documentation and the impact their documentationrelated decisions have on the project.
for instance does documenting a change immediately after making it have different consequences than documenting all changes before a release?
answering these questions provides insights about the techniques that are needed to optimize the resources required to create and maintain developer documentation.
we conducted an exploratory study to learn more about the documentation process of open source projects.
specifically we were interested in identifying the documentation decisions made by open source contributors the context in which these decisions were made and the consequences these decisions had on the project.
we performed semi structured interviews with developers or technical writers who wrote or read the documentation of open source projects.
in parallel we manually inspected more than revisions of documents selected from open source projects.
among many ndings we observed how updating the documentation with every change led to a form of embarrassmentdriven development which in turn led to an improvement in the code quality.
we also found that all contributors who originally selected a public wiki to host their documentation eventually moved to a more controlled documentation infrastructure because of the high maintenance costs and the decrease of documentation authoritativeness.
such observations could enable practitioners to make informed decisions by analyzing the trade o s encountered by their peers and researchers to build documentation tools that are adapted to the documentation process.
.
method we based our exploratory study on grounded theory as described by corbin and strauss .
grounded theory is a qualitative research methodology that employs theoretical sampling and open coding to formulate a theory grounded in the empirical data.
by following grounded theory we 3references to project and documentation tools are presented in table in the appendix 1started from general research questions and re ned the questions and the data collection instruments as the study progressed.
as opposed to random sampling grounded theory involved re ning our sampling criteria throughout the course of the study to ensure that the selected participants were able to answer the new questions that have been formulated.
for example after having interviewed two contributors of perl projects we ltered out further perl projects after having interviewed four contributors from library projects we sent more invitations to contributors of framework projects.
we analyzed the data collected through interviews and document revisions using open coding we assigned codes to sentences paragraphs or revisions and we re ned them as the study progressed.
we then reviewed the codes several times and linked them to emerging categories a process called axial coding.
finally the goal of a study using grounded theory is to produce a coherent set of hypotheses laid in the context of a process that originates from empirical data.
although all reported observations are linked to speci c cataloged evidences we elide some of these links for the sake of brevity.
our method follows that of previous software engineering studies based on grounded theory .
these