what makelongtermcontributors willingness andopportun ityin oss community minghui zhou school of electronics engineering and computer science pe king university key laboratory of high confidence software technologies mi nistry of education beijing china zhmh pku.edu.cnaudris mockus avaya labs research mt airy rd basking ridge nj audris avaya.com abstract to survive and succeed software projects need to attract and retain contributors.
we model the individual s chances to become a valuable contributorthrough her capaci ty willingness and the opportunity to contribute at the time o f joining.
using issue tracking data of mozilla and gnome we find that the probability for a new joiner to become a long term contributor ltc is associated with her willingness a nd environment.specifically duringtheirfirstmonth future ltcs tend to be more active and show more community oriented attitude than other joiners.
joiners who start by commentin g on instead of reporting an issue or ones who succeed to get at least one reported issue to be fixed more than double their odds of becoming an ltc.
the micro climate with a productive and clustered peer group increases the odds.
on the contrary the macro climate with high project populari ty and the micro climate with low attention from peers reduce t he odds.
this implies that the interaction between individual s attitude and project s climate are associated with the odds that an individual would become a valuable contributor or disengage from the project.
our findings may provide a basis for empirical approaches to design a better community architecture and to improve the experience of contributors .
keywords long term contributor open source willingness opportunity interaction of person and environment i. introduction ancient strategist sun tzu claimed that to succeed in battle it is crucial to gain people ssupport.the same appli es tosoftwareprojects becausetheirsuccessinthemarketpl ace is determined by their ability to attract the support from contributors.
oss doesn t work without contributions from thecommunity asanintervieweeforthisstudycommented.
therefore an open source community s volunteer contributors should be a treasured resource .
understanding how to maintain sustain and grow the contributorcommunityiscriticalforthesurvivalandsucc ess of any open source project.
for example wikipedia introduced lovebutton to make it easy for peers to encourage new editors to stay and to contribute despite the fact that theircontributionsoftengetdeletedandderided .inpartic1 agementmetrics and tools for mozilla ipedia addswikilove for newbie editorsular longtermcontributors ltcs arecrucialforproject s success because it takes a long time for developers to become productiveand even more time to be able to do central tasks e.g.
tomentornewcomers .furthermore individ ual and group job enrichment efforts may be more successful when attention is directed to initial task experiences .
consequently the understandingof what affects the chance s that a new contributorwill becomean ltc would therefore facilitate projects success by helping projects train and retain developers capable of solving critical tasks.
borrowing a framework from management science which uses three interactive dimensions of capacity e.g.
ability willingness e.g.
attitude and opportunity e.g.
environment to account for the work performance of individuals we model the probability that a new joiner would become a valuable contributor an ltc 3through her willingness and opportunity to contribute at the time of joining .
issue tracking systems record the history of how people initiate and complete various tasks in software projects.
we therefore assume that such detailed data would contain traces that reflect people s ability attitude and environ ment and use issue tracking data to model willingness and opportunity in two oss projects gnome and mozilla.
we gathered and inspected artifacts recordedin the bug tracki ng system in historic snapshots of projects web pages and in published literature.
we used these sources to model a participant s willingness and capacity through the activi ties she is willing and competent to take on the number and type of tasks she starts with and the effort she is willing to provide the value of her activities to the product and community e.g.
the fraction of reported issues that were ultimately fixed .
we model opportunity through environment s macro climate shared among all participants and micro climate unique for a person.
in particular project s status such as popularity and relative sociality rs 4con3a participant who stays with the project for at least three ye ars and is productive above th percentile of changes per year .
4a geometric average over all project s participants of the r atio of the number of individual s workflow peers social aspect to the number of tasks that individual participates in technical aspect .
.
c ieee icse zurich switzerland 516stitute measures of macro climate while the initial size o f peergroupandactionsofpeers e.g.
theirperformance th eir social clustering or their attention to her represent mic roclimate.
we fit a logistic regression model5to quantify the relationships between these predictors and the probabilit y that a new contributor would become an ltc.
the results show the probability to be associated with the contributor s attitude and environment.specifically at the time of joini ng future ltcs tend to take more active role and show more community oriented attitude than other joiners.
they also receive more attention from the community and encounter more experienced peers.
the main contributions of this study include the quantification of the contributor s willingness and her environmen t in particular measures of her activities and the amount of effort she is willing to contribute and measures of microand macro climate.
the model quantifying the relationship s among attitude environment and the odds of becoming a long term contributor has a potential to significantly improve software practice.
for example projects might adjust their practices to attract and retain contributors b y for example devoting more attention to new contributors who start by reporting an issue.
on the other hand the newcomers who want to be welcomed by the community would benefit by focusing on the quality of their issue reports and on the community oriented initial interaction s. to facilitate the reproduction of the study and of the proposed measures in other contexts we provide the data we retrieved and the scripts we wrote at in section ii we review related work.
the project context and the methodology are described in section iii and section iv presents our findings.
we consider the limitations in section v and conclude in section vi.
ii.
related work enormous effort over past decades was spent in attempts to unravel the possible relationships between job performance and its hypothesized antecedents in management science cognitive science and psychology.
for example it is widely believed that the characteristics responsible for exceptional performance are innate and are genetically transmitted .
however ericsson et al showed that manycharacteristicsoncebelievedto reflectinnate talent are actually the result of intense practice extended for a minimum of years.
also environment for example access to teachers training material and training facilities r ather thantalent arefoundtobe theimportantfactorsdetermini ng the initial onset of training and ultimate performance .
since hawthorne studies researchers have examined the effect on performance of formal and informal groupings 5logistic regression is a common way to model proportions whe re the proportion is related to predictors via a logistic function .peer pressure roles norms cohesiveness goals rewards feedback task characteristics and other variables.
the most obvious conclusion from these varied approaches is that the variables known to influence individual task performance are numerous and varied.
to summarize the existing theories blumberg and pringle proposed a three dimensional interaction model of work performance in which capacity willingness and opportunity are recognized as three interacting dimensions that account for the performance at the individual level.
capacity refers to the physiological and cognitive capabilities that enable an in dividual to perform a task effectively including ability sk ills level of education and endurance.
the psychological and emotional characteristics that influence the degree to whic h an individual is inclined to perform a task comprise the willingnessdimensionincludingmotivation personality and attitude.
opportunity consists of the particular configura tion of the field of forces surrounding a person and her task that enablesor constrainsthat person stask performanceandth at are beyond the person s direct control.
in this study we borrowthis three dimensionalframework for one reason ability motivation attitudeand environm ent are the most popular concepts used by scholars in software engineeringwho havebeenat workattemptingto predictdevelopers performance.
for example curtis claimed tha t the individual differences among project personnel accoun t for the largest source of variation in project performance.
couger and zawacki identified how differences in the motivational structure of programmers interacted with the kinds of jobs they were assigned.
they found that programmers had higher needs for personal growth and personal development than those in any other job category measured.
environmental factors affecting developer s performance includeorganizationvariability coworkers andc ommunicationmedia .
studies of newcomer experiencesby dagenias et al.
identified early experimentation inte rnalizing cultures and progress validation as three primar y factors facing developers joining new projects.
earlier we have discovered that the project s relative sociality w hen a developer joins impacts the probability she will become a long term contributor in that project.
in summary ability attitude and environment comprise the three dimensions that in literature are often suggest ed to account for the developer s performance.
however the quantificationof these relationshipsin softwaredevelopm ent contexts has been elusive.
iii.
methodology in this study we perform qualitative and quantitative analysis of two oss ecosystems gnome and mozilla6.
a qualitativeinvestigationisusedtounderstandjoinerbeh avior and to help design suitable measures of attitude and environment.
gnome and mozilla have been extensively studied 6both contain a number of sub projects517table i projects project years mloc7domain cntrbtrs gnome .
ui evolution .
calendar mailbox nautilus .
file manager epiphany .
browser mozilla ui firefox .
browser thunderbird .
mailbox calendar .
calendar in the past.
we therefore feel an obligation not to interfe re with the work of project participants to the extent we can rely on the results obtained in prior studies.
consequently we chose to base our qualitative study primarily on recorded artifacts in the issue tracking system project web pages t he existing literature and the relevant websites.
for questi ons where we couldnot obtainneeded informationfromexisting sources we conducted a small survey.
most of information in open source projects is public and we therefore feel tha t such primarily record based qualitative investigation wo uld be able to capture the essential features of the investigate d phenomena.
our quantitative study analyzes issue workflows in order to establish the relationship between contributors proba bility of becoming ltcs and the factors that measure their capacity willingness and environment.
we start from describing the project context in section iii a introduce the qualitative study in section iii b and the workflow analysis in section iii c. a. context gnome and mozilla implement user interface functionality and have more than years of history as described in table i. some major sub projectsin each ecosystem are also shown in the table.
evolution is the largest gnome project and firefox is the largest of mozilla s project.
note that both ecosystems have a browser and a mail client.
b. qualitative study for reasons noted above we chose to do our qualitative study primarily based on digital records via the following procedure we read the existing literature particularly about gnomeandmozilla e.g.
to understand the project context and practices we inspected the project web site looking for the project related information for example the standard workflow of resolvingissues.
we also looked at the sub project web pages searched for relevant information e.g.
the practices used to report and resolve an issue 7data from ohloh.net we sampled people non ltcs and ltcs from each ecosystem and carefully read the defects they were involved in particularly at the time of joining to understand the joining process and joiner experiences.
we also wanted to get a broader understanding of how people think of the factors influencing individual performance in software projects.
we therefore communicated with people we know from different companies including google microsoft tengxun a big internet company in china and kingrain a small software company with developers in china .
we asked the following question what is the factor that you think has the most influence on the individual s performance?
after we obtained the answer we asked the following question eliciting response about the factors not mentione d in the first answer do you think environment ability willingnessaffect individual s performance as well?
finally we still felt the need for an independent reality check and sent a small survey to a few participants.
we randomly selected eight people from each project and sent them emails containing issues they reported and the following questions whatmotivatedyoutoreport commentontheseissues?
did you report because of your personal interest or because of the business requirementsyou served at that time?
are these the only issues you have experienced?
if not why did you report only these ones?
we obtained one reply from each project five emails couldn t be delivered giving us the response rate of two out of the eleven delivered surveys or .
c. issue workflow analysis we obtained issue tracking data of gnome and mozilla.
traditional software projects use an issue mr modificatio n request system to track defects enhancements and other project tasks8.
the primaryusers are developersand testers.
customer issues are typically tracked in a separate system and only a very small subset that requires code changes may be copied imported into the system used by software developers.
in contrast in oss software projects the issue tracking systems not only track tasks for developers and testers but also track issues raised by end users and by down stream projects.
each issue mr has a history from the time somebody reported it until the time somebody closed it it also may remain open at the time of the study .
during that period a sequence of events takes place mr is created assigned resolved tested and closed.
it may als o be reassigned its attributes changed comments debuggin g tracking system518traces etc added.
each such event has an associate date time the type ofaction andthe email nameof the developer performing the action.
we consider each such transition as an artifact mediated communication between two of the adjacent performers.
crawlers were written to obtain the mr histories and details from their web pages.
both gnome and mozilla use bugzilla to track issues.
we obtained information for all issues in xml format as well as the activity history for each project from all the sources in january .
there are not many issues prior to in mozilla and very few priorto 1999ingnome hencewe removeddatabefore1998 in mozilla and before in gnome.
overall user ids and mrs were in gnome and user ids and mrs were in mozilla.
these mr traces record people sactionsrelatedtoissue resolution andtherefor e are likely to reflect people s characters.
the climate of a proje ct is determined by participants behavior therefore the sa me traces are also likely to reflect the climate of the project at any specific time.
we investigate the workflow of people resolving issues to measure people s capacity willingnes s and opportunity.
in general people follow a protocol to resolve issues e.g.
gnome defines the standard steps of triaging on its website9.
according to it an issue is reported born in an unconfirmed state until it is confirmed and its state is changed to new or it may be immediately resolved and the state is changed to resolved .
when additional information from the issue reporter is needed to proceed further in fixing this issue the state would be changed to needinfo.
later this issue would be added to an assignee and needs be resolved.
the transition from one state to another may involve a change of actors.
newcomers take differentactionsbecauseoftheircapacityandwillingnes s as described in later sections.
notice not everybodyis allow ed to modify the state of an issue.
we have verified that a new contributor is allowed to modify the state only for the issues she reports but she is able to comment on any issue.
mozilla s triage process is similar10.
however in practice the process is a bit different.
here we focus on determining the roles people play in the issue resolution process.
each resolved issue has a resolution e.g.
fixed duplicate incomplete invalid or wontfix.
the resolution types vary between gnome and mozilla e.g.
mozilla resolution expired is used in similar cases as obsolete in gnome.
as the name suggests fixed means the bug is fixed dupilicate means the reported bug is a duplicate of some other bug incomplete means the reported information is not sufficient to reproduce the bug invalidmeansthisisainvalidreport andwontfix means the reported issue is not relevant enough to be fixed.
with resolution fixed represent of gnome s and of mozilla s resolved issues.
duplicate represent and and incomplete and of all resolved issues.
iv.
results contributors interact with their environment when they join the project.
that interaction is mediated by their capacity and willingness and it affects the odds of them becoming ltcs.
we start from quantifying contributor s capacity and willingness in section iv a continue with measuring contributors environment in section iv b and conclude with fitting a logistic regression model of the probability that a newcomer will become an ltc in iv c. a. measuring capacity and willingness software development is a knowledge intensive activity and the almost universal assumption of personnel managers is that personality has a marked effect on the performance of employees .
as an employee from googlecommentedinourinterviews basically personality determines everything .
and environment is similar for everyone attitude is a part of personality .
how about individual ability?
we are google never lack talented guys .
however another interviewee a manager from kingrain said ability accounts for everything because his best employee is substantially more competent than the remaining employees.
as blumberg and pringle clarified personality attitude and motivation are variables of willingn ess to perform while ability experience and intelligence a re variables of capacity to perform .
in this section we measure the capacity and willingness of newcomers to the oss project and try to establish if the contributor s willingn ess measured at the time they join the project varies between participants who will and who will not become ltcs.
only .
of gnome and .
of mozilla joiners becomeltcs.
andinbothprojects morethan70 ofcontributorsareone time contributors otcs inmozilla in gnome .these contributorshave only a single interactio n e.g.
reportinganissueorcommentingonanissue recorde d in the issue tracking system.
this high level of peripheral participation is consistent with the finding that more than three quarters of the nearly thousand contributors lern er and tirole considered made only one contribution.
we sampled otc and20 ltc participantsfrom each project.
for ethical reasons we omitted the participants names and representthemusing numericaliases with 20representi ng otcs and representing ltcs.
we manually inspected all the issues reported by otcs and observed two types of behavior.
both of these behaviors were exhibited by contributors who appear to be end users.
some were eager contributors who worked thoroughly and tried to help.
for example gnome reported i ve been trying to use libxml ... however i found that there are two rather large memory leaks .
he even committed519some attachments to help fix please let me know if these issues will be addressed .
some people proposed specific requirements.
for example mozilla asked to implement a new feature i m writing to request support for jif be added to mozilla .
for this he was willing to help i can provide some help for this but i would like to know if the mozilla developers are receptive to this .
another group appeared to be not devoting as much attention to the issues they reported.
for example gnome reported two issues according to the required format but without any extra comments.
furthermore he she didn t respond to request for additional information could you please help fixing this by installing some debugging packages... the issue was resolvedwith the state incomplete .these are some of the reasons to believe that these people reported issues and committed fixes because they were end users and they were trying to accomplish something relevant with the oss product they were using.
at the same time they might have found the issues by accident because they were users and they were interested enough to report it but were not motivated enough or had no opportunity to contribute more.
for the sampled ltc group the average number of mrs per person was over over the considered period see sectioniii c .we therefore examinedonlyasubsetofthe ir issues in particular issues in their first month after join ing.
notably they all were more active as compared to the otc group made more comments and often spent more effort on their issue reports for example by includinga patch.
fo r example mozilla 25reported his first issue on oct .
based on the comment on that issue reporter could you reproduce on ff3 rc?
we assume that he was not known by the community at that time.
less than one month later on nov mozilla created attachments for a couple of issues.
apparently he already won trust from the existing developers by perhaps submitting good quality patches because a developer applied to obtain an svn account for mozilla the same day through bug x create localizer ldap svn account for mozilla .
a similar example in gnome is gnome who reported his first issue on mar .
this report was committed with a couple of extra attachments showing the details needed to understand and reproduce the issue and the issue resolution was fixed .
anotherexampleisgnome whosefirstreportwas patch to get access attributes for nested class struct union .
in otherwords thefirstactionhedidistocommitapatchinthe form of an issue report and it appears to have been useful because the responsible developer responded i ll include itinthefirstcvsrelease .itisworthnotingthatfourpeople from the ltc sample appear to have been in thedevelopmentteamfromtheverybeginning.forexample the first participation of mozilla is a comment checked in code for spec compliant implementation of webclient on solaris ... in summary all otcs and most ltcs appear to be product users at the time of joining.
the two survey responses were i use a lot of open source software both at work and at home including mozilla and around that time i did the final move away from windows and replaced windows on my desktop pc at home with gnome .
this observation is consistent with the findings in project fedor a said they were first users of fedora and then became contributors to the project .
moreover both groups show ability and willingness to contribute out of millions of mozilla gnome users only a very small proportion is going to contribute no matter if the contributions are in the for m of bug reports suggestions or occasionally code contributions .
also quoting from our survey i did report the issues because of my personal interest as a technically knowledgeable user i feel a responsibility to give back when i am able .
however what are the differences among contributors in particular between otcs and ltcs?
the evidence appears to favor willingness i.e.
the extent to which people are getting involved in helping the project.
first we consider the number of tasks e.g.
number of comments she makes.
these comments might be an interpretation for a confusing report or suggesting a possible solution or explaining th e benefitsofa proposednewfeature.we assume that the number of tasks primarily reflects the skills the participant ha s accumulated prior to joining the project i.e.
her capacit y but also partly how willing she is to contribute.
there are two other aspects representing the extent of participation what typeof tasks a participanttakeson and how much effort she provides.
the activities a participant undertakes e.g.
attaching the screenshot when reporting an issue is a sign that she has a community friendly attitude.
starting from a comment instead of reporting an issue also reflects such an attitude it means she is intentionally getting involved perhaps by first finding a similar issue and commenting on it instead of simply reporting an issue she encounters as a user.
on the contrary reporting an issue through a crash reporting tool such as bug buddy is extremely easy and does not demonstrate a great amount of desire to get involved.
when an application using the gnome libraries crashes bug buddy generates a stack trace and invites the user to submit the report.
this require s little effort from the user simply filling a few fields and clicking submit button.
in contrast alternative way of reporting an issue involves applying for an account for gnome bugzilla creating a new issue report and filling in the template that includes steps needed to reproduce the bug.
in gnome less than of the joiners who had their first issue reported via bug buddy eventually became munity 520ltcs while more than of the joiners who started with a bugzilla report became ltcs.
even thoughcontributionsappearto be universallyvalued in open source projects the following statistics casts dou bt on that assumption or at least suggests that some contrib utions provide much more value than others.
approximately of the otc reports ended up without any change i.e.
without resolution fixed in mozilla and in gnome of which a big proportion were duplicates in mozilla and in gnome .
however for the defects reported by ltcs a high proportion were fixed in mozilla in gnome and approximately in both projects were duplicates.
this analysis shows how the issue resolution types can be used to measure the value a contributor provides and to reveal her attitude.
specifically fixed issues help impro ve theproductqualityandmightenhancecommunitymoraleby showing some accomplishment.
meanwhile the remaining issues might waste the limited time of the few core developers.
ontheotherhand whenacontributorencountersanissue if she spends more time to search for similar issues and the relevantresolutions the morelikely she is to findexactly t he sameorsimilarissue.thereislesschance therefore that the issue will end up with duplicate resolution.
the same argument applies for issues with resolution incomplete responding and providing enough information for others to reproduce the issue would make it more likely that the issue will be fixed.
in other words if a person puts enough effort the issues she reports have more chances to be fixed and thus improve the quality of the product.
consequently the fraction of reported issues that are fixed in the first month from joining is an indication of effort a contributor provides.
therefore observation a contributor s willingness and capacity can be measuredby the numberand typesof tasks e.g.
reportingor commentingon an issue she participatesin and by the effort she provides to resolve these tasks.
b. measuring environment early literature on job performance predictions did not consider the environment since performance is ultimatel y an individual phenomenon environmental variables influence performance primarily through their effect on the individual determinants of performance ability and or motivation .
however available evidence indicates that certain environmental factors beyond the individual s control play a fa r strongerroleinfluencingherperformancethanwasgenerall y acknowledgedthen .
the more important of these involve what is known in normative decision theory as states of nature and actions of others and suggest a clear recognitio n that in addition to social psychological and physiologi cal determinants behavior performance also depends on thehelp or hindrance of uncontrollable events and actors in one s environment.
in our case we separate two aspects of the environment macro climate and micro climate to account for states of nature and actions of others.
macro climate represents the overall project environment that is the same for everybody in the project.
micro climate represents the conditions th at each individual encounters and varies among participants.
we start from measuring macro climate.
based on the literature and our experiences product popularity proje ct task density and project sociality are important elements.
the market value of a product comes from its usage.
in other words the number of users users reflects the product s market proceeds that will affect the funding tools equipment materials supplies and pay for the project and the degree of interest people would devote to it.
consequently it will likely affect the contributors s tay with the project.
we measure project popularity via its user population each month.
for example firefox is the primary product in mozilla and we use its user base as proxyformozillauserbase.we obtainedtheuserpopulation by multiplying the market share of firefox12by the total number of internet users13.
project task density describes how much work is done in the project and we measure it by the number of active mrs each month nummr .
this aspect of the macro climate indicates whether the project is active and whether the participants have high workloads.
project sociality represents project s social climate and we could measure it by the participation density i.e.
number of participants each month newjoiner or relative sociality rs .
figure shows the evolution of macro climate componentsin mozilla.
we were able to obtain internet user estimates starting from dec .
figure also marks the calendar times of important releases of firefox e.g.
in ja n firefox .
was released.
we have divided the user numbers for each month by the highest number of users over the entire period.
thus this variable ranges in value between zero and one.
notice in order to present the curves on a similar scale we normalized each e.g.
by dividing newjoiner by as shown in the legend of the chart.
the project s popularity grows from the start of the project because internet user population grew and firefox share has increased.
the task density is high when the project is close to its release date and participant density is high when the task density is high.
these components of macro climate are the same for all project participants at a particular time.
person s microclimate may be characterized with the following chinese proverb he who stays near vermilion gets stained red and he who stays near ink gets stained black .
we therefore consider people in her workflow network i.e.
people she shareofwebbrowsers 100number 29newjoiner nummr users max rs mozilla0.6mozilla1.
phoenix0.1firefox1.
firefox1.5firefox2 firefox3 firefox3.5firefox3.
figure .
macro climate in mozilla interacts with to create a unique environment for her.
in other words the characters or actions of these people and her relationship with them constitute the micro climate f or this person.
we chose the initial size of a participant ssoc ial group their productivity their social clustering and th e attention they give to her as measures of the micro climate.
the size of a person s workflow peer group i.e.
the number of peers in her workflow network is primarily determined by her own actions.
the more issues she is involved in the more likely she will meet more people.
but the actual act of contribution is associated with the person s accumulated ability and willingness to contribut e. at the same time her peers constitute her social working conditions.
according to we assume that if a person has more peers she is more likely to attach to the project therefore she is more likely to become an ltc.
on the other hand the performance of her peers is likely to affect her performance as in an old saying a cat gets stronger with a tiger.
forexample mockus foundthatmoreproductive mentors lead to more productive followers.
we consider the social clustering to be the amount of overlap among the workflow networks of peers.
for example contributor alice has two peers dragon and tiger and dragon meets lion and bear tiger meets lion and deer the sum of alice s two peers network sizes is but the size of the joint network is because lion and alice are counted twice therefore her social clustering is6 .
the underlying assumption is that if a person s peers have more in common share more colleagues it is more likely that they have similar project experiences and share similar values.
the new participant hence is less likely to get confused by a variety of behaviors and value systems she observes.
furthermore more clustered peer group is more likely to understand and trust each other and that in turn might create a better environment for a newcomer to learn and to become more effective.
it might also increase her work satisfaction and the willingness to stay.
for example mayer found the willingness to trust others was significantly related to the behavior and performance of individuals.humans need attention from other people and developers are no exception notwithstanding common stereotypes.
perhaps the more attention a newcomer could obtain from the existing project members the more likely she will stay with the project for a long time.
we measure the amount of attention through the duration of time between the newcomer s first action until somebody responds.
the response delay that is too short may not bode well in terms of attention.
a very short response may imply that the responder did not take the issue seriously or did not inspect it carefully but just replied with a canned template to save time e.g.
thanks for taking the time to report this bug.
this bug report isn t very useful because it doesn t describ e the bug well.
in these circumstances the reporter might feel under appreciated and stop contributing.
therefore observation a contributor s environments may be measured via macro and micro climate.
macro climate represents environmentshared among participants and consis ts of project popularity project task density and project soc iality.
micro climate represents environment unique for each person and consists of the initial size of peer group their productivity their social clustering and the attention t hey devote to this new participant.
c. the chances of an individual s success we investigate the influence of the ability willingness and environment on the chances of an individual s success in the project by fitting a logistic regression model specifie d in equation with observations in gnome and 471observationsin mozilla.
the response is the indica tor of a new participant becomingan ltc and the predictors includemeasuresofherability willingness andenvironm ent described above notice not all attributes are presented because of the correlation e.g.
project task density is heavilycorrelatedwithrs .
eachobservationrepresentso ne project participant with the predictors calculated over h er first month from joining shown in table ii.
the predictors that require more explanation are discussed below.
we operationalizedthe size of peer group npeer in two ways.
the first approach counts the number of other partic 522ipants she encounters in her first month s workflow.
second approach considers the number of participants encountered by her peers.
both measures have a similar association with the response but we present the second measure because it explains more variance in the response and is not correlated with other predictors in both projects.
popularity nusr represents the number of firefox users in mozilla as described in section iv b. we did the following to approximate the historic numbers of gnome users.
first we obtained the estimates of the fraction of linux users14 .
then we used surveys of desktop choices for the period between and .
for the to we approximated gnome users by the fraction of ubuntu users15.
eventually we multiplied the market share of ubuntu gnome by the estimates of internet users13to approximate gnome user numbers.
we used gotfixto represent the value contributor providedto the community.havingat least one of the reportsto be fixedindicatesa tangibleimprovementof productquality .
barrier to entry btedepends on the project.
we used fnotrep the first participation is not an issue report for mozilla and withbb the first participation is using bug buddy for gnome because withbb explains more deviance than fnotrep in gnome.
since mozilla did not have an equivalenttool that requiredminimal effortto repo rt an issue we used fnotrep as a proxy for high willingness to contribute.
we used lckattn to represent an extreme situation of a too rapid response within one hour .
predictor prjis a sub project indicator not shown in the table of the ecosystem the participant starts with e.g .
evolution of gnome firefox of mozilla.
it explains of the deviance and was added to account for the variation among sub project environments.
islt c nusr rs gotfix bte ncmt npeer pshared lckattn peerperf prj tables iii and iv contain fitted values for gnome and mozilla.
of the deviance is explained in gnome model and19 in mozilla.
the second column has the estimated coefficients and the third standard errors.
all predictors are significant at .01level except for rsin mozilla.
the forth to sixth columns show practical importance of the predictor in determining the ltc probability through effect sizes.
in logistic regressionthe effect size is odds ratio i.e.
the sixth column for the mean value of the predictor i.e.
column labeled by x and for the mean value plus the standard deviation i.e.
column labeled by xalt .
that s the case for predictors nusr rs pshared and peerperf .
shareofoperating systems reports tmltable ii predictors for participant i dimension predictor description willingness and capacity ncmt logarithm of the number of comments gotfixat least one of the issues reported by i was fixed.
withbb first report by iuses acrash reporting tool fnotrep istarts participation with a comment macroclimatenusr number of product users when ijoins rs project s relative sociality microclimatenpeerlogarithm of the size of i s peers groups ln bardbl p p eers i p eers p bardbl 1where p eers p is the peer group for p psharedlogarithm of the social clustering of i s peer group ln bardbl p peers i p eers p bardbl summationtext p p eers i bardblp eers j bardbl peerperflogarithm of the minimum productivity issues month of the peers lnmin p p eers i nmr p lckattnthe longest duration between the i s action until the response is less than hour table iii model for gnome observations eststd.err.
x xaltodds xalt odds x intcpt .
.
nusr .
.
.
.
rs .
.
.
.
gotfix .
.
f t withbb .
.
t f ncmt .
.
ln ln npeer .
.
ln ln pshared .
.
ln .
ln .
lckattn .
.
f t peerperf .
.
ln ln for predictors with low discrete values npeerandncmt we choseto usemedianand75thor90thpercentilesto make the interpretationof the effect size more meaningful.for t he boolean predictors such as gotfix withbb fnotrep andlckattn the effect size is the odds ratio for the most frequent and the less frequent values.
two hypothetical mozilla contributors alice with one comment in her first month and bob with four comments 90th percentile of ncmtisln or four comments therefore the odds of bob becoming an ltc are higher than odds for alice if their remaining predictors have values specified in the forth column of the table.
in summary the probability of becoming an ltc is associated with the contributor s willingness and environme nt.
specifically starting from comments instead of reports re portingwithbugzillainsteadofbug buddy orreportingan y sensible issue that gets fixed double the odds of becoming an ltc.
regarding micro climate low attention in the form of too rapid response would reduce the odds by in mozilla and by in gnome.
increase of the productivity of the slowest peer from to mrs month in gnome and from to mrs month in mozilla would increase523table iv model for mozilla observations eststd.err.
x xaltodds xalt odds x intcpt .
.
nusr .
.
.
.
rs0.
.
.
.
gotfix .
.
f t fnotrep .
.
f t ncmt .
.
ln ln npeer .
.
ln ln pshared .
.
ln .
ln .
lckattn .
.
f t peerperf .
.
ln ln the odds by and20 .
increasing the social clustering by0.11in gnome and by .2in mozilla leads to and increase in the odds.
for the macro climate product popularity is associated with lower odds that a contributor becomes an ltc increasing the number of users by in gnome and by in mozilla reduces odds by and by respectively.
project s rs is associated with lower odds of becoming an ltc in gnome .326of rs increase leads to decrease in the odds but higher odds in mozilla .0992of rs increase leads to increase in the odds .
also having the size of the peer group increasing from the median to third quartile is associated with a small decrease in the odds in gnome and an increase in mozilla.
in summary observation the probability of a newcomer becoming an ltc is associated with her willingness and environment.herpro communityattitudethatdeterminesherchoic e to start with a comment instead of a report or to report with bugzilla instead of automatic tool and the amount of effort she provides to the community are associated by the most dramatic increases.
on the contrary her macro climat e with high project popularity and her micro climatewith lo w attention reduce her odds.
meanwhile the attributes of he r peer group in particular its social clustering and produc tivity significantly influence her opportunity to become an ltc.
as was shown contributor s attitude e.g.
starting from a comment instead of a report or getting at least one reported issue fixed is much more strongly associated with her chances of becoming an ltc as compared to other factors.
it s consistent with opinions of google and microsoft employees we interviewed.
according to them what matters is attitude because either environment or ability do not pose obstaclesforindividualimprovement.however fortengxu n employee what matters the most is experience because less motivated people will not stay employed.
for a small company like kingrein the most important aspect appears to be ability because it is the most obvious differentiator amon g the employees there though the manager also emphasized that the attitude makes a big difference as well .
in otherwords when people are in the same environment what matters is person s capacity and orwillingness.
if people are compared in different environments the environment might be the primary determinant kingrain manager agreed that if his employees worked at google they might perform better because they had chance to work with more talented people.
consequently we have observation the dominant factor in capacity willingness and environment that affects the probability of a newcomerbecomingan ltc dependson the projectcontext.
v. limitations the first limitation relates to the consistency and accessibility of the data in the bugzilla of gnome and mozilla.
first the web crawling appears to miss a substantial fraction of defects.
we therefore obtained the entire ran ge of defects from to for mozilla and for gnome.
some defects were either not public or not obtainable in gnome and in mozilla.
we also compared different snapshots extracted at different times and verified to make sure that the later snapshots include the issues in the earlier ones.
while there were no problems obtaining mozilla data gnome bugzilla prevents retrieval of large numbers of issues with complete email address of contributors.
we therefore had to rely on public extracts of gnome bugzilla data to map logins to individuals.
second we assume that a login for gnome and an email for mozilla is a unique representation of a single person.
however multiple people may share the same login or a full email and a single person may use several email addresses.
to deal with this issue we used two approaches.
first we identified generic logins e.g.
mozilla gnome bugzilla maint because we focused on ordinary contributors.
second we used the full name of the participant associated with each login email to identify all logins tha t had two or more names associated with them multi name logins .
we also identified full names that had more than one login email associated with them multi login names .
to verify that our conclusions are not affected by this assumption we fit our models on three datasets the original data the data without generic logins and the data without generic and multi name logins and with all logins having multi login names replaced by the corresponding name.
the results were similar and we reported results using the original data.
third the data itself might not reflect what actually happened.e.g.
gnomebug 572011doesn thaveaninformation page or an xml file but it has an activity history page.
some mrs have some states missing.
for example for mozilla bug the resolution type on the information page was status resolved notabug but on the history activity page the last resolution was invalid.
to address this limitation we tested how sensitive our analysis result s are to these data consistency issues.
mrs in gnome524and mrs in mozilla had intermediates states missing but excluding them didn t have any noticeable impact on the results.
the second limitation relates to the measures we construct do they reflect the intended concepts and can we measure each concept separately from other concepts?
individuals and their environment are notoriously difficult t o measurebecauseofthevariabilityamongindividualsandth e ambiguity of concepts such as willingness and opportunity.
the issue tracking systems however provide a practical opportunity to observe the activities individuals engage i n and infer the effort they spend to conduct them.
from these basic measures it is possible to estimate their capaci ty and willingness.
second it is almost impossible to measure one separate dimension.
people s activities we observe are always the combined effect of multiple dimensions.
for example number of issues a participant is involved in shows not only her experience but also her willingness to contribute and maybe how buggy that product release is at that time.
fortunately as ericsson et al claimed ability and practice are not separable i.e.
the talent is n ot needed to explain performance if the amount of deliberate practice is taken into account and the only way to increase the deliberate practice is through willingness.
therefore we encompass capacity and willingness into a single dimension we refer to it as willingness after all willingness determines how much an individual would get involved in a volunteer activity.
from the internal validity perspective we checked the assumptions for the logistic regression and log transform ed the predictors.
while only of the deviance is explained this is in fact a very good fit given that only .
.
of the participants become ltc in mozillagnome .
from the prediction perspective if we randomly picked of participants and compared with model predictions our precision would improve times.
for example in mozilla among developers with the top predicted probability .
are ltcs while for a random predictor the precision would be .
.
from the external validity perspective the way gnome and mozilla are operating is not unusual for open source projects.
the models for both projects are quite similar.
however both are large projects and both represent user interface domain.
we therefore may not generalize to othe r domains e.g.
server and smaller projects.
its important to stress that our findings show association between the response and predictors but that association may not be causal.
in particular there may be some aspects of individualcharacter or of the environmentthat we did not measure but that cause both the response and the predictors to behave in the observed pattern.
vi.
conclusions in this study we have tried to address the following research question what impacts the chances that a newjoiner to a software project will become an ltc?
is it related to differences of persons characters variation i n projectclimate or totheinteractionbetweenindividual sand their environments?we measured the behavior of individual participantsingnomeandmozillausingissueworkflow and modeled how the differences in their behavior affected the probability of the participant becoming a valuable contrib utor to the community.
we found that the main differences among participants were in their capacity willingness and opportunity to contribute at the time of joining.
a participant s capacity and willingness is measured through the activities she takes on i.e.
the number and type of tasks she starts with and the effort she puts into her contributions e.g.
the fraction of reported issues that were ultimately fixed.
the opportunityismeasuredasenvironment smacro climateth at was shared among all participants and micro climate that was unique for a person.
in particular product popularity projecttaskdensity andprojectsocialityconstitutemea sures of macro climate while the initial size of peer group their performance their social clustering and their atte ntion to the new participant constitute micro climate.
we found that the probability of a newcomer becoming an ltc to be associated with person s willingness and environment.
most importantly her pro community attitude represented by her first contribution being a comment on an existing issue instead of a bug report or a report through bugzilla interface instead of a crash reporting tool double her odds of becoming an ltc.
having any of issues reported during the first month to be fixed has the same effect.
her microclimate represented by low attention of too rapid response and her macro climate represented by the increased project popularity reduce her odds.
project s relative sociality a nd individual speernetworksizehadoppositeeffectsinthet wo projects.this may reflect some inherentdifferencesbetwee n practices of gnome and mozilla that need further study.
these finding may help individual participants to understand what their own roles are and find the best ways to contribute.itisalsolikelytohelposscommunitiestoadop t betterstrategiestoattractandretainnewcomers.specific ally the probability of staying longer is associated with how much value a new participant provides to the project by commenting putting more effort into issue reports and by theamountofattentiontheprojectprovidestothenewcomer .
ironically it is during times when projects are popular th us overwhelmingthementors thecommunityneedstoputextra effort to retain newcomers.
acknowledgment the work was partially supported by national basic researchprogramofchinagrant2009cb320703 thenational natural science foundation of china grant and the nature science foundation of china grant .525references m. zhou and a. mockus developer fluency achieving true mastery in software projects in acm sigsoft fse santa fe new mexico november pp.
.
d. h. lindsley d. j. brass and j. b. thomas efficacyperformance spirals a multilevel perspective academy of management review vol.
no.
pp.
jul.
.
m. blumberg and c. d. pringle the missing opportunity in organizational research some implications for a theory of work performance the academy of management review vol.
no.
pp.
pp.
.
m. zhou and a. mockus does the initial environment impact the future of developers?
in icse honolulu havaii may pp.
.
u. neisser g. boodoo j. bouchard thomas j. a. w. boykin n.brody s.j.ceci d.f.halpern j.c.loehlin and r. perloff intelligence knowns and unknowns american psychologist vol.
no.
pp.
feb. .
k. a. ericsson r. t. krampe and c. tesch rmer the role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert per formance psychological review vol.
no.
pp.
jul.
.
h. m. parsons what happened at hawthorne?
science vol.
no.
pp.
march .
b. curtis fifteen years of psychology in software engi neering individual differences cognitive science in icse pp.
.
j. d. couger and r. a. zawacki motivating and managing computer personnel .
new york ny usa john wiley sons inc. .
a. mockus organizational volatility and its effects on software defects in acm sigsoft fse santa fe new mexico november pp.
.
a. ko r. deline and g. venolia information needs in collocated software development teams in icse .
acm press may pp.
.
m. cataldo p. wagstrom j. herbsleb and k. carley id entification of coordination requirements implications for the design of collaboration and awareness tools.
in conference on computer supported cooperative work cscw banff alberta canada .
b. dagenais h. ossher r. k. e. bellamy m. p. robillard and j. p. de vrie moving into a new software project landscape in icse cape town south africa may pp.
.
a. mockus r. t. fielding and j. herbsleb two case studies of open source software development apache and mozilla acm transactions on software engineering and methodology vol.
no.
pp.
july .
d. m. german the gnome project a case study of open source global software development software process improvement and practice vol.
no.
pp.
.
p. a. wagstrom vertical interaction in open software engineering communities phd thesis carnegie mellon university vol.
cmu isr march .
p. robillard the role of knowledge in software develo pment communications of the acm vol.
no.
pp.
.
j. lerner and j. tirole some simple economics of open source the journal of industrial economics vol.
no.
pp.
.
l. l. cummings and d. p. schwab performance in organizations determinants and appraisal.
administrative science quarterly vol.
no.
pp.
pp.
.
r. c. mayer j. h. davis and f. d. schoorman an integrative model of organizational trust the academy of management review vol.
no.
pp.
pp.
.
a. mockus succession measuring transfer of code and developer productivity in international conference on software engineering .
vancouver ca acm press may .