personas in the middle automated support for creating personas as focal points in feature gathering forums mona rahimi and jane cleland huang systems and requirements engineering center school of computing depaul university chicago il usa m.rahimi acm.org jhuang cs.depaul.edu abstract many software systems utilize forums to allow a broad set of stakeholders to request features.
however the resulting mass of ideas and comments can make prioritization and management of feature requests challenging.
in this paper we propose a novel approach for partially automating the creation of personas from a set of feature requests in open forums.
our approach utilizes topic clustering classi cation and association rules to identify meaningful groupings of feature requests and then uses them to guide the construction of personas.
once created these personas are leveraged to coordinate feature requests track changes and to provide stakeholder communication mechanisms.
we illustrate our approach with examples taken from the health insurance domain and then evaluate it against feature requests in the sugarcrm project.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirements speci cations i. .
natural language processing text analysis keywords personas text mining requirements management .
introduction all software systems must satisfy a wide range of functional and quality focused concerns .
these concerns are often elicited from stakeholders using online discussion forums.
while this enables a relatively inclusive elicitation process it also introduces a range of problems such as redundant requests topics dispersed widely across multiple discussion threads and unanswered posts .
such problems can only partially be mitigated through current practices of using search technologies to recommend relevant threads for new posts .
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author s must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
ase september vasteras sweden.
copyright is held by the owner author s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
acm ... .
.
.the solution presented in this paper anchors the requirements gathering process around the notion of personas each of which provides an archetypal representation of a group of similar stakeholders.
we automate the process of generating a relevant set of personas from the feature requests in an open forum and then use these personas as a focal point for various communication and software engineering activities.
to this end we apply topic analysis and association rule mining against the feature requests in a forum to identify meaningful groupings of concerns which are used to recommend the formation of personas.
each persona provides a unique perspective on underlying stakeholder concerns and is used in the coordination prioritization and tracking of feature requests.
the remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
sections and introduce the notion of personas and present our approach for automatically generating them from feature requests.
section describes the application of our approach in the sugarcrm forum and presents results from an initial evaluation.
sections and describe threats to validity related work and discuss conclusions.
.
personas personas were introduced to user interaction design by alan cooper in the mid 1990s through his now infamous book the inmates are running the asylum .
each persona is given a name and described in terms of psyche background emotions and attitudes.
personas are traditionally created through a fairly rigorous series of user analysis activities which include surveys and interviews slicing of users into categories data collection and analysis to test whether candidate slices create distinguishable user groups and analysis of potential usage patterns within each group.
in our prior work we demonstrated how personas could be used to support the architectural design process and argued that using architecturally signi cant as personas as an aid to understanding architectural concerns in early phases of a project could guide the architectural design process and minimize the need for late stage costly refactorings.
our as personas are therefore designed to drive architectural and software design as opposed to user interface design.
in this paper we present a novel semi automated approach for extracting feature requests from online forums and then using this information to generate candidate personas.
we illustrate our approach within the context of a health care insurance marketplace.
figure shows one persona for this application domain.
joe represents the demographic joe is married and has two children.
he was previously employed as a construction worker but after a biking accident he has been unable to work full time.
he spends much of his time watching television.
he has had no health care insurance since his accident.
the recent government healthcare insurance market places means that he can now apply for affordable healthcare.
this is particularly important as his wife has only a low paying job.
he feels confused by the options available to him and approaches the enrollment process with great trepidation.
like many others he has left enrollment for the last minute and worries whether he can register in time.
joe s user stories .as a potential insuree i need to find available insurance policies to understand what they offer me and how much they will cost.
.as a novice user i need the marketplace system to guide me step by step through the application process.
usability .i need the marketplace to be online and responsive.
availability .once i ve entered my information and requested a quote i want the quotes to be returned quickly.
performance .i don t want my healthcare record to be made public as this might impact my future employment opportunities.
privacy .i would like to see a side by side comparison of the quotes returned to me.
fast and responsive scales to support simultaneous visitors graceful degradation under excessive loads interfaces with heterogeneous systems user centric design privacy of healthcare data privacy of financial data accurate information joe insurance seeker figure a sample persona.
group of users who currently do not have any health care insurance and have only basic computer skills.
joe s concerns translate into a number of functional user stories and quality issues related to availability performance privacy and usability of the system.
as depicted in figure personas can serve as a focal point for communication purposes.
stakeholders register their interests in speci c personas while personas register as observers to various system level views.
for example view captures the primary features including the feature request quotes from insurance providers .
both joe and martha are interested in this feature joe because he wants to receive quotes and martha because she wants to ensure privacy of the data transmitted in the request for a quote.
if changes are made to this feature noti cations are sent to all relevant personas and these noti cations in turn are forwarded to their registered stakeholders.
similarly view connects quality concerns to speci c modules through use of a trace matrix.
if changes are made in architecturally signi cant areas of the design or code that impacts the realization of quality goals interested personas and their associated stakeholders should be noti ed.
our approach requires the underlying support of an event based system.
.
persona creation to represent the diverse interests of real stakeholders personas need to be multi faceted.
we generate such personas in the four step process of clustering individual posts into topics performing association rule mining to discover groupings of topics which tend to be of interest to multiple stakeholders identifying quality concerns for each grouping of topics related to attributes such as performance security and availability and nally recommending groups of topics from which to create individual personas and providing supporting information about associated feature requests from which an analyst can create a persona.
we discuss each of these steps below.
.
topic identification topic identi cation is accomplished through clustering feature requests.
unfortunately forum data is very noisy.
in addition to the targeted feature requests the posts include complaints calls for help social comments e.g.
nice to hear from you again and user s names.
they also include foreign language terms typos and spelling errors.
within this challenging context our goal is to identify features of interest to the users.
for example a feature request taken from the openemr electrical medical record system states that just wanted to know is there any way to transfer the whole billed amount to patient responsibility when the insurance denies the claims?
one way to post it through batch payments but it s too lengthy.
as topics tend to be dispersed across posts in multiple discussion threads we take individual posts as the primitive unit for clustering purposes.
each of the generated clusters represents a single topic.
we utilized the incremental di usive clustering idc algorithm to perform this clustering because it has been shown to produce quite accurate and meaningful clusters of features.
it places each post into one or more cluster according to the number of its underlying topics.
for example the example feature request could conceivably cluster into two separate topics related to claim denial and billing .
each topic is named automatically by identifying the me of its cluster de ned as the descriptor that is most representative of the cluster s theme.
due to space constraints we do not formaly de ne the idc algorithm here however a complete description is provided by hariri et al.
.
.
association rule mining creating one persona per topic would lead to a proliferation of personas.
we therefore use association rule mining to infer meaningful groupings of topics .
for example we might discover that users interested in requests for quotes also tended to be interested in reviewing and comparing quotes or in information privacy .
this idea is illustrated in figure .
we utilize association rule mining to infer these relationships.
more formally given a set of users uand a set of topics t ft1 t2 tkgand a topic set t t letut ube the set of users who have contributed in all the topics in t. the support of the topic set tis de ned as t jptj jpj.
topic sets that satisfy a prede ned support threshold are referred to as frequent item sets in the following we will refer to these as frequent topic sets .
an association rule ris expressed in the form x y r r wherex tandy tare topic sets ris thesupport of the rule rde ned as r x y and ris the con dence for the rule rgiven by r x y x .
the discovery of association rules involves two main steps.
first the discovery of frequent topic sets i.e.
itemsets which satisfy a minimum support threshold and secondly the discovery of association rules between frequent topic sets which satisfy a minimum con dence threshold.
.
identifying quality concerns we also identify quality concerns such as security performance and usability which are relevant to the selected topics.
we utilized a classi er that we had previously developed to detect non functional requirements nfrs .
this classi er has been trained to detect several di erent 480stakeholders register their interest in specific personas and are subsequently notified using either a pull or push mechanism when any of the persona s interests are impacted by a change in the system .
view example quality concerns are traced to specific modules.
personas register specific user stories with the quality concern view and are notified when changes occur.
view example personas register their interests in specific features.
when features are modified personas are notified .
personas register notify figure personas in the middle anchor the feature coordination and communication process.
topic t3 topic t4 topic t5 stakeholders functional concern quality concern associations are formed between topics when support and confidence scores exceed a threshold value.
figure each individual topic is composed of a set of contributing stakeholders and their posted feature requests.
association rule mining is used to group topics that are of interest to the same group of stakeholders into a single mega topic.
quality concerns related to security performance usability and more.
the classi er evaluates the likelihood that a given post is associated with each quality.
.
recommending personas the combined use of topic analysis association rule mining and quality concern classi cation produces a set of related topics each of which is de ned in terms of featurerequests and quality concerns.
these megatopics serve as the basis of our persona recommendation process.
for each recommended persona we rst present a set of topics to the user representing the groupings identi ed using association rule mining.
the user can accept or reject topics for several reasons including i the user doesn t believe that the set of topics are su ciently related or ii a topic was formed around a non feature.
examples of the second case include topics formulated around unusual user s names or terms such as help orrunwhich might be commonly used in the forum but not removed as stopwords.
for each accepted topic the user is presented with a list of related posts.
she can search through these posts to identify sentences or phrases to assign to the persona as user stories or can write her own stories that re ect the stakeholders posts.
we considered but rejected the idea of automatically mining the most representative feature requests from the forum and assigning these directly to the stakeholder in favor of a manual requirements user story extraction phase guided by the carefully clustered posts.
this approach facilitated high quality comprehensible focused personas which better supported our end goal.
.
ev aluation we demonstrate and evaluate our approach against feature requests in the sugarcrm system.
sugarcrm is a popular open source customer relationship management system designed to automate sales customer services and marketing processes .
we selected sugarcrm because it is used in both open source and commercial open source applications utilized by stakeholders in a broad set of areas including business healthcare technology and transportation.
the broad interests of the stakeholders coupled with 481an active customer base results in copious requests for new features.
.
extracting sugarcrm personas we used a screen scraping tool named mozenda to extract posts and user tags from the sugarcrm forum for the period of july to january .
this resulted in posts from unique users.
we then applied the idc process to produce the initial clusters depicted in table .
where appropriate we matched the topic to speci c sugarcrm modules and provide an associated description in the table.
for example the topic labeled campaign refers to a module used to create and manage the marketing and advertisement campaigns for the customers.
other modulerelated topics include leads representing the target customers who replied to a campaign and contacts who represent particularly quali ed leads and are part of a longer term selling process.
some topics could be seen as red herrings i.e.
something that distracts from relevant and important issues.
examples of red herrings include the topics labeled manoj and same.
manoj turns out to be the administrator of the forum but as his name occurs ubiquitously throughout the forum and was not included in a list of stop names i.e.
names removed during the preprocessing phase it ended up as the centroid of a cluster.
the topic same was produced for similar reasons numerous users made comments such as i have the same problem.
both of these topics could easily be removed by adding such words to the standard stopword list or simply by rejecting the topic.
we removed non useful topics from further analysis.
these rejected topics are marked with in the nal column of table .
our approach identi ed of core functional areas of the sugarcrm system.
the six missing areas were not extensively discussed in the forum and therefore not detected as primary topics by our algorithms.
we implemented association rule mining using the apriori algorithm .
given a minimum con dence threshold c the apriori algorithm attempts to nd the sets of topics which are subsets of at least c user topic contribution patterns in the data.
it extends the discovered frequent subsets by adding one item at the time and tests all newly formed subsets against the whole data to identify additional successful extensions.
the minimum support threshold was set at and con dence at .
setting higher thresholds would result in stronger but fewer association rules less grouping between topics and ultimately more distinct personas.
we attempted to establish thresholds that would discover primary associations between topics while avoiding the proliferation of resulting personas.
table reports the strong association rules discovered in the stakeholder s contribution patterns.
topics that were associated at con dence and support levels above the speci ed thresholds were then combined e.g.
topics and representing targetlists campaign lead contact email and case .
for understandability purposes we provide names for each persona in the table although in practice the activity of persona naming is one of the last steps in the process.
table depicts the topics associated with each of the identi ed personas.
finally we used the nfr classi er to identify quality related posts from the posts.
these included performance usability availability operability and security.
as an example a post classi ed as performance stated that atable topics extracted from sugarcrm forum id topics module description in sugarcrm t1 sugarforge sugarforge is a source code repository used by software developers to control and manage sugarcrm development.x t2 target lists campaignsugarcrm campaigns module can be used to create and manage marketing and advertisement campaigns for the user.
the campaign process includes ...x t3 fix bug x t4 document attachx t5 report sugarcrm report module turns data into actionable informationx t6 search x t7 lead contact sugarcrm leads are targets module that responded to a campaign and contacts are highly qualified leads part of a longer term selling processx t8 project task sugarcrm projects and tasks modules can be used to create and manage projects and project tasks for the user.x t9 thank manoj!
manoj is the sugarcrm administrator.
t10 mail email x t11 case sugarcrm case module can be used to record support request from customers.x t12 same t13 sort date refers to feature date in sugarcrm.
x t14 delete table discovered associated rules consequent antecedent support con dence t7 t2 and t10 .
.
t10 t2 and t7 .
.
t2 t7 and t10 .
.
t7 t11 and t10 .
.
t10 t11 .
.
t7 t2 .
.
t10 t2 .
.
t8 t11 and t10 .
.
t10 t7 .
.
t2 t11 and t10 .
.
t11 t7 and t10 .
.
t2 t7 .
.
t5 t3 .
.
t3 t5 .
.
t10 t13 .
.
table associated topics for each persona l persona associated topics qualities p1 camila t2 t7 t10 t11 pe us p2 raghu t8 t10 t11 pe us p3 paul t10 t13 us mn op p4 tom t3 t5 pe sec p5 yang t1 us mn p6 sarah t6 pe us pe performance us usability mn maintainability se security op operability well known problem we have a plugin that manages large targetlists in the recording adding roughly records in about seconds without any memory and timeout issues.
in the nal step we create six personas based on the recommended clusterings of topics and their associated functional and quality related posts.
it took one of the authors approximately minutes per persona to review recommended topics and their associated posts and to construct the personas.
these personas focus on project management bug reporting sugarforge search email management and campaigns.
they cover quality concerns including performance privacy and usability.
two of these six created personas are depicted in figure .
during this process a few of the user stories were extracted almost word for word from forum posts while others were created as a result of browsing through the posts associated with each recommended persona and then formulating a concise and representative user story.
.
placing the persona in the middle we automatically subscribed all stakeholders to personas according to the topics of their posts.
for example if stakeholder sh1 had contributed posts related to search and sugar forge then she would be registered to receive notications from sarah and any other persona with relevant interests.
on average each real stakeholder was registered .as a sugarcrm user i would like to be able to search for customers using a variety of different fields including but not limited to account name contact name phone number city state website.
.because some of my search queries are quite complex i would like to be able to save and retrieve the search.
this should include both the query and the layout of the results .searches should allow wild cards and regular expressions.
.search results should be returned quickly.
.if my sugarcrm account times out i would like to be able to log back in and resume my search.
.searchable fields and search results should be access controlled so that they are only available to users with correct access rights.
.search features should be integrated into other tasks such as selecting email addresses to add to a list or searching for email messages.
topics search sarah sugarcrm user sarah uses sugarcrm in her workplace to manage customers campaigns and accounts.
she needs effective search mechanisms.
.as a campaign manager i need to be able to create a targeted list of customers for a campaign.
.i need search features to make it easy to add remove and purge customers.
usability .i need to be able to manage traditional mailing email and phone based campaigns.
.as my contact list is large i need the selection process to be automated.
.i need import over new records and add them to my target list in seconds or less.
performance .as a campaign manager i need to be able to duplicate a campaign including target list duplicate campaigns i would like to be able to duplicate not only the campaign but also the associated target lists.
.i need to be able to mail merge directly from my target list.
.as a manager i need to be able to assign personnel to a campaign.
.as a sugarcrm user i need to be able to request new features.
camilla campaign manager camilla is a campaign manager with over years of experience in customer management.
she has excellent and interpersonal and business skills and leads a team of over people.
topics campaign targetlist lead contact case email mail figure two of six created personas for the sugarcrm system.
other personas include raghu project management tom technology support paul account manager and yang innovative user.
to .
personas.
registration of personas to views is dependent upon the availability of various views.
for purposes of our sugarcrm case study we developed two views.
the rst was based on the core sugarcrm modules while the second depicted a set of trackable feature requests we extracted from sugarcrm s bug tracking system.
we provide an illustrative example later to show how this infrastructure could be used to keep stakeholders informed of a change in the status of a speci c feature.
.
evaluating personas to evaluate our approach we formulated the research question are the personas assigned i.e.
registered for to each stakeholder appropriate and complete?
to answer this question we took a random sampling of stakeholders from the forum.
we eliminated any posts which were not feature requests for example comments such as yes i like that idea too or can anyone tell me how to do x?
for stakeholders with multiple posts related to several di erent topics we selected the rst instance of each topic.
a persona assignment was deemed correct if the body of the user s post contained a reference to a topic of the stakeholder s interest.
the two researchers manually inspected each of the posts and identied the relevant persona s .
a complete listing of the posts the assigned stakeholders and the evaluation results are provided online at .
.
results based on our analysis of the complete sample of personas stakeholders had completely correct personas assigned while stakeholders had exactly one relevant persona missing.
of these were correctly assigned persona while missing and were correctly assigned personas while missing .
there were no cases of incorrect assignments however we expect that this class of error would occur if we were to create ner grained clusterings and more focused personas.
finally we had instances of missing topics.
these topics include synchronization calender and reminders shortcuts for ltering purposes and a request for tagging of open sugarcrm tabs.
an analysis of these missing topics showed that there were insu cient related posts in the forum for them to be identi ed as major topics.
.
demonstrating personas in the middle the e ectiveness of the personas in the middle concept is clearly dependent on the correct assignment of personas totable sample feature requests post topic assigned to i want to add the saved search drop down which shows up in advanced search...search sarah there is a disconnect between the target lists screen and the contacts user screens etc..contact target listcamilla calendar should be internationalized ...calendar the new campaign status feature is brilliant!
i ve got a couple minor improvement ideas for it...campaigns camilla stakeholders and the quality of those personas.
in this section we therefore provide an illustrative example taken from sugarcrm to show how this works.
our example is based on our two depicted personas and the stakeholders depicted in table .
we discuss only the subscriptions and noti cations relevant to the release of the following new plugin feature retrieved verbatim from the sugarexchange .
the feature provides a new powerful search features for sugarcrm from and to date search capabilities or not eld search options text number operator like in between and rlike are supported and the new additional search.
unsurprisingly this feature is tagged with the topic search and added to a new features list.
this triggers a noti cation event to all personas with search interests which in our example is only sarah .
the noti cation is then forwarded either via push or pull mechanisms to all of sarah s registered users.
.
threats to v alidity evaluating new processes in software engineering can be challenging primarily because demonstrating the viability of a new software engineering process or infrastructure such as the one presented here requires using the new approach in a real project during the actual lifetime of the project.
this is out of scope for the current work.
however we have demonstrated the viability of using data mining techniques to identify realistic groupings of topics and associated crosscutting quality concerns and then using these results to create representative useful personas.
furthermore our evaluation is limited to a single open source project and evaluates only whether the personas created in response to the auto483mated recommendations provided su cient coverage to the stakeholders.
while this assessment was made by two members of this team thereby introducing potential bias we mitigated this risk by clearly de ning the criterion for associating a persona with a stakeholder.
furthermore we have publicly posted our evaluation results for review by others.
.
related work several researchers have developed techniques for extracting requirements from online forum data.
for example scacchi describes techniques for using online forums to gather requirements while noll introduces online forums as a way to elicit the requirements for open source software .
several authors have proposed the use of data mining algorithms for identifying personas.
sinha used principal component analysis pca to discover dissimilarities among individuals through identifying the most discriminant factors in data .
tu et al used pca to remove insigni cant questions in a survey and then clustering analysis ca to group similar users based on their answers.
they create one persona per group by interviewing users .
miaskiewicz et aluse latent semantic analysis lsa in order to discover the similarities between responses of interviewees to a set of questions .
these approaches di er from ours because their intent is to create personas early in the development process based on answers to survey questions in order to guide the user interaction design of the system.
in contrast our approach develops personas for the purpose of managing and communicating information in a forum.
furthermore their approaches are limited to text clustering while ours introduces the additional step of association rule mining.
this means that very disparate topics which happen to be of interest to similar stakeholders could be grouped together.
there have also been several attempts to extract requirements knowledge from open source forums.
huang et al proposed an approach for extracting thread title reply pairs as chat knowledge using a support vector machine svm .
vlas and robinson applied a rule based natural language classi er to extract feature requests .
although the nature of data is similar their purpose is to extract requirements whereas ours is to create personas.
.
conclusion in this paper we have proposed a novel approach that mines feature requests from forums identi es cohesive topics learns associations between those topics based on interests of actual users identi es cross cutting concerns and uses this information to recommend personas.
these personas can be used to anchor the feature management process in order to tame the chaos that can pervade large open feature request forums.
we have described the application of our approach to over six thousand feature requests mined from the sugarcrm forum and demonstrated the viability of generating a useful set of personas for managing feature requests.
future work will explore the use of such personas in active projects across a far broader set of domains and will also explore the usability aspects connected to the task of persona creation.
.