integrated impact analysis for managing software ch anges malcom gethers bogdan dit huzefa kagdi denys poshyvanyk 1computer science department the college of william and mary williamsburg va mgethers bdit denys cs.wm.edu 2department of computer science wichita state university wichita ks kagdi cs.wichita.edu abstract the paper presents an adaptive approach to perform impact analysis from a given change request to source code.
given a textual change request e.g.
a bug report a single snapshot release of source code indexed u sing latent semantic indexing is used to estimate the impact s et.
should additional contextual information be available the approach configures the best fit combination to produce an i mproved impact set.
contextual information includes the ex ecution trace and an initial source code entity verified fo r change.
combinations of information retrieval dynamic anal ysis and data mining of past source code commits are conside red.
the research hypothesis is that these combinations help counter the precision or recall deficit of individual technique s and improve the overall accuracy.
the tandem operation of the three techniques sets it apart from other related solutio ns.
automation along with the effective utilization of two key sources of developer knowledge which are often ove rlooked in impact analysis at the change request level is ach ieved.
to validate our approach we conducted an empirical evaluation on four open source software systems.
a benchmark consisting of a number of maintenance iss ues such as feature requests and bug fixes and their associ ated source code changes was established by manual examination of these systems and their change history.
our results indi cate that there are combinations formed from the augmented de veloper contextual information that show statistically sign ificant improvement over stand alone approaches.
i. introduction software change requests such as bug fixes and new features are an integral part of software evolutio n and maintenance.
effectively supporting software chang es is essential to provide a sustainable high quality evo lution of large scale software systems as realizing even a s light change may not be always straightforward.
software change impact analysis or simply impact analysis ia ha s been recognized as one such key maintenance activity.
i a aims at estimating the potentially impacted entities of a s ystem due to a proposed change .
the applications of ia i nclude cost estimation resource planning testing change propagation managing ripple effects and traceabil ity .
in several realistic settings change requests are typically specified in natural language e.g.
english .
they include bug reports submitted by programmers or end users during the post delivery maintenance of a product.
in the distributed collaborative software development environments such as the open source software mode l change requests are typically managed with issue tr acking systems e.g.
bugzilla .
these change requests may need to be resolved with the appropriate changes to relevan t source code.
it is not uncommon in such projects to recei ve numerous change requests daily that need to be reso lved in an effective manner e.g.
within time priority and quality factors .
another factor that adds to the challenge of ia in the maintenance environment is the regular ab sence of useful intermediate artifacts e.g.
design documents and pertinent traceability information between the abs tractions levels of change requests and source code.
it is a common maintenance scenario in which a change request des cribed in the natural language is the only source of info rmation available to perform ia and an automatic technique must operate in such a situation.
moreover developers or development environments may have accumulated valua ble sources of information in the context of solving a specific change request or past change requests .
on the o ther hand developers cannot be expected to manually provide s uch information all the time.
in this paper we present a novel approach for ia t hat automatically adapts to the specific maintenance sc enario at hand.
we consider scenarios in which the change re quest is available at the minimum and is the source of focus .
additional forms of developer knowledge may be avai lable or not in the context of this change request.
two quantifiable forms of the developer knowledge are considered a verified source code entity to start performing the change e.g.
a relevant source code method and run time informati on pertinent to the features in change request i.e.
an execution trace for a feature specific scenario .
developers may narrow down to at least one entity to change e.g.
using feature location techniques previous proj ect experience and or tacit software development knowl edge.
also developers typically attempt to reproduce the problem reported in the change request a typical activity during the issue triage process .
in some cases call stacks of the failure are also available in the bug reports.
our approach uses a scenario driven combination of information retrieval ir dynamic analysis and m ining software repositories techniques msr .
we chose a history based mining technique as we share a preva lent view in msr that the information in software repositorie s is an extension of the collective developer or developmen t knowledge .
given a textual change request an ir e.g.
latent semantic indexing or simply lsi indexed si ngle release of source code is used to estimate the impa ct set.
should the execution information be made available for the .
c ieee icse zurich switzerland same snapshot associated with the change request m ethods in the trace are also obtained.
a combination of ir and dynamic analyses is favored over ir to estimate the impact set in such cases.
furthermore should a verified start entity of chan ge be available evolutionary couplings are mined from th e commits in software repositories that occur before the snapshot of code used for ir based indexing and dy namic analysis .
a combination of ir and evolutionary co upling analyses is favored over ir to estimate the impact set in such cases.
evolutionary couplings are used in our appr oach as they are derived from the actual changes to artifac ts across multiple releases rather than estimations that are based on the analysis of various structural and semantic dep endencies between them in a single snapshot of a system.
als o the commits embody part of the developer s knowledge an d experience .
the version history may contain do mainspecific hidden links that are manually created a nd maintained e.g.
database schema changes which traditional program analysis methods may fail to un cover .
when both forms of additional developer infor mation context are available a combination of ir dynamic information and evolutionary couplings supersedes others to estimate the impact set.
our hypothesis is that such combinations would hel p counter the accuracy i.e.
precision and or recall deficit of individual techniques and improve upon the accuracy collectively.
to validate our approach we first c reated a benchmark of change requests and their associated s ource code changes by manual examination of open source p rojects argouml jedit mucommander and jabref .
empirical evaluation of our approach on this benchmark shows statistically significant gains in precision and re call up to and respectively.
ii.
related work several ia approaches ranging from classical static and dynamic analysis techniques to the recent unconventional approaches such as those bas ed on ir and msr exist in the literat ure.
in the next subsections we review some of the related app roaches to provide a breadth of the ia solutions the inten t is not to exhaustively discuss every single technique.
a. software change ia via static and dynamic analyses depending on the type of information available imp act analysis is traditionally performed using static pr ogram analysis dynamic program analysis or a combination of these techniques .
static progra m analysis relies solely on the structure of the prog ram and the relationship between program elements at different levels of granularity whereas dynamic program analysis takes into account information gathered from program execution .
law and rothermel introduced pathimpact a dynamic ia technique based on whole path profiling i.e.
when a method m is changed any method that calls m or is called after m is added to the set of potentially impacted methods .
orso et al.
proposed coverageimpact a technique that combines forward static slicing with respect to a modified program element i.e.
method with dynamic information collected from program instrumentation.
orso et al.
conducted an experiment to analyze the tradeoff between in terms of cost and precision for two dyna mic ia techniques coverageimpact and pathimpact .
these two techniques require data gathered during program exe cution using various inputs or test cases.
using this info rmation their technique determines the impact set by locati ng the program elements that were executed simultaneously with the given program elements used as seeds.
it shoul d be noted that we are not using any of these algorithms in this paper.
in our solution execution information is rat her used as a filter to eliminate methods that were not execute d and as a result are less likely to be relevant to the chang e request.
other tools such as chianti support ia by analyzing the changes between two versions of a program i.e.
static information and a set of tests that execute parts of a program i.e.
dynamic information .
using this information chianti suggests a set of regression or unit tests that mig ht have been affected by the changes between the two versions of the program.
jripples is an eclipse plug in that relies on static information to guide developers while manual ly locating the impact set by keeping track of impact ed program elements.
the comprehensive summary on usi ng dynamic analysis to support program comprehension including ia is reported in cornelissen et al.
.
b. software change ia via information retrieval ir methods were proposed and used successfully to address tasks of extracting and analyzing textual i nformation in software artifacts including change impact anal ysis in source code .
existing approaches to ia using ir operate at two l evels of abstraction change request and source cod e .
in the first case the technique relies on mining a nd indexing the history of change requests e.g.
bug reports .
in particular this ia method utilizes ir to link an i ncoming change request description to similar past change r equests and file revisions that were modified to address th em .
while this technique has been shown to be rel atively robust in certain settings it is entirely dependen t on the history of prior change requests.
in cases where t extually similar change requests cannot be identified or si mply do not exist the technique may not be able to identi fy relevant impact sets.
also these works show that a sizeabl e change request history must exist to make this approach op erational in practice which may limit the effectiveness.
th e work in relates to our approach in the use of lexical textual clues from the source code to identify related meth ods.
the other set of techniques to ia that use ir opera tes at the source code level and requires a starting point e.g.
a source code method that is likely to be modified in response to an incoming change request .
this appr oach is based on the hypothesis that modules or classes i n software systems are related in multiple ways.
the evident and most explored set of relationships is based on data and control dependencies however the classes can be also rela ted conceptually or textually as they may contribute to the implementation of similar domain concepts.
this information is derived using ir based analysis of t extual software artifacts that are derived from a single v ersion of software e.g.
comments and identifiers in source code .
our previous work was consistent with earlier usages of ir in ia however it was limited to ia at the source code level staring point and the work prese nted in this paper operates at the change request level as a starting point.
in this paper we apply ir for ia similar t o how it has been used in the context of feature location which is different from two aforementioned approaches.
we a lso use this technique as our baseline in our adaptive solution.
we do not discuss applications of ir based techniques in the context of other maintenance tasks due to space lim itations however such an overview can be found elsewhere .
c. software change ia via mining software repositories the term msr has been coined to describe a broad cl ass of investigations into the examination of software repositories e.g.
subversion and bugzilla .
we refer the interested readers to kagdi et al.
literature survey and xie s online