stakenet using social networks to analyse the stakeholders of large scale software projects soo ling lim dept.
of computer science university college london united kingdom s.lim cs.ucl.ac.ukdaniele quercia mit senseable city lab cambridge usa quercia mit.eduanthony finkelstein dept.
of computer science university college london united kingdom a.finkelstein cs.ucl.ac.uk abstract many software projects fail because they overlook stakeholders or involve the wrong representatives of signi cant groups.
unfortunately existing methods in stakeholder analysis are likely to omit stakeholders and consider all stakeholders as equally in uential.
to identify and prioritise stakeholders we have developed stakenet which consists of three main steps identify stakeholders and ask them to recommend other stakeholders and stakeholder roles build a social network whose nodes are stakeholders and links are recommendations and prioritise stakeholders using a variety of social network measures.
to evaluate stakenet we conducted one of the rst empirical studies of requirements stakeholders on a software project for a user system.
using the data collected from surveying and interviewing stakeholders we show that stakenet identi es stakeholders and their roles with high recall and accurately prioritises them.
stakenet uncovers a critical stakeholder role overlooked in the project whose omission signi cantly impacted project success.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
requirements speci cations general terms design experimentation keywords stakeholder analysis social networks recommender systems .
introduction stakeholder analysis is the process of identifying stakeholders individuals or groups that can in uence or be inuenced by a software project and prioritising them based also with the university of new south wales and nicta.
citation s. l. lim d. quercia and a. finkelstein.
stakenet using social networks to analyse the stakeholders of large scale software projects.
in proceedings of the ieee 32nd international conference on software engineering in press .on their in uence in the project.
for groups we also need to identify suitable representatives to act on their behalf.
many projects fail because they overlook stakeholders or involve individuals who lack knowledge time or interest for adequate project involvement.
lack of user involvement is the main cause of project failure and success is rare .
reports suggest that of projects succeed in in and in .
overlooking stakeholders is possibly the most common mistake in development e orts .
as requirements are elicited from stakeholders overlooking stakeholders gives rise to missing requirements which leads to building the wrong product.
for example one company found that all the change requests for their software during the rst year of operation came from stakeholders needs that they had overlooked .
in some cases the project can be delayed or cancelled another company cancelled their project after realising that they overlooked a stakeholder which would have cost them million .
it is no wonder that nding stakeholders and the right representatives form of developers concern on stakeholder analysis .
most if not all projects have resource limitations and timing constraints with di erent stakeholders having di erent levels of in uence.
as such it is necessary to prioritise stakeholders so as to focus our analysis on high in uence stakeholders while still being aware of low in uence ones especially for large scale software projects with hundreds or even thousands of stakeholders.
although there is substantial literature on stakeholder analysis we nd two problems.
first most methods treat all stakeholders as equally in uential and all group representatives as equally suitable.
also some methods are likely to overlook stakeholders and others return non stakeholders .
second the existing literature is almost entirely qualitative.
without empirical evaluations on real projects we are uncertain how well a method performs against another.
it is surprising given the centrality of stakeholders to software engineering that empirical studies have not been done before.
we address these problems by making two contributions.
we propose stakenet a method to identify and prioritise stakeholders using social networks.
we conducted an empirical study of the stakeholders of a large scale software project at university college london ucl .
our study is one of the rst empirical studies on requirements stakeholders and we regard this as a major contribution of our work.
we evaluate stakenet against the existing method used in theproject based on how well they identify and prioritise stakeholders.
we analyse the empirical results with the contextual data gathered from interviewing the stakeholders observing their engagement with the project and reviewing project documentation.
the paper is organised as follows.
section describes our case study.
section reviews existing methods.
section introduces stakenet section evaluates it.
section identi es the limitations of our study and section concludes.
.
the ralic project the ralic project was initiated to replace the existing access control systems at ucl and consolidate the new system with library access and borrowing hence the name ralic replacement access library and idcard.
ralic was a combination of development and customisation of an o the shelf system.
the project duration was .
years and the system is now in deployment.
we select ralic as our case study for two reasons.
first we have access to the stakeholders and project documentation as the system is developed deployed and maintained at ucl.
second ralic has a large and complex stakeholder base with more than stakeholder groups which is substantially larger than existing empirical studies in the area.
approximately students sta and visitors use the system to enter buildings borrow library resources use the tness centre and gain it access.
besides all ucl faculties and academic departments ralic also involves other supporting departments such as the estates and facilities division that manages ucl s physical estate human resource division that manages sta information information services division library services security services and so on which must be identi ed and prioritised.
we use ralic as a running example in the following sections to discuss existing methods and introduce stakenet.
.
existing methods we classify existing approaches into four types semistructured checklist based interviews and search.
we also broaden our search for related work to other areas.
semi structured approaches by cockburn gause and weinberg largely form the basis of existing practice.
they identify stakeholders by considering categories such as those who interact directly with the system e.g.
the students and the security guards and those with interests e.g.
the government who imposes data protection policies .
as the categories are broad stakeholders such as the maintenance team may be overlooked.
checklist based approaches by alexander and robertson map generic stakeholder roles e.g.
maintenance operator and regulator to project speci c stakeholder roles e.g.
the maintenance team and data protection o cer .
as the roles in the checklist are generic project speci c roles such as the corporate communications division which acts as a regulator that imposes rules on the branding and design of access cards may be overlooked.
interviews by pouloudi and whitley consist of three steps identify generic stakeholder roles and the stakeholder e.g.
the sponsor is alice the director of estates interview the stakeholder to learn about other stakeholders or stakeholder roles e.g.
alice suggests the corporate communications division and add the newly identi edstakeholders and their roles to the stakeholder list and repeat step to interview them.
interviews are thorough but time consuming for large projects with many stakeholders.
the search method by sharp et al.
has two steps identify initial stakeholder roles from users developers legislators and decision makers for each stakeholder role r identify other roles who interact with r and repeat step for the newly identi ed roles.
for example students interact with sta and sta interact with department administrators.
hence sta and department administrators are stakeholder roles.
search identi es many roles but may return roles of non stakeholders such as prospective students who interact with department administrators.
in risk management woolridge et al.
and glinz and wieringa prioritise stakeholders based on the risk incurred by neglecting them.
as prioritisations are done from an individual s perspective they can be biased for large projects in which no individual can have a global perspective.
in software engineering mockus and herbsleb use data from change management systems to quantify development experience and suggest experts.
nevertheless the suggestions focus on developers who are a subset of stakeholders.
in requirements management damian et al.
use social network analysis to explore collaboration and awareness among project team members.
the focus is on their interaction rather than their identi cation.
in natural resource management prell et al.
use social network analysis to inform their decision on which stakeholders to involve in environmental decision making.
nevertheless their analysis is qualitative without explicitly prioritising the stakeholders.
to summarise existing methods have two shortcomings.
first some overlook stakeholders and others return nonstakeholders.
second they assume stakeholders are equally in uential by returning an unprioritised list of stakeholders and their roles.
an ideal method should identify and prioritise stakeholders and their roles from a global perspective.
in so it should extend the qualitative analysis of prell et al.
s work into quantitative analysis and improve woolridge et al.
glinz and wieringa s work to be independent of the individual the analysis and scalable for large projects.
these are the features we set out to achieve with stakenet described in the next section.
.
stakenet the idea behind stakenet is to be open and inclusive so that each stakeholder participates in the stakeholder analysis process.
as stakeholders are socially related to one another we can identify and prioritise them using their relations.
stakenet asks stakeholders to recommend other stakeholders builds a social network with stakeholders as nodes and their recommendations as links and prioritises stakeholders with social network measures.
stakenet does so in steps figure and relies on the concepts in table .
step determine the project scope.
this is a preparatory step adopted from existing requirements engineering literature e.g.
.
scope describes the boundary of the project so that we know which stakeholders should be involved.
for example the scope of the ralic project includes installing new card readers throughout the university but excludes changing the existing systems in student residences.
hence the estates director is a stakeholder but the student residences director is not.figure stakenet s steps.
table stakenet concepts concept de nition scope the work required for completing the project successfully .
stakeholder an individual or a group who can in uence or be in uenced by the success or failure of a project .
stakeholder role a part the stakeholder plays in the project.
stake an interest investment share or involvement in the project as in hope of gain.
salience the level of in uence a stakeholder has on the project .
stakeholders with high salience are crucial to project success stakeholders with low salience have marginal impact.
step based on the project scope identify an initial set of stakeholder roles.
using the rst step of the search method discussed in existing methods section we identify initial stakeholder roles from the prede ned categories of users developers legislators and decision makers.
users include students sta and security guards developers include software vendor and interface developer legislators include data protection o cer and decision makers include the director of estates.
step for each role nd the stakeholders s .
if an individual role is suggested e.g.
director of estates the stakeholder is the person taking up the role e.g.
alice unless she nominates someone else.
if a group is suggested we use default representatives if they already exist e.g.
the group sta is represented by the sta union representatives .
otherwise we ask people who hold the role to nominate a representative e.g.
for the group security guards we ask security guards to nominate their colleagues .
step for each stakeholder get their stake and recommendations.
the stake explains the particular way the stakeholder in uences the project or is in uenced by it.
for example students depend on the system to access university buildings and library resources and the funding director determines the project budget.
a recommendation is a triple stakeholder stakeholder role salience where salience is a number on an ordinal scale e.g.
.
salience comes from the literature on stakeholder management where stakeholders are prioritised based on their possession of three attributes that constitute the stakeholder s salience thepower to in uence the project the legitimacy and urgency of their claims.
for example alice makes a recommendation bob library .
to have a broad coverage of stakeholders and their roles we repeat step for each new stakeholder so that recommended stakeholders are in turn asked for further recommendations.
for example bob makes a recommendation carl students carl then makes a recommendation dave students and so on.
the procedure is also known as the snowballing technique because the group of identi ed stakeholders builds up like a snowball rolled down dave carlalice bobfigure a network of stakeholders.
a hill which results in a well connected network .
eventually few additional stakeholder roles are identi ed in each round of interviews.
the snowballing stops when no additional roles are identi ed in one round of interviews.
stakeholders may make an incomplete recommendation stakeholder role salience if they are unaware of actual stakeholders.
if the role has existing stakeholders then the recommendation is connected to allexisting stakeholders.
for example alice makes a recommendation students .
since carl and dave are recommended as students we link them to alice s recommendation.
otherwise we go back to step to nd stakeholders.
step draw the social network.
we draw a social network with the stakeholders as nodes and their recommendations as directed edges alinks to bifabelieves b to be a stakeholder.
the edge weights is either the salience or the reversed order of salience depending on the social network measure we use in step .
for now we accept that the reversed order of salience is the salience subtracted from the upper bound of maximum salience .
we explain this further when we introduce the measures.
figure illustrates an example stakeholder network where alice recommends bob as salience and carl as salience bob recommends alice as salience and carl as salience carl recommends dave as salience and dave does not recommend anyone.
the values in brackets are the reversed order of salience where the maximum salience is .
step prioritise stakeholders by applying social network measures to the network.
given the social network in step we apply social network measures to prioritise the stakeholders.
four measures account for the whole network betweenness centrality closeness centrality and pagerank the remaining three account just for single nodes and their own connections degree centrality in degree centrality and out degree centrality .
in step the edge weights for the social network depends on the social network measure.
pagerank degree in degree and out degree interpret edge values directly as strength of recommendation hence they use salience as edge weights.
in contrast betweenness and closeness centralities interpret edge values as lengths .
the interpretation means that lower edge values correspond to shorter distances between nodes which imply stronger ties and higher salience .
hence high salience is re ected as low edge value and low salienceas high edge value.
this explains why these measures use thereversed order of salience as weights.
as each measure ranks the nodes in the network di erently they prioritise di erent kinds of stakeholders.
we explain how the measures prioritise a stakeholder sas follows.
betweenness centrality ranks sbased on s s ability to act as a broker between disparate groups of stakeholders.
this measure sums the number of shortest paths between other pairs of stakeholders that pass through s. in figure carl is ranked the highest because alice and bob both need to go through him to get to dave.
he is followed by alice as bob can get to carl directly or go through alice with equal distance of .
bob and dave share the lowest rank as they do not appear between the shortest paths of other nodes.
closeness centrality ranks sbased on the inverse average shortest path distance from sto all other reachable stakeholders.
this measure prioritises stakeholders who reach others in the network quickly.
for example carl ranks the highest because he reaches dave with a high inverse average distance.
he is followed by alice bob and dave .
pagerank ranks sin terms of s s relative importance to all other stakeholders.
it is used by google to rank pages on the internet.
this measure is recursive in that stakeholders who are strongly recommended by many salient stakeholders are salient and the recommendations of a highly salient stakeholder deserve more weight which in turn makes their recommended stakeholders salient.
alice and dave both have a recommendation of but alice ranks higher as she is recommended by bob who ranks higher than carl.
carl has the lowest rank due to the low salience recommendations from alice and bob.
degree centrality ranks sbased on the number of incoming and outgoing recommendations shas and the weights of the recommendations.
alice ranks the highest as she has the most connections with most weights followed by bob carl and dave .
in degree centrality ranks sbased on the number of stakeholders that recommend sand the recommendation weights.
dave and alice rank the highest as they have a recommendation of weight followed by bob with a recommendation of weight and carl with two recommendations of weights and .
out degree centrality ranks sbased on the number of recommendation smakes and the weights of the recommendations.
alice and bob rank the highest as they recommend two other stakeholders with a total weight of followed by carl and dave .
for each measure stakenet produces two lists figure prioritised stakeholder roles the stakeholder roles are prioritised by the highest score of the stakeholder.
if a stakeholder role appears in several rows with different stakeholders we take the row with the highest rank.
prioritised stakeholders for stakeholder roles with more than one stakeholder the stakeholder with a higher rank is returned rst.
.
estates .
students .
libraryalice .
dave .
carl bobprioritised stakeholder rolesprioritised stakeholdersraw list from pagerank .
alice estates .
dave students .
bob library .
carl students stakenet s outputfigure stakenet s output using pagerank .
we rst apply each measure independently.
then we combine them to produce an improved prioritisation.
.
evaluation the goal of stakenet is to identify and prioritise stakeholders and their roles.
our research questions ask how well stakenet identi es and prioritises stakeholders and their roles whether the combination of social network measures produce better prioritisation whether di erent methods for collecting recommendations a ect the results how well stakenet performs against individual stakeholders and whether stakeholders are motivated to make recommendations.
to evaluate stakenet we apply it to the ralic project section .
.
then we build the actual prioritised list of ralic stakeholders and their roles which we call the ground truth section .
.
we also collect the list of stakeholders produced by the project team in a stakeholder elicitation workshop where they used both the semi structured and checklist based approaches described in section to identify all the possible stakeholders.
the outcome is an unprioritised list of stakeholders and roles which we call the existing method list.
our evaluation compares the existing method list and the stakenet lists against the ground truth section .
.
.
applying stakenet to ralic we applied stakenet s six steps to the ralic project described in section .
we used steps as discussed in the previous section to arrive with the initial stakeholders and their roles.
for the remaining three steps we conducted a survey which we report as follows.
step .
we emailed the stakeholders for a face to face survey to collect their recommendations separately.
each session took an hour on average starting with the survey and ending with a semi structured interview where we ask them for any relevant contextual information that can support our analysis such as an account of their project engagement the rationale behind their recommendations and their con dence in their recommendations.
to start o the survey we gave the respondents a cover sheet describing the survey purpose to identify ralic stakeholders the de nition of stakeholders and salience as per table and the questionnaires.
to prompt for recommendations we provided respondents with six types of stakeholders as follows.
a stakeholder can be someone who nances the system makes decision about the development of the system develops the system table ralic project scope item description replace magnetic swipe card readers with proximity readers source and install access card printers decide on card design and categories de ne user groups and default access rights interface the access control system with the library human resource student and visitor systems issue new cards to the ucl community replace the library access control system use new cards at the ucl tness centre figure excerpts of stakeholder details openr closedr and individual prioritisations.
imposes rules on the development or operation of the system uses the system or its output or threatens the success of the system .
we collected their recommendations using questionnaires that consist of parts1 figure a stakeholder details respondents provide their name position department and role in the project.
b open ended recommendations openr for each item in the ralic project scope summarised in table respondents make recommendations in the form of stakeholder stakeholder role salience .
openr must be completed before moving on to the closedended recommendations.
c closed ended recommendations closedr given the project scope respondents select stakeholders from a checklist of names and circle their salience.
the 1for the complete questionnaires refer to stakeholdersnumber of recommendationsfigure longtail graph for openr.
names in the checklist belong to stakeholders with the initial stakeholder roles.
we also include the names of other ucl sta to introduce noise.
there is an option to check others for suggesting stakeholders not in the checklist.
we emphasised to the respondents that openr and closedr are separate questionnaires and once they start on closedr they cannot return to openr.
we administered two distinct questionnaires to measure the e ect of di erent survey methods on our results.
we expect open ended ones to be tedious to complete and closed ended ones to be restrictive.
d individual prioritisations respondents provide a prioritised list of who they think are the most salient stakeholders.
these lists enables us to compare individual prioritisations against the collective prioritisation from stakenet.
we started with roles and stakeholders surveyed respondents and arrived with open ended recommendations closed ended recommendations and individual prioritisations.
the respondents consist of developers representatives of di erent user groups managers directors and legislators.
from openr we identi ed stakeholders and stakeholder roles and from closedr stakeholders and stakeholder roles.
stakenet expands role recommendations into their respective stakeholders in step giving us a total of recommendations in openr.
interestingly the network of stakeholders resulting from openr is scale free i.e.
the distribution of the number of edges is a power law as illustrated in figure .
a scale free network suggests that openr is able to build a complete picture of the social network of stakeholders.
in contrast the network resulting form closedr is not scale free the distribution of the number of edges shows a long tail but is not a power law.
this suggests that closedr builds only a partial view of the network of stakeholders.
step .
we build two networks one from openr and one from closedr.
as openr takes recommendations for eight separate scope items we combine the recommendations to build a network for the whole project as follows.
if arecommends binnnumber of scope items a combined recommendation is thus arecommends bas salience n. by combining the recommendations this way we assume the scope items have equal weights.
the maximum salience is because there are scope items.
step .
finally we apply social network measures to both the openr and closedr networks.
.
building the ground truth the ground truth is the complete and prioritised list of stakeholders ranked by their involvement in the project.
after deploying the system stakeholders who were overlooked would be uncovered from change requests and the stakeholders salience can be observed.
we build the ground truth based on ralic s project documentation interviews and observations in four steps.
step .
based on the types of stakeholders introduced in section .
we derive subtypes of stakeholders relevant to the ralic project.
for example for stakeholders who nances the development of the system the subtypes are stakeholders who nances the human resources nances the hardware and software and allocates server space .
from the types of stakeholders we derive subtypes of stakeholders which we assume to be discrete and complete for ralic.
step .
for each subtype we nd actual stakeholders and their roles from the project plan functional speci cation meeting minutes maintenance action items and post implementation report.
we observe stakeholders on their present involvement and learn about their past involvement from interviews.
for example for the subtype nances human resource we nd from the meeting minutes that miles2 con rmed management systems will provide long term support using existing permanent resources and approval for additional resource granted by fuller estates .
hence miles and fuller are stakeholders and their roles are management systems and estates respectively.
step .
werate each stakeholder along their involvement in each subtype in terms of high medium and low.
by so we assume that stakeholders salience is re ected in their project involvement.
we rate across four types of involvement nance a stakeholder who pays more has a higher rating management a stakeholder who is more accountable has a higher rating development a stakeholder with more responsibilities has a higher rating and usage a stakeholder who uses the system more frequently and is more a ected by the system has a higher rating.
for example in terms of nance fuller allocated the highest budget for human resources and hardware hence he gets a high for both the subtypes nances human resource and nances hardware and software .
miles allocated around half of fuller s amount for human resources hence he gets a medium for the subtype nances human resource .
step .
werank the stakeholders by the sum of their ratings from the highest to the lowest.
to do so we convert the ratings into numerical values high medium low .
in our example fuller gets two high ratings so he has the score of .
he is ranked higher than miles who has a medium rating that converts to a score of .
overall the output is a ranked list stakeholders and roles shown partially in table .
we then prioritise the stakeholders according to their roles as in figure .
.
method and results we now ascertain whether stakenet can identify and prioritise stakeholders and their roles by answering the following research questions.
identifying stakeholder roles how many stakeholder roles identi ed by stakenet are actual stake2names have been changed for reasons of privacy.table partial ground truth list rank stakeholder role dawson security services fuller estates and facilities payne estates and facilities crowe library services cook student registry holder roles?
how many of all the actual stakeholder roles does stakenet identify?
section .
.
prioritising stakeholder roles how accurately do stakenet s social network measures prioritise stakeholder roles?
section .
.
combining measures does the combination of stakenet s social network measures improve its accuracy in prioritising stakeholder roles?
section .
.
identifying and prioritising stakeholders for each stakeholder role how many of all the actual stakeholders are identi ed by stakenet?
for each stakeholder role with more than one stakeholder how accurately does stakenet prioritise the stakeholders?
section .
.
openr vs. closedr stakenet uses open ended recommendations openr .
what if it uses a prede ned checklist closedr ?
section .
.
stakenet vs. individual stakeholders in prioritising stakeholder roles how does stakenet compare to individual stakeholders?
section .
.
survey response are stakeholders motivated to provide recommendations for stakenet?
section .
.
.
.
identifying stakeholder roles method.
we compare the stakeholder roles returned by stakenet and the existing method against the ground truth in terms of precision and recall .
the precision of identi ed stakeholder roles is the number of actual stakeholder roles in the set of identi ed stakeholder roles divided by the total number of identi ed stakeholder roles.
precision fxg fgroundtruthg fxg where xis the set of stakeholder roles identi ed by stakenet or the existing method and groundtruth is the set of stakeholder roles in the ground truth.
the recall of identi ed stakeholder roles is the number of actual stakeholder roles in the set of identi ed stakeholder roles divided by the total number of actual stakeholder roles.
recall fxg fgroundtruthg fgroundtruthg with xand groundtruth same as for precision .
both precision and recall range from to .
precision of means all the identi ed roles are actual stakeholder roles.
recall of means all the actual stakeholder roles are identi ed.
the stakeholder roles returned by the methods can be at a ner equal or coarser grain compared to the ground truth.
if the returned stakeholder roles are at a ner grain then we consider the results a match.
for example if ground truthtable identifying stakeholder roles method precision recall existing method .
.
stakenet .
.
returns students and stakenet returns graduates undergraduates and medical students we consider that stakenet returns a stakeholder role that matches the ground truth.
otherwise if the returned stakeholder roles are at a coarser grain than the ground truth then we consider the results not a match.
if they are of equal grain we consider each stakeholder role individually.
for example for security services ground truth returns the subgroup card issuer.
stakenet returns the subgroups card issuer and photographers.
we consider photographers an error.
results.
stakenet identi es most of the stakeholder roles in the ground truth with very few errors.
from table stakenet shows a recall of higher than the existing method used in the project and maintains a high precision of .
by using the existing method the project team was only able to determine a limited number of stakeholder roles.
as a result they overlooked both high and low salience stakeholder roles such as the ucl development and corporate communications o ce that in uences the access card design the network team who provides network connectivity to the access control system the access card vendor short course students external library users library members not in other ucl systems and the maintenance team.
in contrast by combining individual views of all stakeholders stakenet comes up with a more complete picture.
it also successfully identi es the previously mentioned stakeholder roles which were overlooked by the project team.
interestingly overlooking external library users impacted ralic s success.
according to the post implementation report it was established that there were some external library members who would consequently require new cards if the existing library access control system were to be de commissioned.
the board decided that this objective should be removed from the project scope as the associated costs and complications of issuing such a high number of cards to non ucl members far outweighed the bene ts.
had stakenet been used the project team would not need to wait till the end to nd that they have overlooked external library users and caused the library to stay with the old access control system.
.
.
prioritising stakeholder roles method.
we compare only the stakenet lists against the ground truth but not the existing method list as it is unprioritised.
the accuracy of stakeholder role prioritisation is the similarity between the prioritisation of the identi ed stakeholder roles and the prioritisation in the ground truth.
we use pearson s correlation coe cient to determine the similarity ranges from to means the two lists are negatively correlated means no correlation and means positively correlated.
a positive means that high priorities in the ground truth list are associated with high priorities in the list of identi ed stakeholders.
the closer the values are to or the stronger the correlation.
to compute we need lists of the same size.
therefore we take the intersection between the lists.table prioritising stakeholder roles measure accuracy betweenness .
closeness .
pagerank .
degree .
in degree .
out degree .
results.
stakenet prioritises stakeholder roles with high accuracy.
according to table measures that consider the whole network have a higher accuracy in prioritising stakeholder roles than measures that consider direct connections.
out degree has the lowest overall accuracy as stakeholders who make a lot of recommendations are not necessarily salient stakeholders.
closeness also has low accuracy as stakeholders who can reach other stakeholders quickly are not necessarily salient.
we also nd that degree correlates strongly with betweenness measuring the correlation between the lists produced by degree and betweenness gives us a common feature in social networks .
two stakenet features in uence the accuracy of prioritisation.
first stakenet prioritises stakeholder roles based on the highest rank of the stakeholders with that role which produces inaccurate prioritisation when a stakeholder has more than one role.
for example a stakeholder with two roles receives a recommendation every time either role is recommended.
hence both roles receive higher prioritisation than if di erent stakeholders play the two roles.
second the expansion of role recommendations into existing stakeholders with the same role also a ects the accuracy because respondents who recommend roles appear to make many recommendations.
for example the new data protection o cer was ranked rst by out degree as he was unfamiliar with actual stakeholders and suggested many roles.
.
.
combining measures method.
we perform two preliminary studies to combine di erent measures.
first we predict the suitable measure for each stakeholder role.
each role has two boolean attributes gathered from interviews is confident andis community .
is confident indicates whether the stakeholder expresses a lack of con dence in his or her recommendations.
is community indicates whether the stakeholder belongs to any cliques within the organisation as stakeholders in cliques may recommend one another more frequently and skew the results.
we train a c4.
j48 decision tree classi er to nd the measure that produces the closest result to the ground truth for each stakeholder role from the three most accurate and diverse measures betweenness in degree and pagerank .
second we predict the stakeholder role s actual rank in the ground truth.
each role now has ve attributes is confident andis community as before has turnover betweenness and pagerank .has turnover is a boolean indicating whether sta ng changes occurred among the stakeholders of that role.
betweenness and pagerank are the ranks of the stakeholder role produced by betweenness and pagerank .
we use these measures as they are the most accurate measures.
we train a gaussian process classi er to predict each stakeholder role s actual rank.
results.
results from fold cross validation show that both classi ers produce more accurate prioritisationis confident true false in degree betweenness pageranktrue falseis communityfigure decision tree classi er.
table identifying and prioritising stakeholders method measure recall accuracy existing method .
n a betweenness .
.
closeness .
.
pagerank .
.
degree .
.
in degree .
.
out degree .
.
than the most accurate individual measure betweenness with .
the decision tree classi er has an accuracy of and the gaussian process classi er has a higher accuracy of .
figure shows the learned decision tree.
we learn that betweenness avoids stakeholder communities who highly suggest one another from gaining disproportional in uence pagerank avoids salient stakeholders recommended only by a few salient stakeholders from losing in uence and in degree avoids salient stakeholders from being penalised for their answers.
nevertheless other attributes may be more appropriate for other projects and organisations.
.
.
identifying and prioritising stakeholders method.
we compare the lists of stakeholders returned by stakenet and the existing method against the ground truth in terms of recall.
the recall of identi ed stakeholders is the number of actual stakeholders identi ed divided by the total number of stakeholders in the ground truth for each stakeholder role that appear in both lists with the following rule.
if the ground truth has nstakeholders with the same role we consider only the rst nstakeholders of the method.
this is because if the project consults one stakeholder and the method returns the correct stakeholder after two incorrect ones the project would have consulted the less suitable stakeholder.
we use the recall formula in section .
.
with xas the set of identi ed stakeholders by stakenet or the existing method and groundtruth as the set of stakeholders in the ground truth.
for stakeholder roles with more than one stakeholder we also prioritise the stakeholders according to their suitability to represent the role.
the accuracy of stakeholder prioritisation is the similarity between the ordering of the identi ed stakeholder and their actual ordering in the ground truth.
we use pearson s correlation coe cient on the stakeholder list for each stakeholder role.
the total accuracy is the average accuracy for all such roles.
again we measure only the stakenet lists as the existing method list is unprioritised.
results.
stakenet identi es stakeholders with high recall.
betweenness has the highest recall in identifying stakeholders more than the existing method .
in line with the literature these measures prioritise stakehold table openr vs. closedr .
identifying stakeholder roles precision recall openr .
.
closedr .
.
.
prioritising stakeholder roles accuracy btw close pgrank deg in deg out deg openr .
.
.
.
.
.
closedr .
.
.
.
.
.
.
identifying stakeholders recall btw close pgrank deg in deg out deg openr .
.
.
.
.
.
closedr .
.
.
.
.
.
.
prioritising stakeholders accuracy btw close pgrank deg in deg out deg openr .
.
.
.
.
.
closedr .
.
.
.
.
.
ers whose positions in the network allow them connect to di erent groups and have more knowledge which are the characteristics of good stakeholders.
in the existing method many roles were identi ed rather than actual stakeholders.
although some stakeholder roles such as the software vendor need not have prede ned stakeholders those involved in requirements elicitation do.
if we involve unsuitable stakeholders we risk eliciting the wrong requirements.
stakenet prioritises stakeholders with the same role accurately.
pagerank has the highest accuracy of .
stakenet produces high accuracy in prioritising stakeholders as it prioritises them based on their relations with other stakeholders rather than their formal positions.
just from looking at the organisational chart for security services one may assume that the head of security services is the most suitable stakeholder to talk to.
nevertheless the manager is more involved in ralic and connected to the other stakeholders hence is more suitable.
stakenet correctly identi es this.
in contrast to high accuracy in prioritising stakeholder roles measures considering network connectivity have low accuracy in prioritising stakeholders .
their accuracy is low for roles with recent turnover as the new stakeholders do not share the same ties in the network as the old.
besides knowing who the suitable stakeholders are it is also useful to know about potential problems with a stakeholder s involvement.
inspired from the social network literature we nd that comparisons between di erent measures that are strongly correlated reveal two such problems.
first stakeholders who have a high rank in degree but low rank in betweenness tend to have high in uence but low involvement.
an example is the head of security services many security related issues discussed in meetings required his input but he was absent.
second stakeholders who have a high rank in betweenness but low rank in closeness are salient stakeholders who are often out of the loop.
.
.
openr vs. closedr method.
we compare the lists produced from openr against the lists produced from closedr using precision recall and accuracy as before.
results.
in identifying stakeholders and their roles closedrhas less recall than openr less recall in identifying roles and an average of less recall in identifying stakeholders .
checklists limit the discovery of projectspeci c stakeholder roles as they constrain survey outcomes around the given options.
although respondents were encouraged to recommend stakeholders not in the checklist only of them did so with an average of less than three recommendations each.
as fewer new suggestions reduce the likelihood of error closedr has more precision than openr in identifying stakeholder roles.
in prioritising stakeholders and their roles measures that consider direct connections have a higher accuracy for closedr.
recommendations revolve around the names in the checklist rather than from the respondents past interactions.
in contrast to openr where most measures return the security service owner and the project manager as globally high ranked stakeholder measures in closedr return division heads and provosts.
this is because in openr respondents who lack con dence recommended groups but in closedr they checked the names of division heads and provosts.
.
.
stakenet vs. individual stakeholders method.
we compare the individual prioritisations provided by each stakeholder against the ground truth in terms of accuracy as in section .
.
.
as before we take the intersection between the lists to produce lists of the same size.
results.
prioritisations by individual stakeholders are less accurate compared to the collective prioritisation by stakenet.
the individual prioritisations have an average accuracy of less than half compared to stakenet s most accurate prioritisation from betweenness centrality .
managers have the highest accuracy followed by directors developers users and then legislators .
the prioritisations are biased by local perspective.
developers tend to prioritise their immediate managers and other developers managers prioritise other managers.
.
.
survey response method.
we calculate the response rate of our survey as the number of stakeholders who responded over the total number of stakeholders we contacted expressed as a percentage.
we also look at the precision and recall of stakeholder roles as the snowball progresses to know the quality of the identi ed roles had we surveyed fewer stakeholders.
results.
stakeholders were motivated to recommend other stakeholders.
our survey response rate was which is higher than the weighted average response rate without regard to technique3 .
those who did not respond to our email request were mostly away not stakeholders or have low salience.
during our survey the recall increases quickly at the start and then stabilises and the precision lowers consistently throughout figure .
as the snowball progresses towards the boundary of the network fewer additional stakeholder roles are identi ed in each round of interviews.
stakenet terminates after round of surveys as no new stakeholder roles are identi ed.
after round new stakeholder roles 3in the study by yu and cooper the sample sizes for response rates from various survey methods e.g.
mail surveys telephone surveys personal interviews varied from to .
as such the response rate averages are weighted by the number of contacts underlying the response rate.
number of stakeholders surveyedprecision recall round initial stakeholders round round round 4figure precision and recall as the snowball rolls.
can still be identi ed but at a slower rate.
the increase in recall at the end was from an initial stakeholder who was unavailable at the start of our survey.
the graph shows that there is always a tradeo between precision and recall.
respondents involved in software projects are keen to use stakenet in their work.
during the survey a system support asked eagerly will ucl use stakenet?
.
he explained that many of the change requests he received can be avoided if stakeholders were identi ed initially.
a director recommended stakenet to be used in his division.
he added managers often think in terms of systems and organisation.
when we have a function we only look at the layer in the organisation a ected by the function.
this limited view often gives us problems in the long run!
.
threats to validity our study is based on a single project hence there must be some caution in generalising the results to other projects and organisations.
as we conducted the survey after project completion post project knowledge may in uence the results.
the respondents may learn about the missing stakeholders during the project and recommend based on the knowledge.
nevertheless only of the respondents were involved throughout the project due to sta turnover and department restructuring hence their in uence on the overall prioritisation is low.
also as ralic is completed four years ago it is unlikely for recommendations to come from memory or daily conversations.
still to con rm our results future work should evaluate stakenet on di erent projects in di erent organisations.
misunderstandings during the survey can a ect recommendations and the results.
some respondents have a different understanding of stakeholders due to multiple existing de nitions and some nd salience and role di cult to grasp.
for roles respondents who are not actively involved in the project put their job titles instead of why they are stakeholders.
feedback from respondents reveals that the types of stakeholders provided as prompts should have included the categories manages the development of the system provides input to the system and maintains the system .
we clean the data provided by respondents in two ways merge synonymous stakeholder roles e.g.
research students and phd students merge di erent names referring to the same person e.g.
nicholas is sometimes recommended as nic or nick .
manual merging of roles may be inconsistent and subjective e.g.
one may consider research students and phd students as di erent roles which then inuences the results of role prioritisation.
future work shouldaim for more objective and ideally automated cleaning.
in step of stakenet where we identify initial stakeholders one can say that knowledge about the stakeholders e.g.
from the ground truth or the project documentation affects the determination of the initial stakeholders and the quality of the nal set of stakeholders.
nevertheless our initial set is constructed before the ground truth.
also as we use established approaches to identify stakeholder roles from key stakeholder categories users developers legislators and decision makers our approach converges and is relatively insensitive to the initial set.
one can say that the ground truth is biased in our perspective thus a ecting the results of our study.
nevertheless we argue that it is representative of the actual stakeholder list because we have the global perspective from reviewing project documentation observing the stakeholders engagement with the project and interviewing them.
we also validated the ground truth with management level stakeholders.
still future work should consider alternative ways of constructing the ground truth to increase its objectiveness.
.
conclusion stakenet uses social networks to identify and prioritise software project stakeholders and their roles.
by applying stakenet to the ucl access control project we demonstrate that stakenet performs better than the existing method used in the project with a higher precision and recall in identifying stakeholders and their roles.
di erent social network measures prioritise di erent kinds of stakeholders and stakenet outperforms individual stakeholders.
stakenet prioritises stakeholders based on the sum of their salience over the project lifecycle.
future work should consider prioritising over time to accommodate changing scope stakeholders roles and salience prioritising across di erent issues such as funding development and usage and using multi dimensional salience such as power legitimacy and urgency.
we have developed a software tool that implements stakenet which is now used in real software projects.
hence our next step is to measure stakenet s performance in practice.
finally we are strongly persuaded that further empirical studies of stakeholders are called for.
in a broader context we propose a new methodology that shifts the emphasis from stakeholder analysis run by a small number of experts to a collaborative approach in which all stakeholders have a say.
.