automated extraction of security policies from natural language software documents xusheng xiao1amit paradkar2suresh thummalapenta3tao xie1 1dept.
of computer science north carolina state university raleigh nc usa 2ibm t. j. watson research center hawthorne ny usa 3ibm research bangalore india 1xxiao2 ncsu.edu 2paradkar us.ibm.com 3surthumm in.ibm.com 1xie csc.ncsu.edu abstract access control policies acp specify which principals suc h as users have access to which resources.
ensuring the correctn ess and consistency of acps is crucial to prevent security vulne rabilities.
however in practice acps are commonly written in na tural language nl and buried in large documents such as requi rements documents not amenable for automated techniques to c heck for correctness and consistency.
it is tedious to manually e xtract acps from these nl documents and validate nl functional requirements such as use cases against acps for detecting inco nsistencies.
to address these issues we propose an approach ca lled text2policy to automatically extract acps from nl softwar e documents and resource access information from nl scenario b ased functional requirements.
we conducted three evaluations o n the collected acp sentences from publicly available sources al ong with use cases from both open source and proprietary projects.
th e results show that text2policy effectively identifies acp sent ences with the precision of .
and the recall of .
extracts acp rules with the accuracy of .
and extracts action steps w ith the accuracy of .
.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
security and protection access control d. .
requirements specifications keywords access control natural language processing requirement s analysis .
introduction access control is one of the most fundamental and widely used privacy and security mechanisms.
access control is often go verned by an access control policy acp that includes a set of r ules specifying which principals such as users or processes ha ve access to which resources.
acps are crucial in preventing secu rity vulnerabilities since decisions such as accept ordeny on user requests are based on acps.
in acp practice there exist two maj or issues that can result in serious consequences such as allow ing an permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of thi s work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and th at copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyright s for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstrac ting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise to republish to pos t on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission a nd or a fee.
sigsoft fse november cary nc usa copyright acm ... .
.unauthorized user to access protected resources incorrec t specification of acps and incorrect enforcement of acp specificatio ns in the system implementation.
the first issue of incorrect specification of acps is primaril y due to two reasons.
first acps contain a large number of complex rules to meet various security and privacy requirement s. one way to ensure the correctness of such complex rules is to leve rage systematic testing and verification approaches tha t accept acps in a form of formal specification.
in practice acps are c ommonly written in natural language nl and are supposed to be written in security requirements a type of non functional requirements.
however often acps are buried in nl documents such as requirement documents.
for example consider the followin g acp sentence i.e.
sentence describing acp rules for itrust an open source health care application the health care personnel hcp does not have the ability to edit the patient s securit y question and password .
this acp sentence is not amenable for automated verification requiring manual effort in extracting t he acp from this sentence into an enforceable format such as the ext ensible access control markup language xacml .
second nl software documents could be large in size often consisti ng of hundreds or even thousands of sentences itrust consists of use cases with use case sentences where a portion of t he sentences describing acps sentences in itrust are buried among other sentences.
thus it is very tedious and error prone to manually inspect these nl documents for identifying and extrac ting acps for policy modeling and specification.
the second issue of incorrect enforcement of acp specificati ons is primarily due to the inherent gap between acps specified us ing domain concepts and the actual system implementation de veloped using programming concepts.
functional requirements such as scenario based requirements e.g.
use cases that spec ify sequences of action steps1 bridge the gap since they describe functionalities to be implemented by developers using domain co ncepts.
for example an action step the patient chooses to view his or her access log.
in use case of itrust implies that the system shall have the functionality for patient domain concepts to vie w his or her access log.
these action steps typically describe tha t actors principals access different resources for achieving som e functionalities and help developers determine what system function alities to implement.
therefore policy authors can validate actio n steps against provided acps to detect inconsistencies of resourc e access also helping the policy authors construct consistent acps f or the system.
in practice manually inspecting large functional requirements to extract resource access information is also labor intensive and tedious.
for example a proprietary ibm enterprise appl ication 1we use the term of an action step rather than action to distinguish the term from an action in the access control model described later.
that we used in our evaluations includes use cases with sentences.
in general like other types of nl documents nl requirement s written in english are unstructured and can be ambiguous or i nclude implicit information posing significant challenges for natural language processing nlp .
however in software docume nts such as functional and non functional requirements acp se ntences i.e.
nl security requirements for describing acp rules t end to follow specific styles such as for role based acps .
for example based on our manual inspection of acp sentences collected from the itrust requirements and various security requirements in p ublished articles and web sites about of the acp sentences fol low this style.
similarly to provide communication values fu nctional requirements such as use cases are usually written in a relat ively simple consistent and straightforward style .
to tackle the problem in this paper we propose a novel approach called text2policy which adapts nlp techniques de signed around a model such as the acp model and the action step mode l to automatically extract model instances from nl software d ocuments and produce formal specifications.
our general appro ach consists of three main steps apply linguistic analysis to parse nl documents and annotate words and phrases in sentences fro m nl documents with semantic meanings construct model in stances using annotated words and phrases in the sentences and transform these model instances into formal specificati ons.
specifically we provide techniques to concretize our gener al approach for extracting role based acps and action steps from nl software documents and functional requirements respecti vely.
from the extracted acps our approach automatically generates m achineenforceable acps in specification languages such as xacml.
t hese acps can be used by automatic testing and verification approa ches for checking policy correctness or serve as an initial ve rsion of acps for policy authors to improve.
from each extracted acti on step our approach automatically derives an access control request.
an example request could be that a principal requests access to a resource with the expected permit or deny decision.
such der ived requests can be used for automatic validation against speci fied or extracted acps for detecting inconsistencies.
this paper makes the following main contributions a novel approach called text2policy which provides a general framework that incorporates syntactic and semantic nl analyses to extract model instances from nl software documents and produces formal specifications.
our work demonstrates that manual effort can be reduced with automated extraction of security policies from nl documents in a specific domain such as security requirements written in specifi c styles.
analysis techniques that concretize our general approach f or extracting role based acp rules and action steps from nl documents and functional requirements such as use cases respectively.
three evaluations of text2policy on itrust use cases use cases from a module in a proprietary ibm enterprise application in the financial domain and the collect ed acp sentences from publicly available sources published papers and public web sites .
the results show that text2policy effectively identifies acp sentences from use case sentences with the precision of .
and the recall of .
text2policy effectively extracts acp rul es from acp sentences with the accuracy of .
acp an hcp should not change a patient s account.
acp an hcp is disallowed to change a patient s account.
figure example acp sentences written in nl.
text2policy effectively extracts action steps from act ionstep sentences with the accuracy of .
2and text2policy helps us identify a name inconsistency of itrust use cases us ing the extracted acp rules and action steps.
.
background and examples in this section we first introduce the background of the acp model used for representing acps in our approach and then de scribe the background of the action step model used for repr esenting action steps in our approach.
.
acp model and xacml this section provides the background information about our acp model and xacml.
.
.
acp model an acp consists of a set of acp rules.
a typical role based acp rule consists of four elements subject action resour ce and effect .
figure shows two example acp rules.
the subj ect element describes a principal such as a user or process that m ay request to access resources e.g.
an hcp in acp .
the action element describes an action e.g.
change in acp that the principal may request to perform.
the resource element describe s the resource e.g.
a patient s account in acp to which access is restricted.
a rule can have one of various effects i.e.
permi t deny oblige or refrain .
in this paper we focus on permit rules a nd deny rules i.e.
rules with permit or deny effects which are co mmonly used in various software systems for granting or blocking ac cesses to protected resources.
a permit rule allows a principal to access a resource whereas a deny rule such as acp and acp prevents a principal from accessing a resource.
.
.
xacml the extensible access control markup language xacml is an xml based general purpose language used to describe p olicies requests and responses for acps recognized as a stan dard by the organization for the advancement of structured informa tion standards oasis .
xacml is designed to replace applicatio nspecific and proprietary acp languages thus enabling commu nication among applications created by different applicatio n vendors.
in an application deployed with xacml based access control before a principal can perform an action on a particular reso urce a policy enforcement point pep sends a request formulated in xacml to the policy decision point pdp that stores princip alspecific xacml acp rules.
the pdp determines whether the request should be permitted or denied by evaluating the poli cies whose subject action and resource elements match the requ est.
finally the pdp formulates its decision in the xacml respon se language and sends it to the pep which enforces the decision .
currently xacml has been widely supported by all the main platform vendors and extensively used in a variety of applic ations .
recent research also provides systematic testing and verifi cation approaches for ensuring the correct specification o f xacml rules.
there also exist xacml based research tools used in v ari2the evaluation artifacts and detailed results of the itrust use cases and the collected acp sentences are publicly available on ou r project web site .as an hcp creates an account.
as he edits the account.
as the system updates the account.
as the system displays the updated account.
figure an example use case.
ous agencies labs and companies .
thus we choose xacml as the formal specification to model acp.
.
action step model use cases are scenario based requirements specificati ons that consist of sequences of action steps for illustrating b ehaviors of software systems.
these action steps describe how actors in teract with software systems for exchanging information.
actors a re entities outside software systems such as users that intera ct with the systems by providing input to the systems e.g.
in action st ep as2 shown in figure or receiving output from the systems e.g .
in as shown in figure .
since action steps describe how ac tors access or update information resources of the system s each action step can be considered to encode an access control req uest that an actor requests to access the resources and expect the request to be permitted.
using the access control requests with expe cted permit decisions derived from action steps we can automati cally validate such requests with expected decisions against spe cified or extracted acps to detect inconsistencies.
we represent the contents of use cases sequences of action s teps in a formal representation.
the content of a nl use case conta ins a list of sentences each of which in turn contains one or more a ction steps initiated by some actor e.g.
an hcp in as shown in figure .
each action step has an action associated with a classific ation such as the input classification for the action of providing i nformation e.g.
edits in as shown in figure and the output classification for the action of receiving information e.g .
display in as shown in figure .
an action step is also associated t o one or more actors and has a set of parameters.
these paramete rs represent the resources created modified or used by the act ions.
in figure as shows a resource account that is modified.
.
challenges and examples in this section we first describe the technical challenges f aced by acp extraction and action step extraction.
we next use exam ples to illustrate how text2policy extracts acps and action step s from nl documents and nl use cases respectively.
.
technical challenges as a common technical challenge for both acp extraction and action step extraction tc1 anaphora refers to identifying and replacing pronouns with noun phrases based on the context.
for example the pronoun hein as shown in figure needs to be replaced with the hcp from as .
for acp extraction there are two unique technical challenges tc2 semantic structure variance.
acp and acp in figure use different ways semantic stru ctures to describe the same acp rule tc3 negative meaning implicitness .
an acp sentence may contain negative expressions such as acp .
additionally the verb in the sentence may hav e negative meaning such as disallow in acp .
for action step extraction there are two unique challenges tc4 transitive actor .
as implies that an hcp the actor from as is the initiating actor of as tc5 perspective variance .
as implies that an hcp views the updated account requiring a conversion to replace the actor and action of as .
to address tc1 anaphora we adapt the technique anaphora resolution specializing the anaphora algorithm introduced by kenned y policy policyid rulecombalgid ... target rule effect deny ruleid rule target subjects subject subjectmatch matchid string equal attrvalue hcp attrvalue subjectattrdesignator attrid subject role subjectmatch subject subjects resources resource resourcematch matchid string equal attrvalue patient.account attrvalue resourceattrdesignator attrid resource id resourcematch resource resources actions action actionmatch matchid string equal attrvalue update attrvalue actionattridesignator attrid action id actionmatch action actions target rule policy figure generated xacml acp for acp in figure .
et al.
to identify and replace pronouns with noun phrase s based on the context.
to address tc2 semantic structure variance we propose a technique called semantic pattern matching which uses different semantic patterns based on the grammatical funct ions subject main verb and object to match different semantic str uctures of acp sentences.
to address tc3 negative meaning implicitness we propose an inference technique called negative meaning inference which infers negative meaning by using patterns to identif y negative expressions and a domain dictionary to identify ne gative meaning of verbs.
to address tc4 transitive actor we propose an analysis technique called actor flow tracking .
this technique first tracks non system actors in action steps.
later when t he analysis encounters action steps that have only system actors i t replaces system actors with tracked non system actors.
to add ress tc5 perspective variance we propose an analysis technique perspective conversion .
this technique tracks non system actors of action steps.
later when the analysis encounters action ste ps that have only system actors and output information from the syst em it replaces the system actors with tracked non system actor s and replaces output actions with read actions such as view .
.
example of acp extraction text2policy adapts nlp techniques that incorporate syntac tic and semantic analyses to parse nl software documents const ructs acp model instances and produces formal specifications.
in particular text2policy first applies shallow parsing that annotates sentences with phrases clauses and grammatica l functions of phrases such as subject main verb and object.
for example the shallow parsing component parses acp in figure as object a patient s account.
.
text2policy then uses the domain dictionary to associate verbs with pre defined semantic classes.
for ex ample in acp the domain dictionary is used to associate change with the update semantic class and disallow with the negative semantic class.
to determine whether a sentence describes an acp rule i.e.
is an acp sentence and extract elements of subject action an d resource text2policy composes semantic patterns using the i dentified grammatical functions of phrases and clauses extracted by the shallow parsing component.
for example acp can be match ed by the semantic pattern modal verb in main verb group and the constructed model instance of acp is action change update .
to infer the effect for an acp rule text2policy checks wheth er the corresponding sentence contains any negative expressi on and whether the main verb group is associated with the negativefigure an example action step.
semantic class.
for example text2policy identifies the neg ative expression of should not change in acp and infers the effect of acp as deny.
using the extracted acp model elements and the inferred effect text2policy constructs an acp model instance for each acp sentence and generates acp rules in xacml.
figure shows the generated xacml acp for acp .
.
example of action step extraction action step extraction uses similar linguistic analyses a s acp extraction.
first the techniques of shallow parsing and do main dictionary are used to parse and annotate each sentence in use ca ses.
next the technique of anaphora resolution is used to identi fy and replace pronouns from the sentence with the noun phrases b ased on the context.
for example hein as is replaced with hcp .
text2policy then uses a syntactic pattern to check whether t he sentence has required elements subject main verb group and o bject for constructing an action step and constructs a model inst ance if all the elements are found.
consider the example use case shown in figure .
since all sen tences include the required elements text2policy constru cts model instances of these action steps associated with actors the system hcp action types representing the classification of the actio ns e.g.
the classification of display in as as output and parameters the account .
for example the model instance of as is shown in figure .
in addition since as and as have the system as the actor text2policy further applies the techniques fo r tc4 transitive actor andtc5 perspective variance on as and as to replace the actors and actions.
.
approach in this section we describe our general approach for extrac ting model instances from nl documents and producing formal spec ification.
our approach consists of three main steps lingui stic analysis model instance construction and transformati on.
figure shows the overview of our approach.
our approach accepts nl software documents as input and applies linguistic analysis to parse the nl software documents and annotates their s entences with semantic meanings for words and phrases.
using t he annotated sentences our approach constructs model instan ces.
based on provided transformation rules our approach transforms the model instances to formal specifications which can be automatica lly checked for correctness and consistencies.
.
linguistic analysis the linguistic analysis component includes adapted nlp te chniques that incorporate syntactic and semantic nl analyses to parse the nl software documents and annotate the words and phrases in the document sentences with semantic meaning.
we next descr ibe the common linguistic analysis techniques used for both ac p extraction and action step extraction and describe the uniq ue analysis techniques proposed for acp extraction and action step ext raction respectively.
figure overview of our approach.
.
.
common linguistic analysis techniques in this section we describe the common linguistic analysi s techniques used in our general approach shallow parsing and dom ain dictionary.
shallow parsing.
shallow parsing determines the syntactic structures of sentences in nl documents.
research has sho wn the efficiency of shallow parsing based on finite state techn iques and the effectiveness of using finite state techniques for l exical lookup morphological analysis part of speech pos determinat ion and phrase identification.
sinha et al.
s work also shows th at the shallow parsing analysis is effective and efficient for sem antic and discourse processing.
therefore our approach chooses a sh allow parser that is fully implemented as a cascade of several fini te state transducers fsts described in detail by boguraev .
in the shallow parser an fst identifies phrases clauses an d grammatical functions of phrases by recognizing patterns o f pos tags and already identified phrases and clauses in the text.
t he lowest level of the cascade recognizes simple noun group np and verb group vg grammars.
for example acp is parsed as .
later stages of the cascade try to build complex phrases and i dentify clause boundaries based on patterns of already identifi ed tokens and phrases.
for example to change patient s account in acp is recognized as a to infinitive clause.
the final set of fsts mar ks grammatical functions such as subjects main verb group an d objects.
as an example the shallow parser finally parses and an notates acp as main verb group should not change .
domain dictionary.
the domain dictionary is used to associate verbs with pre defined semantic classes.
there are two benefi ts of associating verbs with semantic classes.
the first benefit is to help address tc3 negative meaning implicitness .
consider acp2 shown in figure .
without the negative semantic class asso ciated with the main verb group is disallowed our analysis would incorrectly infer the effect as permit instead of deny.
the second benefit is to identify verb synonyms such as change andupdate .
during validation of action step information against acps our approach uses verb synonyms to match access requests transfo rmed from action steps with an applicable acp rule.
the domain dictionary is used to associate each verb entry wi th a semantic class.
besides the negative class that we mention ed earlier a verb entry can be associated with a semantic class that is a kind of operation e.g.
output view ordisplay and update change oredit .
to achieve so we populate the domain dictionary with an initial set of commonly used verb entries and their respective semantic classes.
we then use wordnet a large lexical database of english to further expand the ent ries with their synonyms.
currently we implement the domain dictionary as an extensi ble and externalizable xml blob and the content is populated man ually.
one major limitation of using an xml blob is that unmatc hed verbs i.e.
ones without matched entries in the dictionary are as table identified subject action and resource elements i n sentences matched with semantic patterns for acp sentence s. semantic pattern examples modal verb in main verb groupan hcp can view the patient s account .
an admin should not update patient s account .
passive v oice followed by to infinitive phrasean hcp is disallowed to update patient s account .
an hcp is allowed to view patient s account .
access expressionan hcp has read access to patient s account .
a patient s account is accessible toan hcp .
ability expressionan hcp is able to read patient s account .
an hcp has the ability to read patient s account .
signed with the unclassified semantic class.
in future work we plan to extend our technique to query wordnet dynamically when an unmatched verb or adjective is encountered.
for exam ple by querying wordnet for synonyms we can assign to an unmatched verb the semantic class of its most similar verb amon g its matched synonyms.
alternatively we can assign to an unmatc hed verb the semantic class that is most common among the unmatch ed verb sk nearest neighbors.
anaphora resolution.
to address tc1 anaphora our approach includes the anaphora resolution technique to identify an d replace pronouns with the noun phrases that they refer to.
to resolve anaphora encountered during use case parsing we adapt the anaphora algorithm introduced by kennedy et al.
with an additional ru le a pronoun in the position of a subject is replaceable only by no un phrases that also appear as subjects of a previous sentence.
as an example hein as shown in figure is replaced by the hcp the actor of as .
.
.
acp linguistic analysis in this section we describe unique linguistic analysis te chniques proposed for acp extraction.
semantic pattern matching.
to address tc2 semantic structure variance we provide the technique of semantic pattern matching to identify whether a sentence is an acp sentence.
we compose different semantic patterns based on the grammatical funct ion of phrases identified by shallow parsing.
these semantic patte rns are more general and more accurate than templates written using lowlevel syntactical structures such as pos tags .
our app roach uses this technique while identifying subject action and resource elements for an acp rule.
table shows the semantic patterns used in our approach.
the text in bold shows the part of a sentence that matches a given s emantic pattern.
the first pattern modal verb in main verb group identifies sentences whose main verb contains a modal verb.
t his pattern can identify acp shown in figure .
the second patt ern passive voice followed by to infinitive phrase identifies sentences whose main verb group is passive voice and is followed by a toinfinitive phrase.
this pattern can identify acp shown in f igure .
the third pattern access expression captures different ways of expressing that a principal can have access to a particular r esource.
the fourth pattern ability expression captures different ways of expressing that a principal has the ability to access a parti cular resource.
using the semantic patterns our approach filters ou t nldocument sentences that do not match with any of these provid ed patterns.
negative expression identification.
negative expressions in sentences can be used to determine whether the sentences hav e negative meaning.
to identify negative expressions in a senten ce ourapproach composes patterns to identify negative expressio ns in a subject and main verb group.
for example no hcp can edit patient s account.
has noin the subject.
as another example an hcp can never edit patient s account.
has never in the main verb group.
acp in figure contains a negative expression in th e main verb group.
our approach uses the negative expression identification while inferring policy effect for an acp rule.
.
.
use case linguistic analysis in this section we describe a unique linguistic analysis t echnique proposed for action step extraction.
syntactic pattern matching.
to identify whether a sentence is an action step sentence i.e.
describing an action step our approach includes the technique of syntactic pattern matchi ng that identifies sentences with syntactic elements subject mai n verb group and object required for constructing an action step .
to improve precision in identifying sentences describing users accessing resources our approach further checks whether the subj ect is a user of the system and whether the object is a resource define d in the system.
for example our approach ignores the sentenc e the prescription list should include medication the name of the doctor.
.
.
since its subject prescription list is not a user of the system.
moreover our approach also uses the techniqu e of negative meaning inference described later in section .
.
to filter out sentences that contain negative meaning since these negative meaning sentences tend not to describe action ste ps.
.
model instance construction after our approach uses linguistic analysis techniques to parse the input nl documents words and phrases in the sentences of the nl documents are annotated with semantic meaning.
for examp le shallow parsing annotates phrases as subjects main verb gr oups and objects.
to construct model instances from these senten ces our approach uses the annotated information of words and phr ases to identify necessary elements for a given model.
.
.
acp model construction to construct model instances for acp rules our approach ide ntifies subject action resource elements based on the match ed semantic patterns and infers the policy effect based on the pre sence or absence of negative expressions in sentences.
model element identification.
based on the matched semantic patterns our approach identifies subject action resourc e elements from different syntactic structures in sentences.
table shows the identified subject action and resource el ements underlined words in the sentences matched with sema ntic patterns.
for a sentence that matches the first pattern modal verb in main verb group our approach identifies the subject of the sen tence as a subject element the verb not the modal verb in th e main verb group as an action element and the object of the sentenc e as a resource element.
for a sentence that matches the second pa ttern passive voice followed by to infinitive phrase our approach identifies the subject of the sentence as a subject element an d identifies action and resource elements from the verb and object i n the to infinitive phrase respectively.
for the first example of the third pattern access expression our approach identifies the subject of the sentence as a subject element the noun read in the main verb group as an action element and the noun phrase patient s account in the prepositional phrase to patient s account as a resource element.
for the second example of the third pattern our approa ch identifies the subject patient s account as the resource element the adjective accessible as an action and the object hcp as the subject element.
for the sentences that match the fourth patter n our approach identifies the subject of the sentence as a subject e lement and identifies action and resource elements from the verb and object in the to infinitive phrase respectively.
policy effect inference.
to address tc3 negative meaning implicitness our approach includes the technique of negative meaning inference.
if an acp sentence contains negative meaning we infer the policy effect to be deny permit otherwise .
to infer whe ther a sentence has negative meaning the technique of negative m eaning inference considers two factors negative expression and n egativemeaning words in the main verb group.
recall that negative ex pressions is identified using the technique of negative exp ression identification in section .
.
.
acp in figure contains a negative expression in the main verb group.
to determine whether there are negative meaning words in the main verb group our approa ch checks the semantic class associated with the verb in the mai n verb group.
if the semantic class is negative we consider the sen tence has negative meaning.
acp has a negative meaning wor d disallow in the main verb group and therefore its inferred policy effect is deny.
model instance construction.
using the identified elements subject action and resource and inferred policy effect our approach constructs an acp model instance for an acp sentence .
moreover our approach provides techniques to deal with a po ssessive noun phrase such as patient s account orthe account of patient.
our approach extracts the possessor as an entity and the pos sessed item as its property.
as a complete example the const ructed model instance of acp is action change update .
here the technique of domain dictionary associates the verb change with the semantic class update.
.
.
action step model construction to construct model instances for action steps described in s entences our approach identifies actor action and paramete r elements based on the use case patterns.
our approach includes two additional new techniques to address tc4 transitive actor andtc5perspective variance .
model element identification.
our approach uses known patterns of use case action steps to identify action actor an d parameter elements for action steps.
we devise these patterns bas ed on industry use cases itrust use cases and use cases coll ected from published articles .
one of the most used patterns i s to identify the subject of a sentence as an actor element the ve rb in the main verb group as an action element and the object of the sentence as a parameter element.
these patterns could be eas ily updated or extended based on the domain characteristics of t he use cases for improving the precision of extracting actor acti on and parameter elements.model instance construction.
using the identified actor action and parameter elements in a sentence our approach con structs action step model instances for action steps described in t he sentence.
for example the model instance for a patient views access logis parameter access log .
here the technique of domain dictionary associates the ve rb view with the semantic class read.
algorithm actor flow tracking require ass for action steps in a use case trackedactor null forasinass do actors getactors as onlysystemactor true foractor inactors do if!issystemactor actor then onlysystemactor false break end if end for if!onlysystemactor then trackedactor getnonsystemactor actors continue end if iftrackedactor !
null then replaceactors as trackedactor end if end for actor flow tracking.
to address tc4 transitive actor we apply data flow tracking on non system actors of an action step .
we consider subjects such as the system in as with some specific names as system actors.
non system actors can usually be obt ained from the glossary of requirements documents.
algorithm sh ows the actor flow tracking aft algorithm.
we next illustrate the algorithm using the example shown in f igure .
aft first checks as and tracks the actor of as since i ts actor is a non system actor hcp satisfying the condition at line .
aft then checks as and tracks the actor of as hcp replaced by anaphora resolution since its actor is also hcp .
when aft checks as aft finds that as has only the system as its actor satisfying the condition at line and replaces the system with hcp as the actor of as .
perspective conversion.
to address tc5 perspective variance we use a similar algorithm as aft.
the only difference is to re place the condition at line as trackactor !
null and getactiontype as output and to replace the statement at line as convertperspective as trackactor .
consider the same example shown in figure .
when the algorithm reaches as the tracked actor is hcp .
since as has system as its only subject and its action type is output displays our approach converts as into an hcp views the updated account by replacing its actor elements with the tracked actors and its action element with a verb entry whose classification is read in the d omain dictionary such as view.
such conversion helps our approach to correctly extract access requests from action steps.
.
transformation with the formal model of acps our approach can use different transformation rules to transform model instances into formal specifications such as xacml .
acp model.
currently our approach supports the transformation of each acp rule into an xacml policy rule.
our approachtable metrics for addressing research questions.
rq metrics rq1precision tp tp fp recall tp tp fn f1 score precision recall precision recall tp true positives fp false positives fn false negatives rq2 accuracy c tc number of correct acp rules extracted by text2policy t total number of acp rules rq3 accuracy c tc number of correct action step sentences extracted by text 2policy t total number of action step sentences transforms subject action and resource elements as the co rresponding subject action and resource sub elements of the targe t element for an xacml policy rule.
our approach then assigns the value of the effect element to the value of the effect attribute of the xacml policy rule to complete the construction of an xacml policy r ule.
figure shows the extracted xacml rule of acp .
more examples can be found on our project web site .
with more transformation rules our approach can easily transform the acp m odel instances into other specification languages such as epal .
action step model.
currently our approach supports the transformation of each action step into an xacml request with t he expected permit decision.
for each action step our approac h transforms actor action and parameter elements as subject act ion and resource elements of the request respectively.
.
ev aluations in this section we present three evaluations conducted to a ssess the effectiveness of text2policy.
for our evaluations we c ollected use cases from an open source project itrust acp s entences from sources published papers public web sites and itrust and use cases from a module in a proprietary ibm en terprise application.
we specifically seek to answer the fol lowing research questions rq1 how effectively does text2policy identify acp sentences in nl documents?
rq2 how effectively does text2policy extract acp rules from acp sentences?
rq3 how effectively does text2policy extract action steps from action step sentences i.e.
sentences describing ac tion steps ?
table shows metrics used to address our research questions .
to address rq1 we used three metrics precision recall an d f1score.
the first row in table shows formulas for computing th ese metrics.
in these formulas tp represents the number of correct acp rules identified by text2policy whereas fp andfn represent the number of incorrect and missing acp rules respecti vely identified by text2policy.
to address rq2 and rq3 we used the accuracy metric shown in the second and third rows of table respectively.
.
subjects and evaluation setup in our evaluations we used three categories of subjects for addressing the three research questions.
first we used use cases from itrust .
itrust is an open source health care app lication that provides various features such as maintaining medical history of patients storing communications with doctors identif ying primary caregivers and sharing satisfaction results.
the req uirements documents and source code of itrust are publicly available o n its web site.
itrust requirements specification has use cases 448use case sentences non functional requirement sente nces and constraint sentences.
the itrust requirements specificat ion also has a section called glossary that describes the roles of u sers who interact with the system.
we preprocessed the itrust use cases so that the format of the use cases can be processed by text2policy.
in particular we rem oved symbols e.g.
and that cannot be parsed by our approach.
we replaced some names with comments quoted in paren thesis.
for example when we see a user an lhcp or patient we replaced a user with an lhcp or patient .
we separated sentences by replacing with or.
we also separated long sentences that span more than or lines since such style affects the precision of shallow parsing.
the preprocessed documents of the itrust use ca ses are available on our project web site .
second we collected acp sentences from sources published articles and public web sites .
these acp sentences a nd nl acp rules from the itrust use cases are the subjects for our evaluation to address rq2.
the document that contains the co llected acp sentences and their original sources can be downl oaded from our project web site .
third we used use cases from a module in a proprietary ibm enterprise application.
due to confidentiality we refer to this application as ibmapp .
this module belongs to the financial domain.
we next discuss the results of our evaluations in terms of the effectiveness of text2policy in identifying acp sentences and extracting acp rules from nl documents and in extracting actio n steps from use cases.
.
rq1 acp sentence identification in this section we address the research question rq1 of how effectively text2policy identifies acp sentences in nl docu ments.
to address this question we first manually inspected the use cases of itrust to identify acp sentences.
we then applied text2po licy to identify acp sentences and compared those results with our r esults of manual inspection to identify the numbers of true positiv es false positives and false negatives.
we further computed precis ion and recall values based on these numbers.
among use case sentences in the itrust use cases we manually identified acp sentences.
among use case sentences in the ibmapp use cases we manually identified acp sentences.
we then manually classified these acp sentences i dentified by text2policy as correct sentences and false positiv es and manually identified false negatives.
table shows the results of rq1 for both the subjects.
column subjects lists the name of the subjects.
columns sent.
and acp sent.
show the number of use case sentences and the number of acp sentences.
column ident.
shows the number of identified acp sentences and columns fp and fn show the numbers of false positives and false negatives.
based on these numbers columns prec rec and f1 show the computed precision recall and f1 score.
for itrust the results show that text2policy identified sentences with false positive s and 14table evaluation results of rq1.
subjects sent.
acp sent.
ident.
fpfnprec rec f1 itrust .
.
.
ibmapp .
.
.
total .
.
.
table evaluation results of rq2.
subjects acp sent.
extracted accu.
itrust .
ibmapp .
total .
false negatives.
for ibmapp text2policy identified sentences with false positive and false negative.
the results show t hat our semantic patterns help identify acp sentences more precise ly on theibmapp use cases.
one explanation could be that proprietary use cases are often of higher quality compared to open sourc e use cases and conform to simple grammatical patterns.
we first provide an example to describe how text2policy correctly identifies acp sentences.
one of the acp sentences tha t text2policy correctly identifies acp rules is hcps can modify or delete the fields of the office visit information.
.
our semantic pattern modal verb in main verb group helps identify that the main verb contains the modal verb canand correctly identify the sentence as an acp sentence.
we next provide some examples to describe how text2policy produces false positives and negatives.
one false positive produced by text2policy is the instructions can contain numbers characters.
.
.
which matches the pattern modal verb in main verb group .
however this sentence describes a requirement on password setting instead of an acp rule.
these false positi ves can be reduced by expanding the domain dictionary to include com monly used nouns that are unlikely to be systems or system actors.
the sentence that cannot be identified by text2policy i s the lhcp can select a patient to obtain additional information a bout a patient.
.
due to precision in parsing long phrases the underlying shallow parser fails to identify to obtain additional information about a patient as a to infinitive phrase causing a false negative for our approach.
these false negatives can be redu ced by improving the underlying shallow parser using more trainin g corpus in future work.
.
rq2 accuracy of acp extraction in this section we address the research question rq2 of how e ffectively text2policy extracts acp rules from acp sentence s. to address this question we manually extracted acp rules from these acp sentences.
we next applied text2policy and compared the results with our manually extracted results.
we compute the accuracy of the acp extraction using the number of acp sentence s from which text2policy correctly extracts acps and the tota l number of acp sentences.
table shows the results of rq2.
column subject lists the name of the subjects.
columns acp sent.
and extracted show the total number of acp sentences and the number of acp sentences from which text2policy correctly extracts acps.
the statistics shown by these two columns are used to compute the accuracy shown in column accu.
.
among acp sentences of itrust including from itrust use cases text2policy c orrectly extracts acp rules from acp sentences achieving the acc uracy of .
.
among acp sentences in the use cases of ibmapp text2policy correctly extracts acp rules from acp sentences achieving the accuracy of .
.table evaluation results of rq3.
subjects as sent.
extracted accu.
itrust .
ibmapp .
total .
we first provide an example to describe how text2policy correctly extracts some acp rules.
one of the sentences from whi ch text2policy correctly extracts acp rules is the administrator is not allowed through the system interface to delete an existi ng entry.
.
our semantic pattern passive voice followed by toinfinitive phrase helps correctly identify this acp sentence and correctly extract subject administrator action delete and resource an existing entry elements.
our technique of negativemeaning inference also correctly infers the policy effect t o be deny.
we next provide examples to describe how text2policy fails t o extract some acp rules.
one of the sentences from which text2 policy cannot correctly extract acp rules is any subject with an e mail name in the med.example.com domain can perform any action on any resource.
.
the subject of this sentence any subject is a noun phrase followed by two prepositional phrases with an e mail name andin the med.example.com domain .
these two prepositional phrases constrain the subject any subject which is not correctly handled by our current implementation.
moreover du e to the imprecision in parsing long phrases text2policy fails to extract some resources from acp sentences.
in future work we plan to develop techniques to analyze the effects of prepositional phrases and long phrases for improving the accuracy of acp extractio n. .
rq3 accuracy of action step extraction in this section we address the research question rq3 of how effectively text2policy extracts action steps from action step sentences.
first we manually extracted actions steps from the se actionstep sentences.
we next used text2policy to automatically e xtract actions steps and compared the results with our manually ext racted results.
we computed the accuracy of the action step extrac tion by using the number of correctly extracted action step senten ces and the total number of action step sentences.
table shows the results of rq3.
column subject lists the name of the subjects.
columns as sent.
and extracted show the total number of action step sentences and the numbe r of action step sentences from which text2policy correctly ex tracts action steps.
the statistics shown by these two columns are use d to compute the accuracy shown in column accu.
.
among action step sentences in the itrust use cases text2policy correctly extracts action steps from action step sentences resu lting in an accuracy of .
.
among action step sentences in the use cases of ibmapp text2policy correctly extracts action steps from action step sentences resulting in an accuracy of .
.
we next provide examples to describe how text2policy fails t o extract action steps.
one of the action step sentences from which text2policy fails to extract action steps is the hcp must provide instructions or else they cannot add the prescription.
.
the reason is that the current implementation of our approach do es not handle the subordinate conjunctions or else .
another example sentence is the public health agent can send a fake email messageto the adverse event reporter to gain more information about the report.
.
for such long sentences with prepositional phrase s to the adverse event reporter to gain more information about the report after the object of the sentence a fake email message the underlying shallow parser of our approach cannot correctly identify the grammatical functions.
we plan to study more use cas es on health care applications and improve the underlying shall ow parser with more patterns to identify grammatical functions of act ion step sentences.
.
detected inconsistency our approach validates the extracted access requests again st the extracted acps.
although our approach does not detect viola tions of the extracted acps in our evaluations our approach ident ifies a few action steps that do not match any extracted acps.
to stud y why these action steps do not match any acps we further apply union on the specifications of action steps to collect the inf ormation of what users perform what actions on what resources.
from th is information we find that editor one of the system users is not matched with any subjects in the extracted acps.
we then chec k the glossary of the itrust requirements and the use case dia gram.
we confirm that editor in fact refers to hcp admin and all users in use cases and respectively.
such name inconsisten cies can be easily identified by combining validation of acp rules and using the union information of extracted action steps.
.
threats to v alidity the threats to external validity include the representativ eness of the subjects and the underlying shallow parser used by the cu rrent implementation of our approach.
to evaluate acp extraction and action step extraction from use cases we applied our appro ach on use cases of itrust.
the itrust use cases were created base d on the use cases in the u.s. department of health human service hhs and office of the national coordinator for heal th information technology onc and evolved and revised b y about students and teaching assistants as well as instruc tors each semester since the itrust requirements were initially crea ted.
although the public availability and activeness make the itru st use cases suitable for our subjects we evaluated our approach o nly on these limited use cases.
to reduce the threats for the evalu ation of acp extraction we further collected acp sentences fr om other publicly available sources.
furthermore we also a pplied our approach on use cases of a module in a proprietary ibm enterprise application that belongs to the financial domain .
the threats to internal validity include human factors for d etermining correct identification of acp sentences from nl softw are documents correct extraction of acp rules from these sente nces and correct extraction of action steps from use cases.
in our evaluations we inspected the whole subject documents and manua lly identified acp sentences and extracted acps and action step s as the comparison base in the evaluations.
to reduce the humanfactor threats we did the extraction carefully and referre d to existing acps and other use cases for determining correct identifi cation of acp sentences and correct extraction of acps and action s teps.
these threats could be further reduced by involving two or mo re people who have experiences on acps to manually extract acps and action steps and integrating their manual extraction r esults with our manual extraction results as the comparison base.
.
discussion and future work in this section we discuss applications and limitations of our current approach and propose directions for future work.construction of complete acps.
from the extracted acps our approach automatically generates formal specification s of acps.
these formal acps can assist the construction of complete ac ps in three ways these formal acps can be used to validate ma nually specified acps for identifying inconsistencies th ese formal acps can serve as an initial version of acps for policy author s to improve greatly reducing manual effort in extracting acps from nl software documents combined with specified acps the se formal acps can be fed to automated acp verification approac hes for checking correctness such as static verification a nd dynamic verification via access request generation .
acp modelling in the absence of security requirements.
in the absence of security requirements our approach can stil l provide a solution to assist policy authors to model acps for a system .
our approach first extracts deny acps and action steps from funct ional requirements.
besides deriving access requests from actio n steps we can also derive a permit acp rule from each action step.
wit h the extracted and derived acps policy authors have two ways to model acps the policy authors can apply the extracted de ny acps and add a policy rule to permit all other accesses th e policy authors can combine the extracted deny acps and the deriv ed permit acps and add a policy rule to deny all other accesses.
cooperation between tool and human.
the extracted policies can serve as an initial version of acps for policy author s to improve advocating cooperation between the tool and the us er the tool reports policies extracted with low confidence and the user can refine them to get better results.
currently our imp lementation is built on an eclipse based ide and can provide vi sual feedback of extracted policies e.g.
extracted subjects actions and resources.
we plan to improve the ide to better support the co operation between the tool and the user.
in addition to impr ove the precision of the semantic analysis such as anaphora res olution we can apply ambiguity analysis techniques on the nl software documents to identify nocuous ambiguities and ask the user to resolve the ambiguities before our approach is ap plied to extract policies.
acp rule ordering.
our current approach extracts acp rules from sentences without considering the ordering of the rule s. so may cause security holes in the extracted acp rules.
we plan to study the extracted acp rules and develop new techniq ues to extract ordering for the acp rules.
context aware analysis in action step extraction.
a sequence of action steps may have several state transitions.
the tech niques of actor flow tracking and perspective conversion in our app roach partially address the context aware analysis in action st ep extraction.
for example a customer may not pay the order if he has no t selected an order.
we plan to develop techniques to deal with state transitions during action step extraction.
other policy models.
in our evaluations we encountered some acp sentences that describe conditions for acp rules.
for ex ample the acp sentence during the meeting phase reviewer can read the scores for paper if reviewer has submitted a review f or paper.
contains an if condition to constrain the acp rule.
without correct extraction of the condition the produced s pecification of acp rules is incomplete and requires policy author s to manually fix the incompleteness issue.
besides the issue of c onditions our current approach cannot handle multi level mode ls or workflow models for access control.
we plan to extend o ur approach to support these new models and provide new semanti c patterns for identifying new styles.
in addition our appro ach can be extended to support privacy policies such as hipaa priva cypolicies3.
supporting extraction of hippa policies requires more sophisticated semantic models to address new challenges s uch as condition rules rule combination and rule ordering.
we pl an to investigate techniques to deal with new challenges of extra cting hipaa privacy policies.
.
related work manual extraction of acps from nl documents.
he and anton propose a manual approach called requirements ba sed access control analysis and policy specification recaps to extract acps from various nl documents including requirem ents documents design documents and database design and secur ity and privacy requirements.
during the extraction their app roach also clarifies ambiguities in requirements documents and id entifies inconsistencies among requirements documents and data base design.
their objective is to derive a comprehensive set of a cp rules similar to our approach.
however our approach adapt s nlp techniques and provides new analysis techniques to automat e the process of acp extraction while their approach is manual.
template matching.
etzioni et al.
propose an approach to extract lists of named entities found on the web using a set of patterns.
their approach is related to the acp extraction of our approach since both use patterns to extract information.
how ever their patterns are based on the low level pos tags such as np and nplist while our semantic patterns are based on gramma tical functions of phases such as subject main verb group and ob ject .
our semantic patterns are more general and provide high prec ision in identifying acp sentences as shown in our evaluations.
nlp to analyze api documents.
pandita et al.
propose an approach that analyzes the meta data of api descriptions programming keywords and semantic patterns from pos tags to in fer method specifications from api documents.
zhong et al.
p ropose an approach that builds action resource pairs from api documents via nlp analysis based on machine learning and infers automata for resources from action resource pairs and class interface hierarchies.
both of these approaches focus on parsing api d ocuments and use the specific characteristics of api document s to improve the nlp analysis.
for example different parts of ap i documents can be mapped to different parts of code structures s uch as class method names return values and parameter names.
ho wever the contents of requirements documents usually canno t be mapped directly to code structures thus making their appro aches inappropriate on analyzing requirements documents.
moreo ver these two approaches do not include techniques to address th e unique challenges of acp extraction and action step extraction s uch as tc3 negative meaning implicitness tc4 transitive actor and tc5perspective variance .
nlp to assist privacy policy authoring.
the sparcle policy workbench employs the shallow parsing te chnique to parse privacy rules and extract the elements of privacy rules based on a pre defined syntax.
these elements are then u sed to form policies in a structured form so that policy authors can review it and then produce policies in a machine readable fo rm such as epal and xacml with a privacy policy profile.
michael et al.
propose an approach to map nl policy statements to an equivalent computational format suitable for further processing by a policy workbench.
however neither of t hese approaches can identify sentences describing a policy rule .
these approaches parse all the input statements for policy extrac tion by assuming that the input statements are policy statements w hile our approach identifies acp sentences from requirements docume nts semantic patterns.
both of these approaches provide s imple templates to extract elements for constructing policy rule s while our approach provides more general semantic patterns.
addi tionally their approaches cannot infer negative meaning of sen tences.
use case analysis.
sinha et al.
adapt nlp techniques to parse and represent use case contents in use case models .
the extraction of use case contents to formal models is similar to the action step extraction in our approach.
however our appro ach focuses on extracting access requests for validation again st specified and extracted acps and provides corresponding analysis techniques to address the tc4 transitive actor andtc5 perspective variance challenges.
.
conclusion in this paper we have proposed an approach called text2pol icy which extracts acps from nl software documents and produces formal specifications.
our approach incorporates syntacti c and semantic nl analyses around models such as acp and action step models and extracts model instances from nl software docume nts.
from the extracted acps our approach automatically genera tes machine enforceable acps in formal languages such as xacm l that can be automatically checked for correctness.
from the extracted action steps our approach automatically extracts resourceaccess information which can be used for automatic validat ion against specified or extracted acps for detecting inconsist encies.
we conducted evaluations on itrust use cases acp sentences collected from sources and proprietary use cases.
the eva luation results show that with customized nlp techniques auto mated extraction of security policies from nl documents in a speci fic domain helps effectively reduce manual effort and assist poli cy construction and understanding.
acknowledgment this work is supported in part by nsf grants ccf ccf cns aro grant w911nf an nsa science of security lablet grant and a nist grant.
.