see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation using information fragments to answer the questions developers ask conf erence paper in proceedings int ernational conf erence on softw are engineering may .
.
sour ce dblp citations 159reads author s thomas f ritz univ ersity of z urich publica tions citations see profile gail murphy univ ersity of british columbia publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y gail murphy on june .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.using information fragments to answer the questions developers ask thomas fritz and gail c. murphy department of computer science university of british columbia vancouver bc canada fritz murphy cs.ubc.ca abstract each day a software developer needs to answer a variety of questions that require the integration of di erent kinds of project information.
currently answering these questions such as what have my co workers been is tedious and sometimes impossible because the only support available requires the developer to manually link and traverse the information step by step.
through interviews with eleven professional developers we identi ed questions developers want to ask but for which support is lacking.
we introduce an information fragment model and prototype tool that automates the composition of di erent kinds of information and that allows developers to easily choose how to display the composed information.
in a study professional developers used the prototype tool to answer eight of the questions.
all developers were able to easily use the prototype to successfully answer of questions in a mean time of .
minutes per question.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming environments h. .
information search and retrieval general terms human factors design keywords information fragments human centric software engineering programming tools .
introduction a typical day of work requires a software developer to answer a variety of questions e.g.
.
some of these questions are easy to answer because they focus on one kind of information and have little ambiguity.
an example of one permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may cape town south africa copyright acm ... .
.of these questions is where is this method called ?
which focuses on source code and typically has a well de ned meaning.
other questions are harder to answer because they require integrating multiple kinds of information and can be interpreted in many di erent ways.
an example of one of these question is what have my coworkers been depending upon the developer asking the question an answer may involve only information from a revision system to determine what code is changing or it may also involve information from a bug repository to help explain why the change is occurring.
from our own experience talking with developers we believed that a number of the questions of interest are of the second form.
to investigate the range of questions that span multiple kinds of information we interviewed eleven professional software developers section nding questions of interest to them that have the characteristic of requiring multiple kinds of information to answer.
we also found that even though many of these questions sound similar there can be substantial variation in how a developer interprets a question.
although developers want to ask these questions existing approaches provide little support for answering them section .
consider the question what have my coworkers been to answer this question existing development environments require a developer to explicitly follow links that exist between pairs of the kinds of information of interest each kind of information is displayed in its own view.
speci cally a developer has to select select a bug that describes ongoing work in one view follow the link to a set of changes that describe what work was done shown in another view and then nally bring up the changed source code in a third view to know speci cally what work was conducted.
these steps must be iteratively performed for each change set associated with the bug.
by the time the developer follows all desired links it is quite possible that he has forgotten the question of interest!
more importantly only one chain of linked information can be followed at a time if multiple chains are needed to answer the question such as the one we are considering that is oriented at multiple members of a team the burden is placed on the developer to mentally and manually correlate the information reached.
an alternate solution is to provide a query language that allows a developer to specify explicitly how the information should be integrated e.g.
.
the problem with this solution is that the developer must know or learn the query language and must express explicitly how the information should be integrated.
these approaches mean that the de veloper needs to know about and express in the query how the bug information maps to the change set information and how the change set information maps to the source code.
we introduce a model that automates the integration of di erent kinds of project information by using the structure of the information section .
our model has two advantages.
first the integration of information which we call composition is automated as a result a developer need only indicate which information to integrate rather than how to integrate it.
second our model separates the composition from the presentation of information.
this separation allows the developer to express a large variety of questions and to tailor the composed information to his personal interpretation of the question at hand.
using our model we have been able to express all questions determined through the interview study.
expressibility of a large set of questions is necessary to make the model useful.
to ensure the model can be applied by developers we implemented a prototype tool section and conducted a case study section involving professional developers.
we found that without needing to know the details of how the composition of the information occurs in the model the developers were able to easily use the prototype to successfully answer of eight questions posed in a mean time of .
minutes per question.
this paper makes three contributions.
2it presents questions that developers ask these questions reveal the range of interpretations developers desire for compositions of project information.
2it introduces the information fragment model that simpli es the answering of these questions compared to previous approaches.
2it demonstrates that the model can be easily used by developers through a study with professional developers.
.
related work a variety of approaches have been developed to help users navigate through complex information spaces by following information links.
feldspar allows a user to follow association links between di erent kinds of information such as emails and les to nd information of interest .
haystack lets a user specify views for di erent kinds of information but still requires the user to step manually across the views to correlate information .
jquery provides support speci c for software development allowing a developer to step through structural links between source code elements within a single view one at a time .
other approaches to helping retrieve information support the user in expressing rather than following information links.
these approaches involve a query language that requires the user to explicitly form links between the information.
some such as the relational views by linton and the approach by paul and prakash are based on a relational algebra.
others such as codequest provide a logic based query language.
kiefer and colleagues broaden the range of information that can be retrieved covering source revision and bug information with the use of the isparql query language that is based on a xed ontology.
all of these approaches require the user to express as part of the query how the information links together.alternatively some systems have automatically linked different kinds of software development project information.
hipikat uses a xed schema to mine information from software project repositories and provides a developer multiple entry points into the created web of information .
the step in system extends hipikat by including information on programmers .
deep intellisense automatically displays information relevant to a selected source code element such as change events and the people involved .
these approaches are oriented at accessing one view of integrated information.
hipikat for instance can recommend artifacts related to a provided starting artifact.
in contrast our approach focuses on allowing the user to compose and view di erent kinds of project information to support the many questions that arise during a work day.
ferret by de alwis and murphy supports the composition of di erent perspectives called spheres in their approach on similar information.
for example a sphere representing source code can be composed with a sphere representing dynamic information about the system to help a developer investigate such properties as which calls between methods are actually occurring in a run of the system.
their approach focuses on matching similar elements between spheres whereas our approach aims to support the composition of di erent kinds of information for which links can be automatically determined.
our model also supports the user in varying the presentation of composed information to enable a suitable interpretation for the task at hand.
the work presented in this paper augments and extends concepts we presented earlier with empirical evidence for both the problem and the e ectiveness of our approach and by presenting details of the underlying model.
.
developers questions earlier studies have considered questions developers ask during a software development project.
four recent studies provide the most comprehensive question catalogs.
two of these catalogs focus largely on questions about source code.
sillito and colleagues described questions that developers ask when programming .
de alwis and murphy identi ed questions from literature blogs and their own experience that deal largely with source code .
the other two studies discuss questions about a broader set of software development activities.
ko and colleagues report on types of questions determined by shadowing professional developers at work .
latoza and colleagues propose problems from their own experience as software developers and present the results of a survey of professional developers about the seriousness of each problem.
a number of these question types and problems require multiple kinds of information to answer and have multiple possible interpretations.
neither of these two studies talks about the ambiguity that lies in the interpretation of questions such as what have my coworkers been while abstraction helps in understanding the question space it is the detailed questions that the developer needs answered.
to determine the speci c questions developers need answered that span di erent kinds of information we interviewed eleven experienced software developers.
we learned about questions that the developers face and about the di erences in the interpretation of very similar questions.
to ease presentation we use the term domain in the remainderof the paper to refer to information of a particular kind such as the domain of bug reports or the domain of source code.
.
subjects and interview process we conducted open interviews with eleven professional developers from three di erent sites of one company.
these developers represented a spectrum of roles and experience.
the roles ranged from junior developer to team leads.
the experience of these developers ranged from to years.
in a pilot for this study we asked developers directly about questions requiring information from multiple domains that occur for them during development.
through the pilot we found that the developers had di culty understanding the kinds of questions that might meet this criteria.
thus we changed the interview method to start with a brief demonstration of a small tool we built that enabled the composition of source code change sets work items1 and team information.
our intent in showing this prototype was to stimulate developers to think about questions that might arise when such composition is possible.
we asked the developer to describe such questions and how he would want them answered.
throughout the interview we adapted our questions to the scenarios the developer described.
each interview session was between and minutes depending on the developer s availability and responsiveness.
throughout each session the interviewer the rst author of this paper took handwritten notes.
we parsed our notes looking for the questions developers stated as well as the meaning of the questions to the developers.
.
interview results from the eleven interviews we determined questions that span across multiple domains.
only one of the questions was stated by two di erent developers the other questions were stated by one developer each.
for space reasons table lists of the questions.2these questions span eight domains of information source code sc change sets chs teams t work items wi web sites and wiki pages ww comments on work items3 co exception stack traces st and test cases tc .
table shows which domains based on developer statements are needed to answer each question.
for ease of reading we have grouped the questions into categories that roughly correspond to the domains needed to answer the questions.
some questions are annotated with a which denotes questions explicitly stated by at least one developer.
all other questions are interpretations we have made as the interviewed developer either gave a long statement to describe the scenario or more context was needed to be able to state the question.
the majority of the questions of the are based on the domains we presented in our demonstration at the start of the interview the remaining questions incorporate a domain we did not present.
in our interviews we focused on the variety and richness of questions rather than their frequency.
from the interviews we determined that some of these questions are looked at a couple of times a day such as what classes have been changed?
.
on other questions developers spend a lot more time.
one developer stated that he spends of his 1work items are similar to bugs issues or tasks.
3based on the developers statements we considered emails as being equivalent to comments.time on the question which conversations in work items have i been mentioned?
to make sure he does not block other developers from working.
without an extensive eld study it is not possible to measure exactly how often each of these questions arises throughout a work day or week or how much time a developer spends on each of these questions.
some of the questions sound very similar in their wording but their answer di ers depending on the individual interpretation of the developer.
for example even though the two questions who is working on what?
and what have people been working on?
seem very similar the answer to question uses the four domains sc chs t and wi whereas the answer to question uses only the two domains t and wi.
a lot of the questions also require the same domains to be answered.
however the developers expressed wanting the presentation of the answer in di erent ways.
who is working on what?
and what classes has my team been working on?
both require information on sc chs t and wi to lead to a meaningful answer.
however based on developers statements who is working on what?
should display the team members rst and the work they have done below with the changed source code last whereas what classes has my team been working on?
the developer wanted to see the elements in the opposite order.
in table and are two blocks of such questions where the questions require the same domains but di erent presentations.
a last subtlety comes with the selection of the actual information.
similar questions often just di er in small details of the information of relevance.
however this di erence in uences the size of the result and the ease of interpreting it.
for example what has changed between two builds and who has changed it?
as well as who has made changes to my classes?
require information from the same domains.
the latter question is however only looking for classes the developer is working on whereas the rst refers to all classes of the project.
.
threats because of di culties we had getting subjects to articulate questions involving multiple domains in this study we stimulated developers to think about such questions by demonstrating a very early version of the tool we subjected to later testing section .
this demonstration may have biased developers to state questions answerable with our approach.
we believe this threat to validity is small as other researchers have found similar questions e.g.
adding credence to these being questions developers ask when working.
the list of questions we present is partial and is not representative of all multi domain questions a developer may ask.
.
information fragment model to enable a developer to answer the wide range of questions that can arise we introduce a model that supports the composition and presentation of information fragments.
.
example of use we introduce our model by showing how it can be used to answer the question what have people been working on?
question in table .
we use a simpli ed version of this example to present our approach succinctly.table developers questions and the operators and domains for desired answers question explicitly stated by a developer id identifier matching t text matching question operator source code change sets teams work items comments web wiki stack traces test cases who is working on what people speci c .
who is working on what?
idxx x x .
what are they working on right now?
idxx x x .
how much work people done?
idxx x x .
who changed this focused on person?
idxx x x .
who to assign a code review to?
who has the knowledge to do the code review?
idxx x x .
what have people been working on?
id xx .
which code reviews have been assigned to which person?
id xx changes to the code code speci c .
what is the evolution of the code?
idxx x x .
why were they introduced?
idxx x x .
who made a particular change and why?
idxx x x .
what classes has my team been working on?
idxx x x .
what are the changes on newly resolved work items related to me?
idxx x x .
who is working on the same classes as i am and for which work item?
idxx x x .
what has changed between two builds who has changed it?
idxx x .
who has made changes to my classes?
idxx x .
who is using that api ?
idxx x .
who created the api ?
idxx x .
who owns this piece of code?
who modi ed it the latest?
idxx x .
who owns this piece of code?
who modi ed it most?
idxx x .
who to talk to if you have to work with packages you haven t worked with?
idxx x .
what classes have been changed?
idxx .
api has changed to see which methods are not supported any more ?
idxx .
what s the most popular class?
idxx .
which other code that i worked on uses this code pattern utility function?
idxx .
which code has recently changed that is related to me?
idxx .
how do recently delivered changes a ect changes that i am working on?
idxx .
what code is related to a change?
idxx work item progress .
what is the recent activity on a plan item?
id x x .
which features and functions have been changing?
id x x .
has progress been made on blockers blocking work items in your milestone?
id x x .
is progress changes being made on plan items?
id x x broken builds .
what caused this build to break?
which change caused the stack trace?
idxx x .
who caused this build to break?
who owns the broken tests?
idxx x x .
who changed the test case most recently that caused the build to fail?
idxx x x .
which changes caused the tests to fail and thus the build to break?
idxx xx test cases .
who owns a test case?
who resolved the last work item that xed the test case?
idxx x x x .
how do test cases relate to packages classes?
idx x