singapor e management univ ersity singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity resear ch collection school of computing and information systems school of computing and information systems awareness .
sta ying awar e of pr ojects de velopers and tasks awareness .
sta ying awar e of pr ojects de velopers and tasks using dashboar ds and f eeds using dashboar ds and f eeds christ oph treude singapor e management univ ersity ctreude smu.edu.sg margaret anne st orey follow this and additional works at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch part of the softwar e engineering commons citation citation treude christ oph and st orey mar garet anne.
a wareness .
sta ying awar e of pr ojects de velopers and tasks using dashboar ds and f eeds.
.
icse pr oceedings of the 32nd a cm ieee international conf erence on softwar e engineering cape t own south africa ma y .
.
available at available at https ink.libr ary.smu.edu.sg sis r esear ch this conf erence pr oceeding ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the school of computing and information systems at institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
it has been accepted for inclusion in resear ch collection school of computing and information systems b y an authoriz ed administr ator of institutional k nowledge at singapor e management univ ersity .
for mor e information please email cher ylds smu.edu.sg .
awareness .
staying aware of projects developers and tasks using dashboards and feeds christoph treude margaret anne storey dept.
of computer science university of victoria ctreude uvic.ca mstorey uvic.ca abstract software development teams need to maintain awareness of various di erent aspects ranging from overall project status and process bottlenecks to current tasks and incoming artifacts.
currently there is a lack of theoretical foundations to guide tool selection and tool design to best support awareness tasks.
in this paper we explore how the combination of highly con gurable project team and contributor dashboards along with individual event feeds is used to accomplish extensive awareness.
our results stem from an empirical study of several large development teams with a detailed study of a team of developers and additional data from another four project teams.
we present how dashboards become pivotal to task prioritization in critical project phases and how they stir competition while feeds are used for short term planning.
our ndings indicate that the distinction between high level and low level awareness is often unclear and that integrated tooling could improve development practices.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming environments integrated environments general terms human factors management keywords collaboration dashboards feeds web .
awareness .
introduction and motivation the success of software projects largely depends on the effectiveness of communication and coordination within teams .
as the complexity of software systems increases maintaining awareness of the overall status of a project and gaining an understanding of current bottlenecks in the process permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may cape town south africa copyright acm ... .
.becomes a challenge.
awareness tools that display information solely based on source code become insu cient as individual developers need to take on managerial tasks.
rather than source code alone the status of the project arises from an aggregation of data on open and closed development tasks successful and failed builds delivered and pending changes and successful and failed tests as well as evolutionary information.
in recent years development environments are becoming more advanced with respect to awareness support.
in particular ibm s jazz software development environment includes feeds and dashboards that aggregate data to improve awareness of high level and low level aspects.
however with these advances comes the need to further our understanding of what the most appropriate toolset is .
research on collaborative environments often draws on both software engineering and computer supported cooperative work cscw .
most of the related work on awareness tools for software development has focused on low level codespeci c tasks rather than higher levels of abstraction .
there is still a lack of understanding of how to achieve highlevel awareness of project management issues with low level awareness of more ne grained activities such as source code changes and development task creation.
in this paper we report on an empirical study of several development teams and their use of dashboards and feeds in day to day development activities.
these teams use ibm s jazz as a development platform.
jazz o ers web based dashboards for projects teams and individual contributors.
the dashboards are highly con gurable and o er many di erent kinds of widgets.
figure shows an example of a dashboard in jazz.
jazz also provides several feeds to keep developers updated on events such as build results modi cations to tasks or incoming tasks and approvals.
while we did not explicitly expect to see awareness as the main theme of this research it emerged during our study of how and why these tools are used.
with our study we aim to assist managers and developers in their decisions about using awareness tools in software development projects.
we examine the role of dashboards and feeds in supporting development activities and we investigate what advantages and disadvantages are associated with these tools as well as how their combination impacts collaborative development.
while many research tools aiming to provide awareness of some sort have been implemented only very few have been evaluated in an industry setting and there is no comprehensive theory on awareness needs and the interplay of awareness tools in software engineer365figure sample dashboard in jazz ing.
studying the early adoption of dashboards and feeds in jazz presents a unique opportunity to start to contribute to knowledge on how an integrated development environment ide should provide a comprehensive mechanism for awareness.
to gain an understanding of the role that dashboards and feeds play in awareness we gathered data through the inspection of project repositories by conducting interviews with developers and project managers and through a webbased survey.
our main contribution is the identi cation of the di erent ways in which dashboards and feeds as provided by jazz support awareness in software development and how the interplay of these tools provides awareness on di erent levels.
we also suggest tool enhancements based on the results of our study.
the remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
in section we discuss related work on awareness in collaborative software development and lightweight tool support.
we introduce dashboards and feeds in section .
our research questions and methodology are presented in section .
section comprises the main part of this research and describes how dashboards and feeds are used by software developers.
subsequently section discusses our ndings and we identify limitations of our work in section .
our work is concluded in section .
.
background and related work work related to our research can be divided into two areas research on awareness in collaborative software development and research on lightweight tools to support social development processes.
our study can be seen as the intersection of these areas exploring lightweight tool support with the emergent theme of awareness.
.
awareness in software development maintaining awareness of each other s activities the overall project status and current tasks is challenging as it is not limited to simple metrics based on source code or the ful llment of a single plan item.
dourish and bellotti de ne awareness as an understanding of the activities of others which provides a context for your own activity .
in complex software development processes awareness includes being aware of technical and social aspects of the development as well as current and upcoming articulation work .
depending on the context of the task at hand the required granularity of this awareness can vary signi cantly.
many researchers have recognized awareness as an essential part of collaborative software development and collaborative work in general.
in their studies on groupware gutwin et al.
found a need for workspace awareness to sustain e ective team cognition and detailed awareness of one another .
awareness can be maintained in an active or in a passive manner.
while active mechanisms require the explicit generation of awareness data such as directed messages passive awareness exploits information already available in a shared workspace .
even if achieved passively maintaining awareness of other s activities and the project status is time consuming but it is indispensable in the construction of mental models of a software project .
tool implementations that support awareness have traditionally focused on source code and information available from source code management systems.
an early example is seesoft a software visualization that maps each line of source code to a thin row and uses colours to indicate changes.
augur adds software development activities to a seesoft style visualization thus allowing for the exploration of relationships between artifacts and activities.
366fastdash uses a representation of a shared code base to highlight current activities aggregated at the level of les and methods.
the workspace awareness tool palant r follows a similar approach by providing insight into workspaces of other developers in particular artifact changes.
these tools allow for insights regarding the current activities in a project.
however in large projects they often fail to provide an overview of the overall status of a project.
researchers have recognized this challenge and have started to develop tools that allow for higher level insights.
social health overview works at the level of change requests and mines the history of development artifacts to reveal social and historical patterns in the development process.
cruisecontrol1achieves high level insights through the use of a dashboard that focuses on builds rather than source code.
the world view in palant r also addresses awareness in the large .
it provides a comprehensive view of the team dynamics of a project in particular regarding the geographical location of developers.
most of these tools lack evaluation in industry settings.
a notable exception is wipdash a large screen visualization for small co located teams designed to increase awareness of tasks and source code activity.
wipdash was evaluated with two small teams during a one week eld study.
in contrast the teams in our study have been using the jazz awareness tooling for at least one year.
studying the use of dashboards and feeds in several large projects using jazz provides a unique opportunity to examine the role awareness tools play in software development.
as jazz is the rst environment to tightly integrate these awareness tools into the ide it also allows us to study the interplay of awareness tools rather than to examine isolated features.
.
lightweight tool support research on lightweight tools to support social development processes is not yet far advanced.
after the success of web .
and its lightweight collaboration and communication mechanisms such as wikis blogs tags and feeds software developers and researchers have started to ask how these mechanisms can be transferred into software development.
for the social aspects of team based development practices lightweight collaboration and an architecture of participation are promising.
annotating artifacts is one of the mechanisms associated with web .
.
in our previous work we explored how task annotations and tagging support informal individual team and community processes in software development including life cycle management task assignment and task categorization.
websites such as delicious2and facebook3have found counterparts in software development.
for example dogear introduces the idea of social bookmarking for large enterprises and codebook uses the approach of facebook for software development.
here we explore two further web .
mechanisms and their use in software development dashboards and feeds.
.
dashboards and feeds in this section we introduce the functionality of dashboards and feeds as they are implemented in ibm s jazz.
dashboards dashboards are information resources that support distributed cognition they are crucial to many business intelligence applications .
dashboards in the jazz ide are displayed and con gured using the web interface.
they are intended to provide information at a glance and to allow easy navigation to more complete information.
by default each project and each team within a project have their own dashboard and an individual dashboard is created for each developer when they rst open their web interface.
figure shows an example dashboard.
a dashboard consists of several viewlets .
viewlets are rectangular widgets displaying information about some aspect of a project.
each viewlet is an instance of a viewlet type .
the actual content shown in a viewlet depends on the viewlet type e.g.
visual representations of the current workload or a list of members on a team as well as the way the particular instance has been con gured.
developers can add viewlets to their dashboards and con gure the viewlets using di erent parameters.
while the list of available viewlet types is constantly expanding table shows common viewlets at the time of our study with a short description.
viewlets can be organized into di erent tabs within a single dashboard.
by default dashboards only display general purpose viewlets containing information about developers and teams and links to general feeds.
in addition to individual customizations of dashboards project managers or component leads can customize the default settings.
it is intended that the development manager of a project is in charge of updating the project dashboard the component leads are responsible for the team dashboards and individual developers change their own dashboards.
.
feeds for awareness on the basis of events jazz provides feeds.
feeds can either be displayed in the client application or as a viewlet as part of a web based dashboard.
the most common way to view feeds is through the team central view in the client application.
figure shows an example.
team central is not accessible through the web interface.
team central is organized into multiple sections that are updated continually with the latest events.
by default team central displays a bar chart of current work for the signedin developer by priority.
the event log in the middle of the view s default con guration shows feeds.
these are con gured to include build events for all teams that the signed in figure the team central view in jazz 367developer is part of work item4changes that are pertinent to the signed in developer and changes to teams.
developers can add or remove feeds and lter events to personalize their event log.
in addition incoming events are displayed as small popup windows in the client application.
unlike dashboards feeds and team central do not o er functionality for sharing sections views or events.
.
research methodology this section identi es our research questions and describes the study setting and data collection methods.
.
research questions our research questions focus on how and why awareness tools are used as well as on the impact of awareness tools on software development practices .
what is the role of dashboards in supporting individual and collaborative software engineering activities?
a how are dashboards adopted and adapted?
b why are dashboards used and which roles do they support?
c which individual and collaborative processes do dashboards support?
d how does the use of dashboards evolve over the life cycle of a project?
.
what is the role of feeds in supporting individual and collaborative software engineering activities?
a how are feeds adopted and adapted?
b why are feeds used and which roles do they support?
c how does the use of feeds evolve over the life cycle of a project?
.
what is the impact of dashboards and feeds on development practices?
.
what are potential tool enhancements?
.
methodology in the following paragraphs we outline the setting of our research as well as the data collection methods we used.
.
.
research setting our study took place with several development teams from ibm.
we conducted a detailed study using archival data semi structured interviews and a web based survey with one team while the other teams were only invited to participate in the survey.
the team of our detailed case study develops the jazz platform and consists of approximately contributors in about functional teams with some teams acting as sub teams of larger teams and many contributors assigned to multiple teams.
the team members are located at locations worldwide primarily in north america and europe.
the developers have been using jazz for more than three years and follow the eclipse way development process .
this process developed by the eclipse 4in other development environments work items are known as bug reports modi cation requests or change requests.development team is an agile iteration based process with a focus on consistent on time delivery of software through continuous integration testing and incremental planning.
in addition the survey was sent out to jazz users that are not part of the jazz development team.
they have been using jazz for about one year and mostly develop business intelligence and nancial applications.
not all of these additional developers follow agile development processes.
they work on four interrelated projects.
we focused our analysis on development teams using jazz because it is the rst development environment that tightly integrates dashboards and feeds.
thus it allows for early insights into the role that these tools can play in collaborative software development.
.
.
data collection our methodology followed a mixed method approach collecting both quantitative and qualitative data to allow for triangulation.
to gather quantitative data on the con guration of dashboards we accessed the repositories of the detailed case study team and extracted all dashboards along with the viewlets used and their con gurations.
we analyzed dashboards containing a total of viewlets.
at the time of our extraction in june the team was working on the .
release of their product.
for the detailed case we collected qualitative data through a series of interviews and a web based survey.
we conducted a total of nine interviews with the development manager the project administrator one component lead and six developers from ve di erent component teams.
the web based survey was given to both the developers in our detailed case and the developers in the other teams.
it allowed us to reach signi cantly more participants than through interviews.
we received responses from the developers in our detailed case response rate and responses from other developers response rate .
of our respondents identi ed themselves as contributors were component leads nine were development managers and six were project administrators.
the questions asked in our survey and interviews were similar.
both the survey and the interview scripts contained about questions on participants use of feeds and dashboards.
questions inquired about the frequency of use as well as the reasons for using these tools.
we investigated which viewlet types were mainly used in dashboards and which sections were mainly used in team central and we inquired about the reasons behind those usage patterns.
we asked about tool enhancement requests and inquired about the impact of dashboards and feeds.
we also sought information about the participants roles and the teams development practices.
about half of the survey questions required a free form response while the remaining ones were yes no or multiple choice questions5.
respondents were allowed to skip questions.
in contrast to the survey the interviews allowed for clari cation questions.
in addition one of our researchers spent ve months onsite frequently having informal discussions with developers regarding their use of dashboards and feeds while also facilitating member checking of our ndings.
the ndings gained from our data collection were mirrored in his observations.
5the survey questions are available online at .
.
findings this section presents the study ndings organized by our research questions.
.
the role of dashboards in a rst step to answer our rst research question we report the number of dashboards and viewlets to establish the content of a typical dashboard.
then to add to the small body of empirical research on awareness we report the reasons for dashboard use and the processes they support.
.
.
adoption and adaption of dashboards of the participants that answered the corresponding question on our survey indicated that they use dashboards and indicated they do not use them at all.
how dashboards are used varies signi cantly depending on the role of the user.
while both the project administrator and the development manager in our detailed case study answered that they look at dashboards at least once a day only respondents were able to recall the last time they looked at a dashboard.
out of these dashboard users two had used a dashboard within the last minutes before lling out our survey and another four had used dashboards within the last hour.
seven participants indicated that they had used a dashboard within the last hours and respondents looked at a dashboard within the last week.
of the dashboards in our detailed case two were project level dashboards belonged to teams and the remaining belonged to individual contributors.
while out of contributors owned only one personal dashboard there were cases in which contributors created more than one dashboard.
that was particularly the case for developers that were part of several teams.
table number of viewlets per dashboard viewlets dashboards the number of viewlets per dashboard is shown in table .
the majority of dashboards contain ve or six viewlets which is the number of viewlets included in the default congurations ve for contributors and six for teams .
table identi es the most used viewlet types partitioned by the scope of project team and contributor.
viewlets either show information on project members e.g.
about me and team members on artifacts e.g.
work item statisticsand builds or on events e.g.
feeds or they display static content e.g.
bookmarks and description .
overall the most used viewlet types are feeds andwork item statistics.work item statistics display a graphical representation of the results of one work item query visualized by one parameter.
data can be presented as bar chart pie chart tag cloud or table.
on the project level feeds and reports are the most common viewlets while work items and workitem statistics account for most viewlets on the team level.
figure shows examples of the six most used viewlet types.
by default a contributor dashboard displays instructions on how to customize it an about me viewlet and a feed for a jazz newsgroup along with two bookmarks viewlets.
a default team dashboard shows customization instructions an html team description a feed for team events the team members and plans andbuilds for the team.
these defaults can be adjusted per project and per team but we found that managers and component leads rarely used that opportunity.
dashboards are individually customized instead.
it is impossible to report the default viewlets among the common viewlets as some viewlets may be part of the default con guration but have been individually customized by developers e.g.
by subscribing to a di erent feed.
.
.
reasons and roles for dashboard use the reasons for dashboard use can be categorized into project awareness and individual convenience.
gaining a high level overview of the project status was named times in our survey and in six out of the nine interviews we conducted that s what dashboards are for to give you this sort of overall high level view of things it is a faster way than running separate work item queries to see which items are in need of attention.
this high level overview was found to be particularly useful when looking at releases.
in fact we found that project and team dashboards were often organized by releases with a separate tab for each release it s really looking at the release at a glance.
all the plan items that we have committed to the open vs. closed some of our burndown and statistics broken down by team.
the ability to produce high level overviews is especially important for project managers the development manager that s the perfect person to be using the dashboards cause that s what you want you want to be reporting things all the time based on a lot of data.
in addition to the awareness of the project status dashboards help with awareness of other developers and teams and their current focus i then found it also helped to give a peripheral awareness of how the other teams were which i would not have had if i just ran the query for the items.
dashboards also help with the identi cation of bottlenecks in the development process there were so many things going on late in the game in that i was relying on that in some respects too.
in the timing meetings someone would say hey there s still these items showing up on the dashboard for is somebody looking at them?
as you re getting towards the end you re paying more close attention to the last few remaining items as you wind down and having high level awareness of what those are and what state they re in is good.
dashboards are used for nding out about work items that need to be xed or addressed at the end of a development phase.
for project managers dashboards provide the opportunity to compare teams against each other and make differences between teams visible one of the reasons i use them a lot is for showing the teams against one another cause it sort of encourages a bit of a competitive thing.
because when you show defects for example no one wants to be the team that s at the top of the list.
for individual convenience some viewlets allow for navigation to the underlying queries and work items by clicking 369table number of viewlets per viewlet type type project team individual sum description feeds internal or external feed work item statistics chart of work item query result work items result of work item query reports prede ned reports bookmarks customizable list of bookmarks html snippet of html mark up work item queries links to executable queries about me information about a contributor builds noti cations from the build engine team members list of contributors with roles plans progress of plan for an iteration description description of a project or team area other e.g.
server status list of sub teams sum on the data.
out of the participants in our survey who answered the corresponding question indicated that they use dashboards for navigation i just use that as a shortcut so i don t have to go and remember the number.
sometimes work items are speci cally agged using the tagging feature for work items to increase their visibility and to make sure that they show up on a dashboard there s things that we speci cally track.
for example when we were the cycle and we wanted to track a speci c issue we put a tracking tag on it so that it would show up here it just raised the visibility of it.
three out of our nine interviewees use dashboards as a work item inbox in part because of the compact presentation i waste less time navigating through work item queries for things i need to do because they are all on one page.
we asked our participants if the information displayed in dashboards was otherwise available.
all participants agreed that it was but added that it was much easier to access it through the dashboards yes but just not as easily.
because every one of these is based on a query and all you are really is just categorizing things showing them with a particular view.
it s just that you can t get that instantaneous summary of the information especially if you ve got thousands and thousands that s di cult.
while project and team awareness is tentatively more important for project managers and component leads and individual convenience is the main use case for developers it is hard to separate these roles partly because individuals often do not clearly belong to one group or the other.
out of the respondents that identi ed themselves as contributors in our survey only stated that they spend of their time on development activities.
of the contributors indicated that they spend or less of their time on development activities.
at the same time of these contributors spend or more of their time on project management activities.
.
.
dashboards support individual and collaborative processes in jazz there are dashboards for three di erent scopes project team and contributor.
these dashboards are entirely separate.
we found that the dashboards that are used regularly are almost exclusively project and team dash boards.
personal dashboards are usually left in their default con guration which shows the roles of the developer along with web links and newsgroups.
with the current con guration default dashboards have practically no value beyond indicating team membership.
an interesting case where dashboards support an individual process is the use of feeds viewlets by one developer considering that feeds are also available in the client application having that viewlet has saved me a couple of times where i ve been wanting to look at the work item inbox from home and i didn t have the eclipse client so my usual path wasn t available to me.
so i used the feed viewlet.
developers and managers customize dashboards for their own bene t but also do so to communicate important insights to their teams it s not just stu for me.
i often put dashboards up for things that are not actually things that i care so much about but they re things that i know the teams will care about or that i want them to care about.
as dashboards are web pages it is easy to share them and to send links to dashboards to other project members.
this opportunity is used frequently by managers and component leads using tools such as instant messaging or mailing lists posting links to dashboard pages on the project wiki or using dashboards to follow along during planning calls.
when communicating the current status of a project to executives dashboards are also used often we go to some executive meeting and they would say for example there might be bugs outstanding and they d say what insurance can you give us all this stu is going to be xed?
and i could say look in this week cycle we xed bugs so really xing is not a big deal.
.
.
dashboards evolve over project life cycle as mentioned before project and team dashboards often contain release speci c information.
a prominent example is given by this quote during the cycle we had this middle column which is called the must x column which is basically all the defects that have to be xed for the release.
and everything else is well it s important but it s not as important as what s in here.
and people were constantly looking at those to see who has stu that needs to be xed.
this dependence on releases implies that dashboards have to be changed when a product version has been released so 370now as we re starting all this new work this dashboard will probably change a fair bit.
jazz does not o er any means to automate that process cleaning up dashboards is a manual task.
however out of the developers that use dashboards indicated that their use is constant across di erent project phases.
the few exceptions mentioned the endgame i.e.
the last cycle of the project before a release.
.
the role of feeds this section looks at a ner granular awareness tool feeds.
since the data on the use of feeds by developers is not stored on a central server our ndings below are based on the results from our interviews and our survey.
.
.
adoption and adaption of feeds feeds can be accessed through the team central view through dashboards and through a couple of other mechanisms in the client application such as e mail noti cations.
out of participants indicated they made use of the team central view cf.
figure and only out of participants that answered this question indicated that they use feeds outside of team central .
when asked what was the last time they looked at team central nine looked at it in the last minutes seven in the last hour nine in the last hours in the last week and did not remember when they last accessed team central .
the feed that most developers look at is the my work item changes feed an event feed of changes to work items that the signed in developer owns created modi ed or is subscribed to.
only two developers took advantage of the opportunity to create their own custom feeds e.g.
based on individual work item queries.
.
.
reasons and roles for feed use feeds are primarily used to track work at a small scale .
the majority of participants who answered the corresponding question in our survey indicated that they use feeds to see what work items are updated and new ones coming in quickly and easily.
then the work items that catch interest are expanded.
feeds are similar to e mail noti cations in other systems.
in fact a reason to use feeds is because it allows to turn o all work item related e mail.
the event log in team central is largely seen as a personal inbox that is primarily used to answer the question what should i do next?
and thus helps developers plan their day.
it also helps to quickly get information such as the due date of a particular feature.
the other sections of team central in particular the team load section are used frequently to get information on the overall status of a team.
team central and feeds are also used by new developers on a team to get an overview of what the team is working on and to understand common work practices .
we found no di erence in the use of feeds between di erent development roles.
while feeds support collaborative work how they are used is not shared with other team members.
.
.
feeds evolve over project life cycle the extent to which developers use team central is mostly constant across di erent project phases.
out of answers only participants in our survey indicated that their use ofteam central is not constant over time.
the exceptions were developers who are fairly new to developing software in jazz and thus were unsure how the view works.
.
the impact of dashboards and feeds awareness tools increase the transparency in collaborative software development.
as mentioned in section .
.
competition between teams is one of the reasons dashboards are used by managers and component leads.
they are aware of the peer pressure e ect that arises from this competition and they see it as one of the bene ts of using dashboards that s partly why we use them they de nitely do .
i mean it increases the exposure and the visibility a great deal.
an executive is probably unlikely to be going in writing a query or browsing around in the work items but it s easy for them just to go here and just right away see.
competition is usually seen as a good thing the need to look like you are making progress is useful.
any peer pressure is based on data that already exists i mean we re showing data that s already there it s just making it visible at a glance.
developers and managers are aware that dashboards can only be as good as the data that they display i.e.
peer pressure should not occur because of outdated or incorrect data the problem is work items are only as good as the data that s in the work items and the way they re being led so obviously if all of this is going to be useful we need to ensure that the data that s in the open work items is useful too.
if you try to manage purely by numbers then that s a big mistake.
you ve got to always be applying common sense.
in some cases correcting steps are taken so that the dashboards and feeds are not misleading sometimes we have to put those caveats on things.
for example there would be something and would show some team with a really long bar.
sometimes there are reasons for that.
just because one team has a lot more defects than another that doesn t necessarily mean that the quality of that component is any worse.
it is worth noting that when we asked developers in our survey if they would alter their work practices because of information displayed in dashboards out of participants who responded to that question answered no.
however we noted that some developers look at dashboards to compare team activities just knowing that you re not the component that s on the critical path for number of bugs remaining.
whether awareness tools are distracting or not largely depends on their use of push vs. pull mechanisms.
none of our respondents found dashboards distracting in particular because they are not part of the client application but are displayed in a web browser instead you ve got to go there to look at them.
of course you could choose not to look at them.
i guess one thing that can happen is just in terms of the amount of noise or information on them sometimes people go there and they re going looking for one particular thing and they re seeing a thousand other things going on.
feeds were sometimes considered to be distracting.
six out of respondents found that they receive irrelevant event noti cations.
on the other hand some developers consciously try to limit unimportant changes and combine them into one change to reduce the number of events.
.
potential tool enhancements .
.
enhancements for dashboards one of our ndings is that developers are often unaware of the full functionality of dashboards.
in these cases our study sometimes helped to raise awareness of features.
two of our interviewees changed their dashboard con guration 371during the interviews because they learned about the available functionality.
while it is di cult to make developers work through the complete list of features the utility of dashboards could be made more apparent by adding advanced default dashboards .
the same applies on a more ne grained level to di erent settings for particular viewlets.
we found that developers were often unaware of some of the available settings e.g.
visualization and feed con guration settings.
again default viewlets could help communicate the full utility of the dashboard functionality.
developers often miss support for dashboards in the client applications .
an integration would enable them to open links to artifacts in the client instead of the web browser.
in addition more inbox functionality would improve the usefulness of interactions with dashboards.
developers who use dashboards to check events requested that events would disappear from the viewlets once read.
also more information such as upcoming builds milestones or feature freezes and pending approvals should be easier to access.
in dashboards with more than one tab tabs often get missed because they are not obvious to the user.
in this case it would be helpful to show an overview of the available tabs rather than the rst page by default or to o er ltering mechanisms such as only displaying tabs pertinent to a certain release.
there were also requests to improve the visualizations in dashboards.
for example to compare open vs. closed work items per team two viewlets need to be created one for open work items and one for closed work items.
having a stacked chart showing both would save screen real estate and make comparisons easier.
with the heavy reliance of many project and team dashboards on the release cycle it should also be possible to let viewlets or whole tabs expire when a new version of a product has been shipped.
this would help to avoid having outdated information on dashboards.
it is impossible to unite data from di erent projects into one dashboard right now.
for developers working on more than one project at the same time a common occurrence this is a major shortcoming.
.
.
enhancements for feeds most of the enhancement suggestions for feeds and team central involve adding additional information and perspectives to the tooling.
a burndown view that shows a graphical representation of remaining work vs. time was requested several times along with schedules general announcements and a section focusing on quality control.
for work item feeds it would be useful to identify relationships between tasks that are a ected by events.
when a sub task is completed the tool should show which parent task it belongs to.
it would also be useful to o er more lter options for feeds.
in particular it should be possible to distinguish between items that require action such as failed builds and items that do not require any action such as successful builds.
alternatively the number of events can be limited by grouping events that belong together.
this is already implemented for some cases but can further be improved.
for some developers the reason not to look at feeds in their team central view is the time interval for the auto reloads of the event log section.
enabling e mail noti cations usually displays events faster than the event log.since the layout of team central and the con guration of speci c feeds are not stored on a central server they are lost whenever a new version of the client application is installed or whenever a developer switches clients.
for many developers this is a reason not to con gure their views.
switching between team central and dashboards is tedious and could be avoided by having an analog to team central in the web interface .
.
discussion this section discusses our ndings and identi es future directions for tool designers.
reliance on informal tool features for critical phases.
one of our least expected ndings is the reliance of developers and managers on dashboards in the most critical project phase the endgame right before a release.
the project teams in our study used dashboards to stay aware of bottlenecks in the process and work items that needed to be closed before the shipping date.
in fact the defects to be xed before a release were identi ed using a combination of informal mechanisms work items were tagged with mustx to indicate their importance and then dashboards and feeds were used to track the state of those work items.
in one of the dashboards a must x column was implemented that only showed viewlets based on the must x tag and feeds were used to see state changes of the must x items in real time.
this reliance on informal tools demonstrates both the versatility and the reliability of informal tools in software development.
informal tools can be used to organize artifacts in a lightweight manner and to support tasks that do not occur every day.
relationship between dashboards and feeds.
there are three main di erences between dashboards and feeds granularity privacy andcon gurability .
even though it is possible to make dashboards private most developers share dashboards with the whole team.
project and team dashboards are shared by default with the entire team.
this is in contrast to feeds in the client application in team central it s a bit too introverted because it s your own view of things and you can t share that with people.
the suggestions for tool enhancements indicate that the relationship between dashboards and feeds is not clear cut.
it was suggested to introduce dashboard functionality into team central in particular burndown views and grouping of events.
at the same time developers requested more inbox functionality for dashboards such as viewlets for incoming work items and work item changes.
implementing these suggestions would result in team centralbeing very similar to dashboards and vice versa.
there are two di erent conclusions possible rst a clear distinction between dashboards and team central .
as one of our interviewees put it there seems to be a split between managers and non managers with regard to their tool use.
this border could be sustained and developers could be required to use dashboards as soon as they are looking for information outside their own work items.
alternatively dashboards andteam central could consciously be aligned to have similar functionality and con gurations.
this could go as far as changes to sections in team central being re ected in dashboards and vice versa.
in the current setting we also 372found that individual dashboards do not have obvious uses unlike team and project dashboards.
individual dashboards often remain unchanged display outdated information such as links to feeds with expired passwords and are rarely used.
the current distinction between overall project status in dashboards and pertinent work item changes in the client application is insu cient as developers and managers need both awareness in the large and in the small but to di erent extents.
an example are the must x work items developers not looking at the project dashboard regularly had to rely on being informed by somebody of the must x tag in order to adjust their priorities.
our results lead us to believe that integrating web based dashboards and team central functionality would solve some enhancement requests and provide a clearer conceptual model of awareness.
dashboards and feeds are ephemeral resources in a software development environment.
the secret of their success in the projects that we observed may lie in the fact that often team memberships and roles turned out to be ephemeral as well.
when developers need to take on tasks of project managers and vice versa a strict distinction between high level awareness and low level awareness is rendered ine ective.
the paradox of choice.
as with many highly con gurable user interfaces dashboard users su er from the paradox of choice.
most developers are unaware of all the options available to them.
this leads to unsatisfactory con gurations and to developers avoiding dashboards due to not understanding their bene ts.
instead of adding more viewlet types and properties removing the least used viewlet types and o ering well designed default con gurations would be a better solution.
towards ides as socially translucent systems.
in their work on socially translucent systems erickson and kellogg suggest that systems that support social processes have three characteristics visibility awareness and accountability .
ides are also systems that support social processes in software development and thus need to be designed with these characteristics in mind.
these issues were clearly evident in our ndings on how dashboards and feeds provide di erent levels of awareness in software development.
many enhancement requests contradict the original intent of the individual features.
when combined the enhancement requests point to the need for one integrated system rather than a set of isolated features to improve awareness and visibility.
research on awareness in collaborative software engineering lacks a theoretical background.
one of the most important themes that came out of our work is the need to design studies that look beyond one individual tool and focus on the interplay of processes artifacts and developers.
we need to evaluate how awareness tools and features are used across di erent dimensions of collaboration and we need to formulate new theories and add to existing theories from the domain of computer supported cooperative work cscw to be able to assist managers and developers in software projects.
.
limitations as with any chosen research methodology there are limitations with our choice of research methods.for usage data on both dashboards and feeds we had to rely on answers from interviews and from our survey.
jazz does not log data on the use of these artifacts.
however a strength of our mixed method approach is that we are able to triangulate ndings obtained through di erent methods.
the large number of respondents in our survey also provides a good basis for our conclusions.
some of the individuals who participated in our survey skipped some of the questions while lling out the survey.
consequently we reported throughout the paper the number of responses to the questions discussed.
another limitation lies in the low response rates to our survey.
however as it is the nature of a large software project that developers do not have much time to spare and since for ethical reasons we did not want the developers to feel coerced to participate we were unable to achieve better response rates.
when the teams started on their projects dashboards were still being improved and new viewlet types were added.
this might have in uenced the speci c usage.
because our detailed case study was conducted with the developers of jazz their willingness to adopt dashboards and feeds might be above average.
however we con rmed our ndings with several non jazz teams.
while the team in our detailed case used an agile development method not all of the additional teams were agile.
we found no di erences between users across the di erent teams and development methods.
our conclusions are limited to how dashboards and feeds are implemented in the jazz environment.
however jazz is the rst development environment supporting con gurable dashboards for every developer and giving a prominent role to feeds thus providing a rst chance to study how such tool features are used.
as more projects and development environments integrate dashboards and feeds additional studies need to be conducted to gain further insights into the use of these awareness tools in software development.
.
conclusions and future work the main contributions of this paper are the identi cation of di erent uses for dashboards and feeds in collaborative software development the discussion of their impact and their interplay as well as concrete suggestions for tool enhancements and integration.
awareness in a software development project is composed of many di erent aspects developers need to stay aware of the overall status of their projects and critical deadlines they need to understand current priorities and bottlenecks in the process they need to know of dependencies between components and teams and they need to be informed of changes to tasks they are working on in a real time manner.
previous e orts have often neglected high level awareness and focused on source code or source code management systems instead.
while the awareness of source code is crucial to software development it is insu cient when development is a team e ort.
developers need to be able to see current plans upcoming deadlines schedules of other team members and critical components.
our research has shown how several teams of developers using ibm s jazz use a combination of feeds and dashboards to maintain awareness of various development aspects dashboards are mainly used to keep track of the overall project status to provide peripheral awareness of the work of other teams and to stir competition between teams.
during critical project phases dashboards also evolve into the central 373entity where priorities of tasks are organized and shared.
therefore dashboards depend largely on the project s life cycle.
feeds are used to track work at a small scale and to plan short term development activities.
as developers need to understand issues that span several teams and components the line between requirements for dashboards and feeds becomes blurred and tool enhancement requests add up to a considerable overlap of both tools.
future work will have to be conducted to identify the ideal toolset for awareness in collaborative software development.
our ndings suggest that such a toolset brings awareness of projects teams and tasks together and no longer separates between awareness in the large and awareness in the small.
.