live api documentation siddharth subramanian laura inozemtseva and reid holmes school of computer science university of waterloo waterloo on canada s23subra lminozem rtholmes uwaterloo.ca abstract application programming interfaces apis provide powerful abstraction mechanisms that enable complex functionality to be used by client programs.
however this abstraction does not come for free understanding how to use an api can be di cult.
while api documentation can help it is often insu cient on its own.
online sites like stack over ow and github gists have grown to ll the gap between traditional api documentation and more example based resources.
unfortunately these two important classes of documentation are independent.
in this paper we describe an iterative deductive method of linking source code examples to api documentation.
we also present an implementation of this method called baker that is highly precise .
and supports both java and javascript.
baker can be used to enhance traditional api documentation with up to date source code examples it can also be used to incorporate links to the api documentation into the code snippets that use the api.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
programming environments general terms languages experimentation keywords source code examples source code search documentation .
introduction using third party libraries can greatly reduce the e ort required to develop a new system.
unfortunately understanding how to use these libraries correctly can be di cult.
while the application programming interface api documentation can be a valuable means of understanding the library it can be insu cient on its own.
one of the permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
.main issues is that the documentation is often out of date.
recent work has con rmed the popular belief that writing documentation and keeping it up to date is very di cult consequently developers ignore the documentation that does exist and declare that code is king .
as a result of this situation developers often turn to online resources such as stack over ow.
parnin et al.
have previously studied online resources and have found that they do a good job of covering apis .
in fact they found that of android classes were referenced in stack over ow answers.
unfortunately there are rarely links between online resources and o cial api documentation the o cial documentation does not link to the examples that could help developers and the examples rarely link to the documentation.
previous work has tried to identify source code