see discussions st ats and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at .researchgate.ne t public ation boosting the performance of flow sensitive points to analysis using value flow conf erence paper sept ember .
.
sour ce dblp citations 92reads author s including lian li instit ute of computing t echnolog y chinese ac ademy of scienc es publica tions citations see profile cristina cif uent es oracle corpor ation publica tions citations see profile all c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y cristina cif uent es on july .
the user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.boosting theperformance of flow sensitivepoints to analysisusing value flow lianli cristina cifuentes nathankeynes oraclelabs brisbane australia lian.li cristina.cifuentes nathan.keynes oracle.c om abstract points to analysis is a fundamental static analysis technique which computes the set of memory objects that a pointer may point to.
many different applications such as securityrelated program analyses bug checking and analyses of multi threaded programs require precise points to information to be effective.
recent work has focused on improving the precision of points to analysis through flow sensitivity and great progress has been made.
however even with all recent progress flow sensitive points to analysis can still be much slower than a flow insensitive analysis.
in this paper we propose a novel method that simplifies flow sensitive points to analysis to a general graph reachability problem in a value flow graph.
the value flow graph summarizes dependencies between pointer variables including those memory dependencies via pointer dereferences.
the points to set for each pointer variable can then be computed as the set of memory objects that can reach it in the graph.
we develop an algorithm to build the value flow graph efficiently by examining the pointed to by set of a memory object i.e.
the set of pointers that point to an object.
the pointed to by information of memory objects is very useful for applications such as escape analysis and information flow analysis.
our approach is intuitive easy to implement and very efficient.
the implementation is around lines of code and it is more efficient than existing flow sensitive points to analyses.
the runtime is comparable with the state of theart flow insensitive points to analysis.
categories andsubjectdescriptors f3.
semantics of programming languages program analysis generalterms precision efficiency .
introduction permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this w ork for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided th at copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and th at copies bearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.
tocop yotherwise to republish topostonserversortoredistributetolists re quirespriorspecific permission and orafee.
esec fse september5 szeged hungary.
copyright2011acm ... .
.points to analysis is a fundamental static analysis technique which computes the set of memory objects abstract locations that a pointer variable may point to.
the pointsto information is often represented in the form of points to sets or points to graphs and such information is a prerequisite for many important problems including security analysis bug checking hardware synthesis and the analysis of multi threaded programs .
the effectiveness and efficiency of such techniques depend heavily on the precision of the pointer information provided.
recent researches have focused on improving the precision of points to analysis through flow sensitivity .
compared to flow insensitive approaches flow sensitive points to analyses respect the execution order of program statements and compute different points to graphs at different program points.
flow sensitive points to analysis has been shown to be beneficial for the above important problems.
however traditionally flow sensitive analysis based on the iterative data flow analysis framework is too costly to be applied.
it is not scalable because of the high cost of conservatively propagating and computing large amounts of pointer information along the control flow graph cfg of a program.
recent research efforts on flow sensitive points to analysis hence have emphasized in avoiding the propagation and computation of unnecessary pointer information to improve performance.
one of the key insights is to employ the static single assignment ssa representation which enables sparse analysis and propagates pointer information from the definition of a variable directly to its corresponding uses i.e.
following the def use chain thus avoiding over conservatively propagation of pointer information.
based on this observation previous work has successfully sped up flow sensitive points to analysis by more than 100x .
however even with this improvement flow sensitive points to analysis can still be much slower compared to its flow insensitive counterpart .
we evaluated the state of the art flow sensitive points to analysis in our experiments for the three benchmarks that it can run to completion it is on average slower than a flowinsensitive one.
in this paper we introduce a novel method for flow sensitive points to analysis based on value flow.
our approach is intuitive easy to implement and very efficient.
the implementation is around lines of code and it is much more efficient than existing flow sensitive points to analyses.
the runtime is comparable with the state of the art flow insensitive points to analysis algorithm .
we achieve the large performance improvement by sim plifying flow sensitive points to analysis to a general graph reachability problem in a value flow graph.
the value flow graph vfg monitors how memory objects flowto pointer variables.
variable ais said to flowto variable bifais assigned to bdirectly via assign statements b a or indirectly via pointer dereferences represented as an edge a bin the graph.
both direct and indirect flows are represented in the graph.
in the vfg for each pointer variable its points to set is the set of memory objects that can reach it.
similarly the set of nodes that are reachable from a memory object node is the set of pointers that can point to it denoted as the pointed to by set of the memory object.
property .variable acan flow to variable bindirectly via pointer dereferences only if ais stored to a memory object first and bis loaded from the same memory object afterwards.
property highlights the key observation of our approach.
based on this property we can build the value flow graph with indirect flows efficiently by computing and examining the pointed to by set for each memory object a stored value can flow to a loaded value only if both targets point to the same memory object i.e.
both targets are from the same pointed to by set of a memory object.
note that the pointed to by information for memory objects is also very useful for many applications such as escape analysis and information flow analysis.
with the value flow graph representation we avoid propagating large points to information along the cfg node or def use chains as in most existing flow sensitive points to analyses and significantly improve the performance.
our analysis is flow sensitive and so is the value flow graph.
different definitions of the same variable in the original program are represented as distinct nodes in the graph as in ssa .
the execution order of statements is also respected when computing direct and indirect value flows.
we have developed an efficient value flow based flow sensitive points to analysis algorithm and implemented it in llvm .
experimental results against several large applications including the opensolaristmoperating system and networking on consolidation with over millions of lines of code loc show that the analysis is as precise as existing flow sensitive analyses for the benchmarks we studied and that it is significantly more efficient than previous work the runtime is comparable with the state of theart flow insensitive points to analysis.
to summarize our contributions are as follows we propose a novel method for flow sensitive points to analysis based on value flow.
our approach not only computes the standard points to information it also computes the pointed to by information for each memory object.
in this work we focus on flow sensitivity only and we do not distinguish different calling contexts at different call sites i.e.
it is context insensitive .
however the proposed method can be naturally extended to be context sensitive.
we highlight the major challenges in our approach and develop an efficient algorithm to build the flowsensitive value flow graph with both direct and indirect value flows of a program.
the algorithm can be easily implemented and adopted in modern compilers.the value flow graph built by our analysis can be used in many value flow based applications including compiler optimizations error detection and software validation .
we implement our algorithm in llvm and demonstrate that it is significantly more efficient than previous approaches.
the performance is comparable with the state of the art flow insensitive points to analysis algorithm .
the rest of the paper is organized as follows section reviews related work.
section introduces flow sensitive pointer analysis in general and explains how it is optimized in ssa.
we describe our proposed approach in section and highlight the major challenges.
section introduces an efficient implementation in detail.
we evaluate our implementation using several large applications in section and section concludes this paper.
.
relatedwork points to analysis is a fundamental static analysis that has been studied extensively in the past .
most existing work focuses on improving the precision of pointsto analysis by being context sensitive while flow sensitivity was previous considered not to be as important .
its importance is only recognized recently and great progress has been made including and some