improving automated source code summarization via an eye tracking study of programmers paige rodeghero collin mcmillan paul w. mcburney nigel bosch and sidney d mello department of computer science and engineering university of notre dame notre dame in usa prodeghe cmc pmcburne pbosch1 sdmello nd.edu abstract source code summarization is an emerging technology for automatically generating brief descriptions of code.
current summarization techniques work by selecting a subset of the statements and keywords from the code and then including information from those statements and keywords in the summary.
the quality of the summary depends heavily on the process of selecting the subset a high quality selection would contain the same statements and keywords that a programmer would choose.
unfortunately little evidence exists about the statements and keywords that programmers view as important when they summarize source code.
in this paper we present an eye tracking study of professional java programmers in which the programmers read java methods and wrote english summaries of those methods.
we apply the ndings to build a novel summarization tool.
then we evaluate this tool and provide evidence to support the development of source code summarization systems.
categories and subject descriptors d. software engineering d. .
software engineering management productivity general terms algorithms documentation keywords source code summaries program comprehension .
introduction programmers spend a large proportion of their time reading and navigating source code in order to comprehend it .
however studies of program comprehension consistently nd that programmers would prefer to focus on small sections of code during software maintenance and try to avoid comprehending the entire system.
the result is that programmers skim source code e.g.
read only method signatures or important keywords permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse june hyderabad andhra pradesh india copyright acm ... .
.to save time .
skimming is valuable because it helps programmers quickly understand the underlying code but the drawback is that the knowledge gained cannot easily be made available to other programmers.
an alternative to skimming code is to read a summary of the code.
a summary consists of a few keywords or a brief sentence that highlight the most important functionality of the code for example record wav les or xml data parsing.
summaries are typically written by programmers such as in leading method comments for javadocs .
these summaries are popular but have a tendency to be incomplete or outdated as code changes .
as a result automated source code summarization tools are emerging as viable techniques for generating summaries without human intervention .
these approaches follow a common strategy choose a subset of keywords or statements from the code and build a summary from this subset.
for example haiduc et al.
described an approach based on automated text summarization using a vector space model vsm .
this approach selects the top nkeywords from java methods according to a term frequency inverse document frequency tf idf formula.
taking a somewhat di erent approach sridhara et al.
designed heuristics to choose statements from java methods and then used keywords from those statements to create a summary using sentence templates .
in this paper we focus on improving the process of selecting the subset of keywords for summaries.
the longterm goal is to have the automated selection process choose the same keywords that a programmer would when writing a summary.
future research in automated summarization could then be dedicated to the summary building phase.
our contribution is three fold.
first we conduct an eyetracking study of java programmers.
during the study the programmers read java methods and wrote summaries for those methods.
second we analyzed eye movements and gaze xations of the programmers to identify common keywords the programmers focused on when reviewing the code and writing the summaries.
this analysis led us to di erent observations about the types of keywords programmers tended to view.
we realized these observations were not su cient enough to prove that only those types of keywords should be included in method summaries.
we then designed a tool that selects keywords from java methods.
finally we compared the keyword selections from our tool to the keywords selected using a state of the art approach .
we found that our tool improved over the state of the art when compared to keyword lists written by human evaluators.permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
copyright is held by the author owner s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
icse may june hyderabad india acm .
the problem we address the following gap in the current program comprehension literature there are no studies of how programmers read and understand source code speci cally for the purpose of summarizing that source code.
this gap presents a signi cant problem for designers of automated source code summarization tools.
without studies to provide evidence about the information that programmers use to create summaries these designers must rely on intuitions and assumptions about what should be included in a summary.
in one solution haiduc et al.
proposed to adapt ideas from textsummarization and developed a tool that creates summaries by treating source code as blocks of natural language text .
moreno et al.
and eddy et al.
have built on this approach and veri ed that it can extract keywords relevant to the source code being summarized.
still a consistent theme across all three of these studies is that di erent terms are relevant for di erent reasons and that additional studies are necessary to understand what programmers prioritize when summarizing code.
another strategy to creating summaries is to describe a high level behavior of the code.
the goal is to connect the summary to a feature or concept which a programmer would recognize.
for example sridhara et al.
create summaries by matching known patterns of features to java methods .
in prior work they had identi ed di erent heuristics for statements within java methods to describe the key functionality of these methods .
while these approaches are e ective for certain types of methods or statements they still rely on assumptions about what details the programmers need to see in the summaries.
in both of these works a signi cant focus was placed on evaluating the conciseness of the summaries that is whether the generated summaries described the appropriate information.
hence in our view existing summarization tools could be improved if there were more basic data about how programmers summarize code.
.
related work this section will cover related work on program comprehension and eye tracking studies in software engineering as well as source code summarization techniques.
.
studies of program comprehension there is a rich body of studies on program comprehension.
holmes et al.
and ko et al.
have observed that many of these studies target the strategies followed by programmers and the knowledge that they seek .
for example during maintenance tasks some programmers follow a systemic strategy aimed at understanding how di erent parts of the code interact .
in contrast an opportunistic strategy aims to nd only the section of code that is needed for a particular change .
in either strategy studies suggest that programmers form a mental model of the software speci cally including the relationships between di erent sections of source code .
documentation and note taking is widely viewed as important because programmers tend to forget the knowledge they have gained about the software .
at the same time programmers are often interrupted with requests for help with understanding source code and written notes assist developers in answering these questions .
di erent studies have analyzed how programmers use the documentation and notes.
one recent study found thatprogrammers prefer face to face communication but turn to documentation when it is not available .
the same study found that programmers read source code only as a last resort.
the study con rms previous ndings that while reading source code is considered a reliable way of understanding a program the e ort required is often too high .
these studies provide a strong motivation for automated summarization tools but few clues about what the summaries should contain.
some studies recommend an incremental approach such that documentation is updated as problems are found .
stylos et al.
recommend highlighting summaries of code with