how do api documentation and static typing affect api usability?
stefan endrikat university of duisburg essen germany stefan.endrikat stud.unidue.destefan hanenberg university of duisburg essen germany stefan.hanenberg icb.unidue.deromain robbes pleiad dcc university of chile chile rrobbes dcc.uchile.cl andreas stefik university of nevada las vegas united states stefika gmail.com abstract when developers use application programming interfaces apis they often rely on documentation to assist their tasks.
in previous studies we reported evidence indicating that static type systems acted as a form of implicit documentation benefiting developer productivity.
such implicit documentation is easier to maintain given it is enforced by the compiler but previous experiments tested users without any explicit documentation.
in this paper we report on a controlled experiment and an exploratory study comparing the impact of using documentation and a static or dynamic type system on a development task.
results of our study both confirm previous findings and show that the benefits of static typing are strengthened with explicit documentation but that this was not as strongly felt with dynamically typed languages.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
distribution maintenance and enhancement general terms experimentation documentation human factors keywords api usability documentation static type systems .
introduction the software engineering community has developed a renewed interest in studies of application programming interfaces apis and their documentation although the importance of good apis has been known for some time.
in his landmark essay brooks states permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
.that the most radical possible solution for constructing software is not to construct it at all.
brooks describes how apis and frameworks are promising attacks on the essential complexities of software.
while most reasonable scholars would not deny the benefits of high quality apis the impact of documentation is less clear.
for example consider several claims on the benefits of documentation in the academic literature one user mentioned that the equivalent of an empty api documentation with only the type name e.g.
doxygen could save him hours of source code exploration.
the biggest hurdle when learning an api is the documentation.
if the documentation for an api is good it solves of your problems.
while on the surface many might consider such claims reasonable if documentation is of truly excellent quality studies show a more nuanced state of the practice.
for example not all developers trust documentation preferring to investigate the source code or to talk to colleagues.
this is due in part to missing documentation or the suspicion that documentation may be out of date .
further an analysis of knowledge exchange sites e.g.
stack overflow conducted by parnin et al.
showed that of the classes in the android apis are covered by questions and answers coming on the stack overflow web site .
indeed the exact quantifiable benefits of documentation are in need of further investigation.
proponents of statically typed programming languages further claim that static typing provides a form of implicit documentation embedded in the source code.
for example pierce states that the type declarations in procedure headers and module interfaces constitute a form of documentation giving useful hints about behavior .
similarly bruce claims that type annotations provide documentation on constructs that make it easier for programmers to determine how the constructs can or should be used .
we have undertaken an empirical investigation into these and similar claims finding in previous work some empirical evidence for their arguments.
specifically controlled experiments comparing static and dynamic type systems have shown that for some tasks type annotations in statically typed code do lead to increases in productivity .
however while previous work appeared to support the use of static type systems all previously reported experiments included only the implicit documentation provided by the type system .permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
copyright is held by the author owner s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
icse may june hyderabad india acm thus to better evaluate the hypotheses presented by pierce and bruce we conducted a randomized controlled trial with a 2x2 experimental design and an exploratory study on possible causes comparing developers using either static or dynamic typing and with or without accompanying documentation.
given this setup we see at least two possible outcomes.
first it could be the case that adding documentation is an equalizing factor affording equal or better productivity to those with dynamic typing.
second type annotations and static checking could benefit programmers even further.
the results of our experiment show evidence toward the second explanation the addition of explicit documentation affords even greater productivity gains to developers using statically typed languages.
those with dynamic typing did not appear benefit as much from the addition of explicit documentation.
while the previous paragraph gives the primary finding of our paper to try and garner possible causes for the behavior we observed we conducted an exploratory analysis of the interaction logs of our developers while completing the tasks.
results from this analysis are not definitive but hint that the number of file switches may be a leading indicator on why such differences occur.
we also report on additional indicators from the logs.
structure of the paper we first describe related work section empirical studies on documentation and type systems.
then we describe the design of the experiment in detail section .
next we present the results of our experiments section .
we then perform an exploratory study based on the interaction data we recorded section .
we close the paper with a discussion section possible threats section and conclude section .
.
related work .
studies of apis and documentation controlled experiments an early experiment by tenny compared two types of procedures inlined or external procedures and the occurrence of comments.
the experiment showed an effect of comments on understandability of short programs measured by a questionnaire.
an experiment by tryggeseth found that documentation had a positive impact on the time necessary to complete a maintenance task in a c system the subjects were approximately faster.
the solution was written in pseudocode.
unfortunately the experimental design was not fully documented.
an experiment by prechelt et al.
found that documenting design patterns in source code in addition to the existing documentation had a positive effect on development time and correctness.
entities forming a design pattern were more easily recognized and processed as a single chunk of data rather than several entities.
on the other hand ellis et al.
found conflicting evidence on the usefulness of the factory design pattern.
another experiment by bandi et al.
explored the impact of three complexity metrics on maintenance time interaction level interface size and operation argument complexity.
all three metrics were found useful to predict the maintenance time taken by several groups of students students in total .
an experiment by arisholm et al.
showed that there is a positive impact of uml documentation on task correctness but not on time.
the experiment had several tasks on the same systems and showed that subjects were more likely to succeed in later tasks when the documentation was present.
a recent pilot experiment by leotta et al.
seems to unsurprisingly confirm that outdated documentation is less useful than up to date documentation.
however a recent study by petre showed that usage of uml in the practice is limited yielding the necessity to investigate additional forms of documentation.dekel and herbsleb evaluated the effectiveness of emoose a knowledge pushing tool that highlights critical parts of the documentation and makes them more obvious in the ide .
a controlled experiment was conducted where participants used emoose in a variety of tasks where significantly more likely to solve the tasks than users from the control group for four out of tasks .
a follow up video analysis study fleshed out how the documentation was used in more detail .
exploratory studies robillard and deline conducted a study on what makes apis hard to learn based on surveys and interviews they found a variety of obstacles that developers faced and documented the implications of them.
in particular developers prefer a continuous presentation of the api focused on its relation to the problem domain how a set of api elements are used together to solve a given task as opposed to a hyperlinked documentation of individual api elements.
dagenais and robillard interviewed developers to find out what decisions were taken by developers with respect to documentation and the consequence it had on the project .
timely update to the documentation was found to improve code quality.
three types of documentation were observed task related documentation aimed at newcomers getting started type of documentation reference documentation documenting program elements and conceptual documentation.
an exploratory study by duala ekoko and robillard analysed video recordings of twenty participants working on a set of tasks for which they had to discover unknown apis.
the main information sources where the api documentation and the web.
they formulated a list of questions the developers asked when solving the tasks and made additional observations about the challenges developers faced such as discovering types with non obvious relationships and difficulties related to the usage of exceptions.
roehm et al.
conducted a study of program comprehension in industry based on an observational study of programmers from seven companies .
it highlighted important facts pertaining to documentation source code was more trusted than documentation due to possible mismatches or the code not being covered direct communication was preferred over the documentation for similar reasons.
on the other hand understanding the rationale behind the code its purpose and how to use it was found to be very difficult exhausting when the code is not documented.
maalej and robillard developed a taxonomy of the types and patterns of knowledge commonly found in apis based on two large apis the jdk and .net.
the types of knowledge found in the apis were functionality concepts directive purposes nonfunctional requirements control flow structure patterns examples environment issues and