let s talk about it evaluating contributions through discussion in github jason tsay laura dabbish james herbsleb school of computer science and center for the future of work heinz college carnegie mellon university forbes ave. pittsburgh pa usa jtsay dabbish jdh cs.cmu.edu abstract open source software projects often rely on code contributions from a wide variety of developers to extend the capabilities of their software.
project members evaluate these contributions and often engage in extended discussions to decide whether to integrate changes.
these discussions have important implications for project management regarding new contributors and evolution of project requirements and direction.
we present a study of how developers in open work environments evaluate and discuss pull requests a primary method of contribution in github analyzing a sample of extended discussions around pull requests and interviews with github developers.
we found that developers raised issues around contributions over both the appropriateness of the problem that the submitter attempted to solve and the correctness of the implemented solution.
both core project members and third party stakeholders discussed and sometimes implemented alternative solutions to address these issues.
different stakeholders also influenced the outcome of the evaluation by eliciting support from different communities such as dependent projects or even companies.
we also found that evaluation outcomes may be more complex than simply acceptance or rejection.
in some cases although a submitter s contribution was rejected the core team fulfilled the submitter s technical goals by implementing an alternative solution.
we found that the level of a submitter s prior interaction on a project changed how politely developers discussed the contribution and the nature of proposed alternative solutions.
categories and subject descriptors d. .
integrated environments h. .
.
general terms management design human factors.
keywords github transparency open source social computing social media contribution discussion evaluation .
introduction open software development environments enable submitting code to any project.
this means many people with diverse expertise the long tail of contributors can add unique value to a project.
at the same time openness poses the formidable problem of evaluating these contributions to ensure their quality and to maintain technical integrity.
when contributions are deemed unsuitable or threaten technical integrity a negotiation between contributor and project members often ensues .
our work examines how this negotiation unfolds in an open environment where project members and contributors have little formal authority to rely on in exerting influence.
for traditional open source software projects the contribution process is characterized as a meritocracy where code is king .
according to this view the decision to accept a code contribution largely depends on technical merit and review of submissions identifies technical defects .
technical merit of course is a rich and complex notion including not just correctness but notions of scope style design choices priorities and inter project dependencies.
however previous studies on open source software suggest that the evaluation of a code contribution is often a more nuanced process involving many factors other than technical merit .
for example newcomer or non member contributions are often summarily rejected for violating project norms .
contribution acceptance is higher for submitters with existing relationships with core members of a project controlling for a number of technical factors .
these previous results suggest that the contribution evaluation process is more socially charged than the code is king mantra would imply.
extended code contribution discussions reveal important social project dynamics and project members values and mental processes as they articulate arguments for or against a particular change.
while the average github contribution generates little if any discussion and involve very few developers cases of extended discussions occur as project members and the broader community work to understand the implications of the suggested change .
changes to a project often have major impacts on other related projects with different and perhaps conflicting goals .
previous work has found that more complex code contributions to projects in terms of lines of code and number of files changed and whether the change was previously defined are more likely to spur longer discussions about the suggested changes .
there is also evidence that existing relationships with project members may influence the nature of these discussions as recent work suggests lengthy discussions around newcomer contributions have a very different outcome than discussions around member contributions .
although previous work has noted the prevalence of extended contribution discussions in response to complex contributions we lack a detailed understanding of the form and content of these discussions.
a study of the content and form of comments in lengthy discussions in response to code contributions would extend our permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
fse november hong kong china copyright acm ... .
.
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
copyright is held by the author owner s .
publication rights licensed to acm.
fse november hong kong china acm understanding of the dynamics of collaboration in an open environment.
the problems and issues identified in contributions reveal unique challenges of collaborating with a heterogeneous diffuse set of contributors with limited shared understandings and common goals.
in an open setting project members have little or no formal authority over contributors and vice versa .
the methods and means they use to attempt to increase their likelihood of acceptance may reveal what constitutes power in this setting.
given the open nature of the environment there is no prescribed method by which contributions are resolved.
what do the outcomes of these lengthy discussions look like?
by better understanding the nature of comments in long discussions around contributions to open software projects we can inform policies and tools that enable software developers to better manage open projects.
for example if contributions frequently result in certain types of conflicts then collaborative software development environments can incorporate specialized conflict management tools .
notification mechanisms e.g.
watching following mailing list subscriptions can be more precisely targeted to those whose interests are affected.
to understand extended contribution discussions we studied interaction in github github.com a successful example of an open development environment.
on github participants submit contributions to projects by sending what is known as a pull request .
we analyzed a set of pull requests generating extended discussions from a large sample of open source software projects on github.
average case pull requests typically generate little to no discussion and therefore are not very informative about the reasons for acceptance or rejection.
for this reason we chose to focus on only pull requests with extended discussions which often reveal the developers reasoning process.
using a grounded approach we focused on the phenomenon of extended contribution discussions rather than interactions around contributions more broadly because these discussions are an important aspect of the open collaboration process and a key place where core and peripheral members negotiate around aspects of project evolution and direction .
we explored the kinds of issues core developers raised and the arguments they over both the appropriateness of the problem that submitters attempted to solve and the correctness of the implemented solution in a submitted code contribution.
due to the open nature of the software projects other stakeholders from outside the project observed and participated in these extended discussions sometimes attempting to influence the outcome of the contribution through rallying support of the audience or leveraging project or company communities.
we also found that non member contributions were more likely to be rejected following a long discussion.
however although core teams rejected new submitter s contributions more often they almost always satisfied the submitter s technical goal by implementing an alternative solution.
core members interacted more politely with new submitters and in cases of conflict were more likely to implement alternative solutions for these newcomer submitters rather than simply suggest them.
in the next sections we motivate our research questions based on previous research describe our research setting and study methodology present the results of our discussion analysis and discuss the implications of our findings.
.
contribution and discussion in online work previous research on open contribution evaluation suggests a number of different ways discussions are used to resolve issues that arise around contributions.
this work suggests that discussions around newcomer or non member contributions may evolve differently than for members with different consequences.
we position our work in the literature of evaluating contributions in peer production communities such as wikipedia.
we also examine how developers in open source software projects ensure the technical correctness of contributions.
when more information is available in open transparent environments such as github developers use this information when evaluating contributions.
informed by previous work we develop research questions around how developers discuss contributions in open environments.
.
deliberation in online communities one can consider an open source software project as a type of online community.
online communities are centered around contributions from a wide variety of users.
successful online communities rely on members contributing their unique resources to the community such as users uploading videos on youtube or posting pictures or comments on reddit.
kraut and resnick analyze challenges that online communities face when trying to encourage contribution matching users to contributions needed making requests to members using intrinsic and extrinsic motivators and grouping users together.
they review evidence showing that constant feedback to members whether it be character levels in world of warcraft or community comments in youtube motivates members to create more contributions.
similarly combining contributions with social contact also encourages further contributions.
for example the gnome software project encourages socialization through forums and get together conferences .
the contribution evaluation process can have an important impact on contributor motivation particularly for new members.
in a study of newcomer contribution on wikipedia halfaker et al.
found that reverts decreased motivation for newcomers.
reverts from experienced editors were the most demotivating suggesting that certain interactions around contributions may have a particularly negative influence on motivation to contribute to a project.
bryant et al.
found that contribution acceptance is an important step in a newcomers socialization process.
newcomers learn the conventions and contribution rules of the wikipedia community through observation lurking and direct mentoring from more experienced users.
however conversation on wikipedia is most often used to organize work rather than to discuss issues or problems with contributions.
viegas et al.
found that in wikipedia editors primarily used edit comments to coordinate article edits.
some research has looked in detail at how the content of communication influences participation for example finding that politeness strategies in an opening thread on a discussion forum increases the likelihood of reply .
however participation in forum based online communities is typically focused on social support and information exchange rather than collaboration around a shared project.
thus we may expect to see new types of conversational dynamics in contribution evaluation discussions where the contribution is the focus.
.
contributions in open source software as open source software often relies on the contributions of a diverse group of software developers members of software project teams must evaluate and discuss contributions to ensure the integrity of the software project.
literature on the contribution process for open source software projects suggests that evaluating contributions especially from unknown developers is a complex social process.
krogh et al.
found in their study of the contribution process in the freenet open source project that successful newcomers must follow joining scripts before submitting a contribution.
these joining scripts involve participating in prior activity such as lurking on the project s mailing list participating in technical discussions and reporting bugs.
they also found differences in the tone of discussion between developers who were invited to join the project versus developers who were not.
for example the detail and specificity of feedback given was much more general for non joiners.
ducheneaut noted that developers looking to make successful contributions to the python project needed to undergo a progressive socialization process.
core members on a project would vet contributions to ensure the code changes were technically sound.
successful socialization allowed potential submitters to learn project norms and to identify members of the core project team.
in order to successfully start the contribution evaluation process a submitting developer needed to recruit core members of the project as a network of allies .
when evaluating code contributions for technical correctness core project members often use a peer review process.
rigby et al.
found in their examination of different peer review processes in the apache server open source project that early and frequent reviews of small contributions from the core team were effective in finding defects in contributions.
in particular the usage of the project mailing list allowed for self selection of expert core members and a more open discussion between members.
ko and chilana found that discussions around bug reports established scope proposed ideas identified design dimensions defended claims with rationale moderated the process and finally made a decision.
the most powerful factors in decision making around a bug report were the participant s authority developers over users and actions taken writing a patch .
.
transparent work environments while evaluating contributions is a key process in all popular open source projects different environments provide different tools and mechanisms for participating in discussions and negotiations about them.
the setting for our study is github often cited as an example of a transparent environment .
transparent environments incorporate social media features that allow developers to utilize a much greater range of information when making and evaluating contributions due to the visibility of work across the entire community.
previous qualitative research on github by dabbish et al.
showed that developers use this information available in github through social media features to make a variety of subtle inferences about other developers and projects.
project managers especially those in popular projects that received many contributions pull requests per day used information available to them via transparency in order to assist in the evaluation process by making inferences about the quality of code contributions and submitter competence.
at times project managers needed to communicate directly with submitters about code contribution.
most often this was done to negotiate additional changes.
other times core members needed multiple rounds of discussion with the submitter in order to create a shared understanding of what the submitter s contribution was attempting to do and what the current direction was at the time of submission.
core members also used inline interaction with specific lines of code in order to address specific conflicts or to ensure conformity with project style norms.
the transparent nature of github also led developers to become acutely aware that their work actions had an audience.
audience pressures led developers to change their behavior.
for example developers spent some time managing face by being careful not to offend developers by publically rejecting long time contributors or not following someone who followed them.
marlow et al.
found that when github developers engage in information seeking behaviors they used information made visible by the environment in order to form impressions of users and projects.
developers would engage in information seeking behaviors after and during interactions with other developers on github.
for example developers looked to another developer s previous work in order to better understand their coding abilities.
when evaluating a developer s contributions project managers would look to the submitter s other projects in order to better understand how much assistance or extra effort the submitter would require in order to accept their contribution.
core members would also often account for uncertainty when evaluating contributions.
uncertain changes required back and forth discussion between the submitter and core members in order to explain why the contribution could not be automatically accepted and negotiate the outcome.
in these cases project managers would make use of information about the code contribution and the submitter to decide how accommodating towards the submitter they should be.
for example a project manager may weigh the cost of fixing a contribution against the benefit of recruiting a new member to the project.
tsay et al.
found in a study of contributions in github that a number of social and technical factors influenced the probability of a contribution being accepted.
when contributions were highly discussed contributions were much less likely to be accepted.
however the prior interaction of a submitter on the project moderated the negative association of high discussion on a contribution and acceptance.
the submitter s prior interaction on a project also had a positive association with acceptance.
the literature on deliberation in online communities suggest that members engage in discussion to both encourage and evaluate contributions to the community .
open source software projects needing to ensure the technical integrity of code contributions engage in complicated social processes and peer technical reviews .
often developers would also engage in discussion in order to socialize themselves when joining a project .
transparent work environments such as github have developers using information made visible due to transparency to make inferences about projects and other developers when evaluating contributions .
however we still know relatively little about the kinds of issues that arise and the nature of discussions developers have when evaluating contributions.
.
development of research questions our examination of literature on discussion around contributions in online environments suggests a number of research questions to advance our knowledge of how software developers discuss contributions in open environments.
from online communities such as wikipedia we see that editors engage in discussion over conflicts in article direction.
in open source software developers discuss problems in bug reports making and justifying arguments when discussing the design of a solution .
for more uncertain changes in github core members engage in back and forth discussion to justify the value of the contribution .
however it is not well understood what issues around open source software development need to be worked out in these discussions.
by better understanding the issues arguments and criteria raised in contribution discussion we can identify challenges in collaborating with a diffuse set of contributors in an open environment.
this leads us to our first research question what are the different kinds of issues raised around code contributions?
in online communities members use intrinsic and extrinsic motivators when making requests to encourage compliance .
one tactic identified in open source software is that submitters recruit core members to assist in the evaluation process .
in this way submitters are able to influence the outcome of the evaluation process.
what is not well understood is the full range of methods that different stakeholders may use to influence the evaluation process.
by better understanding the decision making process and how influence is brought to bear we also gain insight into what motivates software developers to accept changes.
the influence tactics used in an environment where there is little formal authority also reveal what constitutes power in open collaboration.
this leads us to our second research question how do participants try to influence the decision process in code contributions?
we find in online communities that the outcome of a contribution evaluation may be farther reaching than simply whether the contribution itself is accepted.
for example the outcome of a contribution and the identity of the evaluating editor in wikipedia has an impact on the motivation of a new editor to contribute again .
in open source software environments such as github project managers may decide to accept less desirable code contributions in order to recruit new members .
we investigate the following research question in order to better understand the less obvious impacts of outcomes of code contribution evaluations what are the different outcomes for proposed code contributions?
in online communities new submitters tend to interact differently.
in wikipedia new editors tend to make peripheral specific edits to articles and tend to be sensitive to reverts from experienced editors .
in open source software new contributors tend to follow joining scripts before making successful contributions .
similarly a submitter s level of prior experience on a project has an association with contribution acceptance and seems to moderate the negative effect of discussion .
this suggests that a submitter s prior experience or lack of changes the nature of discussion around code contributions and may influence the outcome of the evaluation.
by understanding how a submitter s prior experience impacts discussion we may better understand how projects manage both new and experienced contributors.
this leads us to our fourth research question is discussion different when the submitter has prior experience with a project?
.
method to answer our research questions we created and analyzed a dataset of both interview data and contribution discussions from the social open source software hosting site github .
the interviews allowed us to investigate the practices of a relatively broad sample of developers while the content analysis of entire collections of comments for specific pull requests allowed us to analyze complete exchanges and their outcomes in some depth.
in this section we present descriptions of the github setting our data collection methods and analysis technique.
.
research setting github is a software project hosting site started in that brands itself social coding that is home to over ten million repositories .
some of the more popular open source software projects that github hosts include ruby on rails and jquery.
we selected github as our research setting because it is an open environment where public software repositories are made available for anyone to participate.
in github one of the main methods for contributing to a software project is by sending a pull request .
first potential project contributors fork or make a personal copy of the target project where they can make changes to add or alter functionality.
this potential contributor can then request that code changes in their fork be merged into the project s main repository.
this can be accomplished by creating a pull request that contains the code changes that the submitter would like integrated into the original project.
core members in the original project have several options to close the pull request including accepting the offered contribution and merging it into the project code base or rejecting the contribution.
of course project managers may also ignore the contribution leaving the pull request open .
core project members and other interested users can discuss the contribution by creating comments on the pull request page to suggest improvements or ask questions about the code change.
there are two different methods for commenting on a pull request general comments about the contribution as a whole see figure or code level inline comments for specific lines in the code contribution see figure .
figure .
example of pull request and discussion figure .
example of inline code comment for pull request .
data collection our dataset consists of both a set of comments from developers embedded in extended pull request discussions and interviews with users of github.
.
.
highly discussed pull request sample from a larger dataset of pull requests across github projects we created a sample of highly discussed pull requests see table .
we defined highly discussed as pull requests where the number of comments is one standard deviation .
higher than the mean .
in the dataset filtering out all pull requests with less than comments in the discussion.
for each pull request we include both discussion comments on the pull request itself and code level inline comments.
from this reduced sample we randomly selected highly discussed pull requests from different software projects.
from these pull requests1 a total of comments from developers were analyzed.
as we reached theoretical saturation we drew no more pull requests from our sample.
we constrained our sample to ensure that it included both accepted and rejected pull requests as well as submitters with varying levels of prior interaction with the project see table .
as our research questions are concerned with the outcomes of contributions we wanted a roughly equal representation of both accepted and rejected pull requests.
as we were also investigating how a submitter s prior experience on a project changes the discussion around a contribution we also wanted a roughly equal distribution of new submitters no prior interaction and experienced submitters see table .
table .
description of pull request sample number of pull requests total number of comments mean number of comments .
total number of participants mean number of participants .
table .
distribution of pull request sample yes no pull request accepted?
submitter has prior interaction on project?
.
.
interview data to supplement our sample of extended discussions we also conducted a series of semi structured interviews with github users .
our goal in these interviews was to document and understand in more detail the different ways github functionality was used by our participants including how pull requests were created and managed.
we solicited participants via email and conducted our interviews in person or via phone or skype.
remote participants shared their screen during the interview using adobe connect so users could demonstrate their activities on the site.
participants were asked to walk through their last session on github describing how they interpreted information displayed on the site as they reviewed earlier work activities.
for this study we used responses to that portion of the interview where participants were asked to describe their last pull request sent to a project and to describe the last pull request received for their own project.
none of the pull requests mentioned in interviews were included in our sample of pull request discussions.
interviews lasted approximately minutes to one hour overall.
these interviews were then transcribed verbatim to support further analysis.
.
data analysis we applied a grounded theory approach to analyze how developers evaluate contributions in transparent environments in our sample of pull request discussions .
we first identified instances of how developers evaluated code contributions in the comments of five pull request discussions.
for each instance analyzed we identified the participants involved information made available by github that is used by developers the type of comment what portion of the code contribution is referred to and the higher level goal of the participant in regards to the contribution.
we then conducted open coding on these examples grouping examples into categories that were conceptually similar.
this process revealed different categories of interaction between different types of participants for a code contribution.
we used this first set of categories to code the remaining pull request discussions revealing additional categories.
we used an iterative process until the discussions no longer revealed new interactions not captured in our existing set of categories theoretical saturation .
during this process we also identified similar interactions in our interview data and used these examples to supplement our pull request discussion examples.
.
results our analysis found that both core and peripheral developers in a project engaged in discussion in order to resolve issues around both the problem that the contribution is attempting to solve and the solution that the contribution implements.
different stakeholders such as third parties and audience members sometimes attempted to influence the outcome of discussion.
we found different outcomes for contributions and discussions around them.
we also found that the submitter s level of prior interaction on the project changed the discussion around the code contribution.
.
issues raised around code contributions what are the different kinds of issues raised around code contributions?
contributions to projects in the form of pull requests sometimes generated issues that the submitter and the core members must resolve through discussion.
we saw that core members raised different issues over the appropriateness of the problem that the contribution was attempting to solve.
we also saw that developers discussed how to optimize the solution that the contribution implements with various levels of involvement.
at times core members in the project also disagreed amongst each other over these issues.
.
.
disapprove of the problem being solved one main issue that developers discussed was whether the problem that the code contribution was trying to solve is appropriate.
core members would sometimes discuss whether the pull request belonged in their project while other times would ask contributors to prove the value of their contribution through explicit use cases.
.
.
.
project appropriateness core members questioned whether the submitter was using the project in the intended manner.
sometimes contributions offered by submitters using the project inappropriately would attempt to implement features that were not in the intended scope of what the project was meant to do p2 p7 p14 p15 p16 p19 p20 .
in these cases core members offered alternative solutions to the submitters outside of their own project.
one example had the project owner offer to assist the submitter in learning how to use the project correctly offline in a local hackathon p15 .
if the contribution was outside the scope of the project core members sometimes suggested that the contribution actually be made to an upstream or downstream project p20 .
to prevent submitters from wasting time on inappropriate contributions core members expected submitters to propose their contributions before implementation to get feedback on its appropriateness p7 .
in cases when core members inadvertently accepted inappropriate earlier contributions into the project later contributions would be necessary to revert the inappropriate change p20 further increasing the time and effort wasted for both submitters and core members.
the idea of proposals issues before hand is to see the likelihood of something getting merged so you don t feel you ve wasted all your time if it doesn t. p7 some github developers explained in interviews that submitters would sometimes inadvertently solve inappropriate problems because the project would move in a different direction unknown to the submitter.
for example a core developer s planned changes to a project made a submitter s contribution obsolete.
so yeah.
not sure what s gonna happen with this off the top of my head if it s gonna get landed or i mean because some of the things that we re with this refactor of the master branch make this whole thing a little unnecessary now.
.
.
.
value proposition request in order to explore whether the contribution truly had value for the project core members asked submitters to provide specific use cases or test cases p1 p2 p3 p4 p13 p14 p20 .
core members used this requirement as a way to confirm that the specific problem submitters were trying to solve in their contribution was appropriate.
in some discussions core members refused to continue the evaluation process until use cases were presented p1 p3 p4 p14 .
in response submitters offered use cases or test cases to demonstrate the problem their contribution solved.
for the contributions in this category submitters that provided code examples or