hal id hal submitted on nov hal is a multi disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents whether they are published or not.
the documents may come from teaching and research institutions in f rance or abroad or from public or private research centers.l archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire hal est destin e au d p t et la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche publi s ou non manant des tablissements d enseignement et de recherche fran ais ou trangers des laboratoires publics ou priv s. estimating f ootprints of model operations c dric jeanneret martin glinz benoit baudry t o cite this version c dric jeanneret martin glinz benoit baudry .
estimating f ootprints of model operations.
international conference on software engineering may honolulu united states.
hal estimating footprints of model operations c dric jeanneret university of zurich binzm hlestrasse zurich switzerland jeanneret ifi.uzh.chmartin glinz university of zurich binzm hlestrasse zurich switzerland glinz ifi.uzh.chbenoit baudry irisa campus universitaire de beaulieu rennes france bbaudry irisa.fr abstract when performed on a model a set of operations e.g.
queries or model transformations rarely uses all the information present in the model.
unintended underuse of a model can indicate various problems the model may contain more detail than necessary or the operations may be immature or erroneous.
analyzing the footprints of the operations i.e.
the part of a model actually used by an operation is a simple technique to diagnose and analyze such problems.
however precisely calculating the footprint of an operation is expensive because it requires analyzing the operation s execution trace.
in this paper we present an automated technique to estimate the footprint of an operation without executing it.
we evaluate our approach by applying it to models and ve operations.
our technique provides software engineers with an e cient yet precise evaluation of the usage of their models.
categories and subject descriptors i. .
model validation and analysis d. .
design tools and techniques general terms algorithms measurement keywords model footprint model operation static analysis .
introduction a model is an abstract representation of an original for a given purpose.
in software engineering many kinds of models are used in various contexts ranging from informal models sketched on a whiteboard to executable models deployed in a production environment.
in this paper we are permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse waikiki honolulu hawai copyright 20xx acm x xxxxx xx x xx xx ... .
.interested in models used for analysis and generation purposes.
such models are mainly used as input to various model operations like queries simulations views extractions or model transformations.
increasingly model operations are automated to improve both the productivity of engineers and the reliability of the analysis .
to support this automation models must be machine processable i.e.
models must be expressed in a modeling language with a formal syntax such as uml adora or petri nets.
these modeling languages are de ned by a metamodel.
when performed on a model an operation computes new information based on the information stored in the model.
during its execution it navigates through the content of the model and gathers some information by reading some of its elements.
the set of elements touched by a model operation during its execution forms the footprint of that operation.
thus the footprint contains all elements that a ect the outcome of the operation as long as this operation is deterministic and does not use data other than those contained in the input model.
footprints rarely cover models completely.
the ratio between the size of a footprint and the size of the model quanti es the model usage of an operation.
this measure can be used as a diagnosis to detect problems with the model s scope or its level of detail or the presence of faults in an operation.
identifying the footprint of an operation in a model further helps engineers in solving these problems by highlighting elements in the model that were used by the operation and separating them from the elements that remained unused.
actual footprints can be computed with a dynamic analysis by tracing the execution of an operation on a model.
unfortunately the dynamic nature of footprints makes them at least as expensive to compute as performing the operation.
to be e ective and practical a diagnosis must be available when it is needed and should be inexpensive to perform.
therefore obtaining the footprint of an operation without having to execute it would be valuable to software engineers.
in this paper we motivate the use of footprints in modeling activities and then concentrate on a novel approach for e ectively and e ciently estimating footprints without executing the operation.
in a nutshell our approach works as follows by analyzing the formal de nition of an operation we establish its metamodel footprint the set of modeling constructs involved in this de nition.
the model footprint can then be estimated by selecting only those model elements that are instances of elements in the metamodel foot information contained in a modelinformation needed by an operation i.e.
its footprint figure gap between a model and its usage.
print.
we call such a footprint estimate the static footprint whereas the actual footprint is called the dynamic footprint .
we have chosen this terminology in analogy to the static and dynamic analysis in the program analysis eld .
we have evaluated our approach with real world models.
first we illustrate the meaningfulness of footprinting in a case study where we present representative model operations that do not use all the information contained in these models even when they are executed all together.
then we evaluate empirically the quality of the estimation made by static footprinting.
in experiments involving these models and combining these operations model operations we demonstrate that static footprints a are indeed conservative estimates of dynamic footprints b are very precise with respect to dynamic footprints and c are much faster to compute than dynamic footprints.
the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
in the next section we present the various uses of footprinting during modeling activities.
in section we introduce a measure for assessing the model usage of an operation.
section presents static and dynamic footprinting while section evaluates our approach with a case study and some experiments.
we discuss our contribution in section before contrasting it with related work in section .
.
motiv ation a typical modeling assignment consists of an original to be modeled a modeling purpose and a modeling language e.g.
uml which is de ned by a metamodel.
frequently the purpose of a model can be characterized in terms of an operation or a set of operations to be performed on that model particularly in the context of model driven development.
in this case a gap between the information contained in the model and the information required by the set of operations that will be executed on the model cf.
figure is an indicator of a problem.
for example assume that a modeler needs to create a uml model with the purpose of deriving a performance model based on queueing networks as presented in .
assume further that the modeler actually creates a model that fully documents the architecture of some software according to the view model .
among other diagrams this model includes use case and sequence diagrams for the scenario view class diagrams for the logical view component diagrams for the development view activity diagrams for the process view and deployment diagrams for the physical view.
such a model would contain too much information for the operation presented above because this operation only uses information from use cases diagrams sequence diagrams and deployment diagrams.
models with excessive information with respect to an operation require more time and resources for their creation and their processing by the operation than necessary.
asillustrated in figure the modeler can identify information that is excessive with respect to an operation by establishing the footprint of this operation.
an analysis of the size and extent of the actual footprint of an operation or a set of operations in comparison to the expected size and extent can reveal several problems i the model may have the wrong scope ii it may contain information that nobody needs or it may be on the wrong level of abstraction i.e.
it contains unnecessary details iii it serves more or other purposes than initially intended iv the operation s concerned may be erroneous or immature.
in the example given above the presence of nodes in the deployment diagram that are not involved in any scenario interaction is a problem of scoping i .
furthermore the class diagram of the logical view is completely ignored by the operation ii .
problem iii can be illustrated with the presence of comments meant to improve the understandability of the model.
finally the operation ignores elements from the activity diagrams.
still these diagrams could provide useful information about workload derivation suggesting a possible improvement to the operation iv .
beyond problem identi cation calculating the footprint of an operation may also serve for generating a dynamic view of a model that contains only those parts of a model that are relevant for a given operation.
note that there is another form of gap between a model and its usage a model may lack some important information for a given operation.
in this case the operation may fail or its result may be imprecise.
this paper is concerned with the excessive part of a model with respect to a set of operations and leaves the missing part for future work.
for management purposes it is su cient to know the size of a footprint so that it can be compared to the size of the model.
by assessing systematically the model usage of operations a project manager can locate gaps between models and their usages and undertake appropriate actions.
then establishing the footprint can further help in reducing these gaps.
in the next section we propose a measure to quantify the usage of a model by one or more operations.
.
measuring model usage in order to quantify the usage of a model by a model operation we rst need a metric for the size of a model or model footprint.
for our purpose it su ces to count the number of elements present in the model or footprint.
to illustrate the further discussion we introduce a running example a simple petri net model is given in figure .
figure shows a metamodel de ning petri nets of the kind given in figure .
basically such a metamodel is a set of types and features.
types can either be meta classes or data types enumerations or primitive types like integer .
features are divided into structural features attributes within classes or