the impacts of software process improvement on developers a systematic review mathieu lavall e pierre n. robillard laboratoire de recherche en g nie logiciel polytechnique montr al montr al canada mathieu.lavallee pierre n.robillard polymtl.ca abstract this paper presents the results of a systematic review on the impacts of software process improvement spi on developers.
this review selected studies from the high est quality journals conferences and workshop in the field.
the results were compiled and organized following the grounded theory approach .
results from the grounded theory were further categorized using the ishikawa or fishbone diagram .
the ishikawa diagram model s all the factors potentially impact ing software developers and shows both the positive and negative impacts.
positive impacts include a reduction in the number of crises and an increase in team communications and morale as well as better requirements and documentation .
negative impacts include increase d overhead on de velopers through the need to collect data and compile documentation an undue focus on technical approaches and the fact that spi is oriented toward management and process quality and not towards developers and product quality.
this systematic review sho uld support future practice through the identification of important obstacles and opportunities for achieving spi success.
future research should also benefit from the problems and advantages of spi identified by developers.
keywords component software process systematic review impact developer i. introduction a company s software development process describes how its software products come to life and more specifically how developers bring them to life.
development processes are rooted in the deve lopers work and so improv ing those processes is very often dependent on accepta nce on the part of developers of the need for improvement and their support for it.
success factors in the software process improvements spi field have been the subject of r esearch for many years .
of the factors confirmed by previous research adoption of the improved process by developers has not surpris ingly been deemed significant .
however r esearch on the developers themselves is limited to the narrow field unde r study .
so what about the big picture?
how are developers treated by spi initiatives as a whole?
what are the impacts of these initiatives on the software developer?
the goal of this systematic review is to answer this last question .
this paper reviews the literature using the systematic review approach developed by kitchenham and refined by biolchini et al.
.
systematic literature reviews slr are different from common literature reviews by their formalism.
the goal of a slr is to provide a repr oducible summary of the state of a problem or field of study.
the conclusions obtained by a slr should therefore represent an accurate and objective assessment of the situation give n the body of literature at the time of the review .
this slr was performed by the two authors with the assistance of four graduate student s. section ii details the methodology used.
section iii presents a quality overview of the selected studies .
section iv describes the ishikawa model used including the spi factors identifi ed as potentially having either positive or negative impacts on developers.
section v presents the supporting evidence from the selected studies .
section v i presents other systematic reviews in the spi field and how we position our work in th is field.
sec tion vi i presents our conclusion s and outlin es the main findings of th is review .
ii.
methodology the following subsections describe the process used for this formal systematic review which was based on the technical report written by biolchini et al.
.
a. data sources study selection was restricted to a number of journals conference s and a workshop which are arguably the most important resources for spi research.
restriction of the research in this way proved rewarding in terms of quality as very fe w studies were rejected for quality reasons.
the selected journals are listed in table i. the column shows the number of studies selected in the corresponding source.
b. search string the search string used in the various data sources was adapted from a common concept plan shown in table ii.
ideally all the concepts were applied to each data source .
however the application of all concepts proved too restrictive for certain data sources .
in these cases combinations of concepts f rom the plan were tes ted in the data source until a specific combination returned a sufficient number of studies .
.
c ieee icse zurich switzerland table i. data sources and number of selected studies source journals empirical software engineering ieee software ieee transactions in softwar e engineering information and software technology journal of systems and software acm transactions on software engineering and methodology software process improvement and practicea conferences international conference on softwar e engineering international conference on software maintenance eurospib international c onference on software and systems process workshop internation al software process workshop a. now included in the journal of software maintena nce and evolution .
b. also known as european system software process improvement and innovation .
table ii.
concept plan concept search string process software process or spi or software development standard model capability maturity model or cm m or spice or or developers programmer or developer or coder or engineer or practitioner impact practice or impact or benefit or roi or strateg c. selection process a three stage approach was used in the selection process.
the firs t stage involved the selection of studies based on their titles.
at the title level obvious irrelevant studies were removed .
if there was any doubt about selection based on the title alone the study was kept.
the second stage involved the selection of studies based on their abstracts.
at the abstract level the focus was on selecting empirical studies.
purely theoretical models and historical recapitulation were excluded at this stage as our goal with this review is to provide conclusions based on empiri cal data.
the last stage involved the selection of studies following a summary overview.
the overview focuse d on the main elements of the studies introductions conclusions tables and figures.
the goal at this stage was to perform a preliminary quality evaluation to determine whether or not the studies conclusions were justified.
d. extraction process the studies remaining at this stage were carefully read.
any conclusion pertaining to developers was copied in to a repository for further analysis.
the ev idence was extracted by the individual reviewers using a standardized extraction process based on previous work by dyba and dingsoyr and then reviewed formally by one of the author s. e. grounded theory approach once all the selected studies had been read the copied conclusions were associated with a set of codes following the grounded theory approach.
this approach was chosen because it had already been used successfully in the software engineering field s12 s18 .
practitioners seeking more inform ation on the approach are refe rred to the works of strauss and gla ser .
the c odes were further grouped into concepts which form ed the seven factors presented in section iii.
these seven factors were matched with different models but were found to be closer to the basic six categories of the ishikawa fishbone diagram.
the choice of the ishikawa categories to represent the results was made after the codification of the conclusions .
the goal of the six categories of ishikawa diagrams is to cove r all the possible root causes of a specific problem .
the resources process people materials environment and management categories are typical of ishikawa diagrams and were kept by the author s. f. validity of the process the entire review process was planned and executed by the authors and four graduate student s. an initial iteration on the journal software process improvement and practice showed unacceptable discrepancies between the reviewers selections mainly as a result of ambiguities in th e process.
a second iteration on the improved process presented herein was performed by the same reviewers and showed much improved results.
extraction was first performed by the reviewers and the evidence s obtained were then confirmed by the author s. coding and grouping into factors was performed by the authors .
however t his review presents the raw conclusions with no global meta ethnographic inferences .
the grounded theory groupings and the ishikawa diagram were only used to give structure to the evide nce and to help us understand the data extracted.
in fact the ishikawa categories must remain the same e ven though another reviewer may create his own codes and groupings.
the evidence in this review is presented as objectively as possible.
we do not pr esent meta ethnographic conclusions but let the conclusions of the selected studies speak for themselves.
there is therefore no publication bias nor is there a hindsight bias.
while some fringe evidence could be moved from one factor to another there is still a significant body of knowledge supporting each factor.
therefore o ur belief is that subjectivity in this review was kept to a minimum.
iii.
quality of the selected studies almost all t he studies selected for extraction were of high quality.
qualit y evaluation was performed using a standard form adapted from t he work of dyba and dingsoyr .
their original quality evaluation form was based on eleven elements worth one point each.
four of these elements did not provide relevant information in our ca se e.g.
use of a control group .
our adapted quality evaluation was thus limited to seven elements with each worth zero 114table iii.
quality evaluation form quality score studies quality score threshold figure .
quality results element questions aims of the research is there a clear statement of the aims of the research?
does the study present empirical data?
is there a clear statement of the study s primary outcome?
context description is there an adequate description of the context in which the research was carried out?
what are the skills and experience of the staff under study?
what are the software processes being used?
sampling was the recruitment strategy appropriate to the aims of the research?
were the cases representative of a defined population?
was the sample size sufficiently large?
data collection were the data collected in a way that addressed the research issue?
is it clear how the data were collected?
has the researcher justified the methods chosen?
data analysis was the data analysis sufficiently rigorous?
was there an in depth description of the analysis process?
has sufficient data been presented to support the findings?
reflexivity has the relationship between researcher and participants been adequately considered?
did the researcher s critically examine their own role potential bias and influence during research question formulation sample rec ruitment data collection and analysis and selection of data for presentation?
findings is there a clear statement of the findings?
are the findings explicit e.g.
magnitude of effect ?
are the limitations of the study discussed explicitly?
null one poor or two adequate points .
to obtain the two points the element must answer the main question showed in roman type in table iii as well as the sub questions showed in italics in table iii .
therefore the maximum score for our quality evaluation form which is presented in table iii is fourteen.
the acceptability threshold was set at .
studies below this thr eshold show ed distinct flaws in either their methodology or their conclusions.
few studies were rejected because of their quality since the research was limited to reputed data sources.
additionally the worst studies were removed during the overview stag e described in section ii.c which focused on elements context description sampling and findings described in table iii.
two studies below the threshold were nevertheless included but the evidence extracted was limited to the conclusions supported by the data and the methodology of the research .
all the evidence presented in this review is therefore supported by the data in the related studies .
results of the quality eval uation are presented in figure .
the main flaw found in the spi field is in the reflexivity quality element element in table iii .
bias consideration is often weak or totally absent from many studies.
this flaw has been examined in greater detail in our previous work .
iv.
factors influencing developer support from the evidence obtained in the selected studies seven factors emerged that were found to fit loosely with the standard causes of problems in the ishikawa diagram better known as the fishbo ne diagram as shown in figure .
use of the ishikawa diagram was j ustified because the factors identified sometimes had positive impacts and sometimes negative ones.
the six main categories of the ishikawa diagram people management process environment resources and materials represent the potential caus es of the problem under study .
the seven factors found fall into those six main categories surrounding the problem.
the content of the ish ikawa diagram shown in figure is as follows impact of spi on developers the root of the ishikawa diagram describ es the problem under study.
what are the factors that have a positive or a negative impact on software developers?
motivation and resistance the people represented by the developers constitute the first potential problem factor.
spi implies an adjustmen t in the ir normal habits which may in turn lead to resistance to change.
what causes this resistance?
how can developers be motivated?
115impacts of spi on developerspeople process resources management environment materialsmotivation resistance technical focusknowledge sharingrequirements clientsdocumentationeffort morale skills figure .
ishikawa diagram for the seven categories of evidence.
technical focus management s involvement with spi essentially favors technical approaches.
is this focus on developer s practices justified?
documentation process impl emen tation and assessment require a fair amount of documentation.
how much overhead do standard processes like the cmmi generate ?
how do developers react to these documentation needs?
knowledge sharing th e environment of the developer is his or her team.
good team dynamics communication and knowledge sharing are essential for successful software development.
what are the advantages of good team communications?
what happens when knowledge does not reach t he developer?
effort and morale these two causes are always presented as intertwined in the evidence found .
effort and morale are seen as a resource excessive effort in the form of overtime and late night rushes depletes it as surely as low budget reser ves.
what is the effect of spi on these factors?
skills another resource provided by developers a skilled team can mean the difference between success and failure in a software project.
what skills are critical to spi success?
requirements and clients of the materials provided to developers requirements are certainly among the most important.
how are requirements and client relations perceived by software developers?
v. results this section presents the evidence found for each factor identified.
the se lected studies are presented in appendix a at the end of this review.
the y are identified from s1 to s26 to distinguish them from the