effects of using examples on structural model comprehension a controlled experiment dina zayan micha antkiewicz krzysztof czarnecki generative software development lab university of waterloo canada dzayan mantkiew kczarnec gsd.uwaterloo.ca abstract we present a controlled experiment for the empirical evaluation of example driven modeling edm an approach that systematically uses examples for model comprehension and domain knowledge transfer.
we conducted the experiment with graduate and undergraduate students from electrical and computer engineering ece computer science cs and software engineering se programs at the university of waterloo.
the experiment involves a domain model with uml class diagrams representing the domain abstractions and uml object diagrams representing examples of using these abstractions.
the goal is to provide empirical evidence of the e ects of suitable examples in model comprehension compared to having model abstractions only by having the participants perform model comprehension tasks.
our results show that edm is superior to having model abstractions only with an improvement of for diagram completeness for questions completeness for e ciency and a reduction of for the number of mistakes.
we provide qualitative results showing that participants receiving model abstractions augmented with examples experienced lower perceived di culty in performing the comprehension tasks higher perceived con dence in their tasks solutions and asked fewer clarifying domain questions a reduction of .
we also present participants feedback regarding the usefulness of the provided examples their number and types as well as the use of partial examples.
categories and subject descriptors d. software engineering d. .
elicitation methods d. .
methodologies d. .
domain engineering i. .
modeling methodologies general terms documentation human factors permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
to copy otherwise to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
.keywords structural domain model comprehension controlled experiment abstraction example example driven modeling edm .
introduction the process of knowledge transfer occurs in most activities of software development.
in this paper we consider the transfer of domain knowledge among project stakeholders.
the main challenge in domain knowledge transfer is that much of the knowledge is complicated in nature di cult to articulate and communicate among stakeholders who have di erent backgrounds and skills .
subject matter experts smes usually assume that business analysts bas possess the same level of knowledge and they are able to infer the business rules that are required to build a software system that addresses the problems of smes.
the problem is worsened when the bas mistakenly think that they understand the domain and they do not require further elicitation sessions.
this contributes to the production of incomplete and or incorrect requirements artifacts which is one of the major reasons for the failure of software projects .
to help with knowledge transfer structural modeling can be used for articulating capturing and communicating domain knowledge .
however the constructed models often only contain domain abstractions that cannot be easily validated by other stakeholders who usually are not modeling experts .
based on research results in cognitive psychology and in software engineering we propose that explicit examples should be used together with the abstractions for e ective domain knowledge transfer .
the process of collecting communicating and verifying domain knowledge iteratively through examples is what we refer to as example driven modeling edm .
since the process of domain knowledge transfer is not exclusive to the phase of creating models edm is of equal importance when creating or exchanging models.
in edm the purpose of examples is to explore and learn about the domain during all phases of software development.
examples are commonly used in software engineering.
test cases are examples of what the software should do.
traces are example executions of behavioral models used for model validation .
approaches such as test driven development behavior driven development story test driven development all postulate that examples should be used for specifying software behavior.
the importance of using examples in structural modeling on the other hand seems to be underestimated .
for example uml object diagrams which represent examples of more abstractpermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
copyrights for components of this work owned by others than acm must be honored.
abstracting with credit is permitted.
to copy otherwise or republish to post on servers or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and or a fee.
request permissions from permissions acm.org.
icse may june hyderabad india copyright acm ... .
class diagrams are rarely used in practice .
it is important to verify whether the use of examples offers signi cant bene ts in structural modeling.
it is also important to know which types of examples the number of examples and their presentation forms are best for improving the comprehension of the model and consequently of the domain.
this paper presents a controlled user experiment targeting these questions.
the objective is to provide the missing empirical evidence about the e ects of using examples on structural model and domain comprehension.
the results of the experiment show that augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples improved model and domain comprehension by participants who were novices to the application domain.
the highest score for diagram completeness .
achieved by the participants who received the model abstractions only is lower than the lowest score of those who received the abstractions together with examples .
.
on average participants receiving the examples asked instead of domain questions a reduction of had times fewer mistakes per object diagram a reduction of scored .
times higher for the questions response completeness and had nearly double the e ciency as compared to the control group.
edm group participants also experienced lower perceived di culty of performing the comprehension tasks while at the same time higher con dence in their answers.
we conjecture that these signi cant results could potentially translate into signi cant time and cost savings in industry however industrial evaluation remains future work.
structure of the paper.
section presents a modeling approach where abstractions and examples are equally important parts of a model.
section describes the design of our experiment and details its operational phase.
section describes our data collection techniques.
section presents our preliminary data and subjects analysis.
section discusses our results and major ndings followed by a presentation of the threats to validity in section .
concluding remarks and future work are in section .
.
example driven modeling in order to better understand and judge our experimental design and make the implications of our hypotheses testing more apparent this section presents the theory from which our hypotheses are derived.
we have previously proposed example driven modeling edm an approach where modeling is based on examples .
edm relies on the systematic use of examples for eliciting validating and verifying complex domain knowledge.
the use of examples in current structural modeling practices at least in the uml context is undervalued .
this limits the use of models to highly trained experts who are able to work with and understand abstractions.
however many stakeholders who would bene t from the models are not experts.
yet they can understand and prefer working with models via examples .
according to van god et.
al.
the use of examples lowers the mental e ort required to understand problems.
in practice class diagrams are much more frequently used than object diagrams .
this suggests that even if examples are used in the structural modeling world they are used informally.
in edm models comprise both abstractions and examples model abstractions examples where abstractions are representations that are disassoci ated from concrete objects and the examples are concrete instances of these abstractions.
we hypothesize that fostering model comprehension is achieved if model abstractions are augmented with examples since humans experience optimum knowledge transfer when they learn abstractions together with examples .
in this experiemnt we address the following questions what is the impact of examples on model comprehension?
how to use examples systematically?
what kind of examples are more useful than others?
.
we derive our hypotheses and attempt to answer these questions based on cognitive science theories.
the use of examples varies between novices and experts.
while novices would bene t instantly from examples for comprehension experts would only need examples for clari cations .
according to kalyuga examples help compensate for the missing or partially available information.
hence the di erence in the need of examples is attributed to the user s level of expertise in the domain.
we hypothesize that bas who are familiar with the domain prefer abstractions and seek examples only for clari cations.
on the other hand bas who are new to the domain prefer to work with examples rst to understand the abstractions.
the choice of examples is important for e ective comprehension and domain knowledge transfer.
while positive valid examples specify correct model instances negative invalid examples specify undesired or unacceptable instances.
invalid examples can be abstracted as model constraints.
according to gick and paterson the most e ective types of examples are near miss contrasting examples.
they help humans build abstractions by emphasizing the critical di erences between the instances.
partial examples are needed to allow expressing only the relevant information.
partial examples can be expressed using partial instances whereby some elements e.g.
objects attributes links can be ommitted or their presence can be uncertain and whereby values can be unspeci ed it is unknown whether a value is present or not or partially specied value is present but unknown .
we hypothesize that having partial examples limited to a given context is more bene cial than having full complete instances of the model.
this way the novices to the domain can focus on a small subset of the domain at a time.
.
experimental design the purpose of our experiment is to quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate the e ectiveness of edm as a structural modeling approach when compared to a modeling approach whereby the model consists of abstractions only.
we followed the guidelines for software engineering se experimentation presented in .
the goal of the experiment is summarized using the gqm template .
.
research questions and hypotheses the research questions underlying our experiment are rq1 does augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples improve model comprehension among model receptors who are novices to the application domain compared to having model abstractions only?
rq2 does using a variety of valid and invalid examples improve the model receptors comprehension of the model abstractions compared to having valid examples only?956table experimental goal according to gqm template.
analyze the e ects of using examples on comprehension of structural models by model receptors for the purpose of improving the comprehension with respect to correctness completeness and e ciency of solving instantiation tasks and answering domain questions from the perspective of the researcher who is the knowledge provider in the context of knowledge transfer to model receptors who are novices to the domain.
we use several measures of comprehension as dependent variables in literature also referred to as response variable for running the experiment.
accordingly we formulate the following null alternative hypotheses h10 h1 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the completeness of the object diagram created by each participant.
h20 h2 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the number of mistakes in a given participant s diagram.
h30 h3 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the number of the questions answered correctly by each participant.
h40 h4 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the participant s e ciency in solving the questions.
h50 h5 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the participants perceived di culty in performing the comprehension tasks.
h60 h6 augmenting model abstractions with explicit examples the participants perceived con dence in the comprehension tasks solutions.
h70 h7 having a variety of valid and invalid examples model comprehension by the participants compared to having valid examples only.
the last null and alternative hypotheses correspond to the second research question.
we perform quantitative analysis to accept reject the rst four null and alternative hypotheses while we depend on qualitative feedback from the participants for the last three null and alternative hypotheses.
.
dependent and independent variables the purpose of this experiment is to verify whether edm improves model and consequently domain comprehension among stakeholders who are considered novices to the application domain compared to a structural modeling approach where the model consists of abstractions only.
consequently our experiment has one independent variable the modeling method used to understand the model abstractions.
the modeling method varies across two groups the control group which gets a model consisting of abstractions only and the edm group which gets a model consisting of both abstractions and examples.
the design of our experiment is abetween subjects design where each participant is either a part of the control group or the edm group.
similarly to other empirical evaluations of uml comprehension the dependent variables of our experiment are diagram completeness diagram mistakes questions response completeness the e ciency in answering the questions the participants perceived di culty in performing the comprehension tasks and nally the participants con dence in their task solutions.
.
problem domain we selected rewards loyalty programs as the problem do main of our experiment.
loyalty programs represent structured marketing activities especially in the retail domain that reward and therefore encourage loyal buying behavior at the customer end.
the choice of rewards loyalty programs was inspired by a similar domain modeled and used by one of our industrial partners.
the domain is su ciently rich in concepts relationships and constraints and we had enough knowledge to build model abstractions and examples.
.
participants in total we had participants in the experiment model receptors sme and model creator.
for model receptors we decided to target graduate and undergraduate students from electrical and computer engineering ece computer science cs and software engineering se programs at the university of waterloo.
the year of study for the undergraduate students varied from second year to fourth year.
most students had previous work experience either through full time jobs or co op terms as well as familiarity with uml either through academic projects or work experience.
to avoid biasing the results through model receptors expectations we employed blinding techniques.
the model receptors were not familiar with the experiment hypotheses nor with the measures we were applying.
the sme and the model creator were the rst and second authors of the paper.
they were both familiar with entire experimental setting and they had advanced knowledge of uml class and object diagrams.
.
tasks and treatments edm provides aid in the comprehension of model abstractions and the problem domain.
our approach supports bas designers developers and any role who needs to understand the domain for future use.
our aim was to design a set of tasks that are close to scope and complexity to real tasks performed by practitioners and at the same time allow us to objectively measure the di erence between the comprehension levels of the two modeling approaches.
we asked the participants from both the control and edm groups to complete the same set of tasks in a single three hour session.
model receptors were randomly assigned to treatments.
the experiment involved two tasks.
task asked the participants to create an object diagram for a rewards loyalty program called club sobeys.
we provided a brief overview about what club sobeys is.
the instructions speci ed that the participants should create at least one instance of every class include all associations and attribute values and realize all requirements included in the experiment document.
for example one requirement was provide information about the di erent sales channels through which the customer will know about the o ers.
take into account di erent ways of promoting store and partner o ers.
we provided the participants with a checklist that included all the main concepts they needed to include in their object diagrams member registration points accumulation through in store957products purchased without o ers points accumulation for in store o ers sales channels to promote all o ers partner o ers and redemption mechanisms.
the control group received the model abstractions class diagram in this task.
however the edm group received both the model abstractions and the six partial examples for a di erent rewards loyalty program called shoppers optimum.
task of the experiment asked the model receptors to answer a set of questions.
all questions were related to the modeled domain.
task included both multiple choice and short answer questions.
we asked them to record the start and end times for solving this task to be able to calculate their e ciency.
we instructed them not to switch between the tasks once they started task as the time should be solely allocated for answering the domain questions.
however we allowed the participants to go back to task after nishing task questions if they felt the need to add or x something in their object diagrams.
from the beginning and throughout the experiment we encouraged the model receptors to ask any questions they had.
we recorded all questions but we only answered questions related to tooling or understanding of requirements.
we used magicdraw for uml modeling.
we introduced the tool during the rst minutes of the session and provided training materials on using the tool for opening the provided diagrams and creating object diagrams.
.
operation the operation of the experiment covered the period from november till july and was divided into two phases the pilot study and the experiment.
we rst conducted a pilot study with three participants which allowed us to test and improve the experimental design.
we also conducted a test session to simulate the actual experiment to verify the clarity of the study materials and the time needed for completing the tasks.
we did not include any of these data points in the results.
in total we conducted experimental sessions each having between two and three model receptors who were randomly assigned to either the control or edm groups.
.
data collection .
model abstractions and examples we gathered data about loyalty programs in general and two speci c programs club sobeys and shoppers optimum.
we chose these programs due to their publicly available data on their stores websites.
each program generally has a loyalty card sometimes called a points card associated with it.
this card identi es the card holder as a loyalty program memeber.
members earn points for every paid transaction when they swipe their card upon checkout.
members can then redeem their points via one of the redemption channels provided in the store.
one example of points redemption is instant savings o a bill.
the researcher playing the role of a sme studied the actual loyalty programs and then the other researcher playing the role of the model creator elicited all the necessary knowledge through conversations with the sme.
the model creator created a single uml class diagram that satis ed the requirements for both loyalty programs and validated it with the sme.
the class diagram was composed of classes associations and constraints.
the constraintswere written in natural language because we expected that most model receptors would not be familiar with the object constraint language ocl .
an extract from the class diagram is shown in fig.
.
the full class diagram is available with the rest of experimental materials in .
the sme prepared six partial examples in the form of partial uml object diagrams.
each partial example clari ed one or two main concepts derived from the model abstractions.
we used a variety of examples four valid and two invalid examples.
example shown in fig.
represents an invalid example that violates a constraint a member cannot earn and redeem points for the same bill.
we see that john bought an omega3 bottle that didn t have an o er associated with it and hence was added directly to his bill.
he also bought vitaminc which was o ered at a reduced price o .
john knew about this o er through the instoreflyer .
the bill includes the reduced price for vitaminc in itsdollaramountbeforetax attribute value.
since there are nobonuspoint s associated with any o er picked by john the bill only accumulated regular basepoint s. we chose points for every as our basemechanic .
this part of the example shows how a member can accumulate points.
however the rest of the example shows points redemption as well that would make john only pay .
instead of .
.
this represents a constraint violation if redemptionmechanic is applied it has to be the only mechanic applied to the bill.
.
participants information we identi ed three factors that could have an in uence on the model receptors performance in our experiment their background uml experience level and domain knowledge.
the background refers to the working context of the model receptor which we divided into two main categories industryandacademic .
for this experiment our model receptors were students only.
however many of them had industry experience.
the domain knowledge refers to the extent of their familiarity with rewards loyalty programs.
before the experiment we collected both personal e.g.
name email address and professional data e.g.
department graduate or undergraduate student uml experience rewards loyalty programs experience about the model receptors using an online questionnaire.
we measured and controlled the model receptors experience levels with uml class and object diagrams as well as the problem domain through the following procedure.
first we sent them recruitment emails that mentioned our interest in recruiting students who have uml class and object diagrams experience to take part in a structural modeling experiment and asked interested recipients to complete a background questionnaire.
the questionnaire included multiple choice questions asking students to rate their expertise with structural modeling in general and with uml class and object diagrams and their familiarity with the application domain.
one question asked the students to choose the source of their experience with uml academic industrial or both.
on a point likert scale ranging from no experience to expert we selected students who rated themselves on average or higher for structural modeling experience or higher for uml class diagram experience or higher for uml object diagram experience and for their familiarity with the application domain.
second we sent the selected students a uml assessment exercise.
the exercise aimed at making sure that the students rated their experi 958ence with respect to uml class and object diagrams correctly.
the exercise included multiple choice questions and one diagram construction question.
we selected the students who scored percent or higher in the assessment exercise to be model receptors in our experiment.
among the selected students only two scored below percent.
.
timing data to time the model receptors accurately the experimenter started each session for all students at the same time so that the total time allocated for all students is exactly three hours.
to time the second task of the experiment the model receptors were asked to inform the experimenter when they wanted to start solving task .
the experimenter recorded the start and end times for the second task and ensured that there was no switching between the tasks of the experiment.
.
evaluation of task solutions at the end of each session the experimenter collected a soft copy of the students object diagrams and a hard copy of their answers for task .
before grading their solutions we created a list of classes and associations that needed to be instantiated in an object diagram a set of correct answers for task and the marking scheme for each task.
we employed a blind marking technique to rule out any sort of bias when grading the task solutions the experimenter didn t know the name of the participant nor which group he or she belonged to.
after marking all solutions the experimenter created code names for some students and created a mapping between the code names and the students groups.
the code names were for sample students solutions provided to the second and third authors in addition to the employed marking scheme which allowed them to perform blind veri cation of the grades.
the authors discussed the di erences and agreed on the nal grading.
.
participants feedback each experiment session ended with a debrie ng part in which the model receptors assessed the level of di culty for each task identi ed speci c parts of the class diagram that were hard to understand assessed the con dence level in their answers for each task provided feedback regarding the overall time pressure of the experiment and optionally provided any comments they might have that could potentially help us improve the experiment.
the model receptors who were part of the edm group in addition to the previous items also answered questions related to whether it would have been hard to understand the model abstractions without examples speci ed which examples if any were of help commented on whether having a variety of valid and invalid examples was better than having valid examples only commented on whether having partial examples was better than having a single complete but big example object diagram and nally provided their comments regarding the number of examples used the concept s covered by each example and the size of each provided example.
.
data analysis .
subject analysis we conducted the experiment with participants in several runs.
we excluded one data point from the controlparticipants as the participant couldn t nish the experiment within the allocated time.
hence we ended with data points for the edm treatment and data points for the control treatment.
moreover the random assignment of model receptors to treatments led to a balanced distribution of graduate and undergraduate students in addition to a balanced distribution of students expertise among treatments.
.
preliminary data analysis from the participants solutions for task we observed that most mistakes and missing objects from the control group object diagrams were related to the classes redemptionmechanic redemptionchannel bonusmechanic and partneroffer .
all participants from the control group scored zero for the redemptionmechanic class and out of participants scored zero for incorrect or missing instances of the other two classes.
on the other hand all edm participants got the full mark for the classes partneroffer and redemptionmechanic and out of participants got the full mark for the class bonusmechanic .
the inability to correctly instantiate the class redemptionmechanic by the control group indicates the usefulness of explicit examples over any other form of extra information.
in the experimental materials we provided all participants with a textual description of possible ways by which members can redeem their points members can redeem their points for instant savings o a bill or have them automatically converted to one of sobey s partners.
possible ways by which a member can redeem points previously added to their account include inside the store to reduce overall grocery costs or through a partner such as aeroplan aeroplan members collect miles via credit cards or via a points conversion system with one of their partners.
we observed that all participants from both treatments answered q9correctly .
q9was about the di erence between fixedpriceo and fixedpercento mechanics which are likely to be familiar to the participants based on previous shopping experience.
this supports our earlier discussion from section that people who are already familiar with the domain might not need examples to improve their model comprehension compared to novices to the application domain.
there are three questions that all edm participants solved correctly while less than half of the participants in the control group were able to solve q5 q8 q10 .
we observed the highest discrepancy between the scores of the control group for q15 with a minimum score of out of and a maximum score of .
this question tested the participants ability to perform impact analysis.
if they had to change the value of the basemechanic instance then which other instances would have to be changed accordingly.
we didn t observe this discrepancy for the edm group answers for this or any other question in task .
.
results .
quantitative analysis given the design of our experiment a between subjects unbalanced design students for edm versus students for the control group with one independent variable the suitable parametric test for hypothesis testing is the independent samples students t test .
we ensured that our data met the test assumptions through the following independence of observations we met this assumption through our choice of a between subjects design.
normality of the populations across the dependent variables we tested the normality of all dependent variables using the normal quantile comparison plots .
the assumption was met for all cases.
equal variances of the populations across the dependent variables we tested our data for equal variances using the levene s test .
the assumption was not met for diagram completeness.
we used the welch s t test for that case which is an adaptation of the student s t test intended for use when the two populations have unequal variances.
we performed all tests using the r statistical package .
we chose a signi cance level of .
which corresponds to to a con dence interval.
the statistics related to diagram completeness diagram mistakes task completeness and task e ciency are presented in table .
diagram completeness.
we use this variable to indicate how complete the object diagrams created by the model receptors are with respect to the provided class diagram and a set of requirements.
creating an object diagram with at least one instance for every class all attribute values and all links was a requirement for all participants.
we measure completeness as a percentage of the participant s score for correctly instantiated objects and links over the total reference score for all required objects and links .
by correctly we mean an instantiation that satis es all constraints and domain requirements.
we calculate the total score for completeness as follows mark for each correctly instantiated object mark for each correctly included attribute value and mark for each correctly assigned link in the object diagram.
promotionvehicle is the only object assigned marks as the provided requirements asked the participants to include di erent ways for promoting in store and partner o ers .
this means at least di erent instances of promotionvehicle are needed.
there is extra mark to satisfy the requirement that the object diagram must include at least one ownerproduct instance that isn t associated with o ers.
also firstname and lastname attributes are only marked once whether the participant included them in the member object or in the account object.
we excluded any redundancy from our calculations.
for example if a participant instantiated the same object twice we only mark one correct instance.
this allows us to have a point of comparison with other participants diagrams.
the maximum score is corresponding to a for diagram completeness.
result there was a signi cant e ect of examples on diagram completeness with a p value .
indicating that the mean completeness score for the edm group was signi cantly higher than the completeness score for the control group.
this e ect is illustrated in fig.
.
diagram mistakes.
we use this variable to indicate thenumber of mistakes per object diagram .
by mistake we mean wrong interpretation and or usage of classes associations in addition to unsatis ed constraints.
for example one participant used a product manufacturer such as kraft foods to be the programowner instead of clubsobeys .
another mistake would be applying accumulation and redemption techniques for the same instance of bill which violates 90diagram completness diagram mistakes control control edm edmfigure diagram completeness and mistakes.
a constraint in the class diagram.
the di erence between the two variables diagram completeness and the diagram mistakes is that the rst takes into account missing classes attributes and or links.
for example if a participant did not include the value of an attribute it is not considered a mistake but decreases their score for diagram completeness.
result as illustrated in fig.
with a p value .
the data indicates that there was a signi cant e ect of examples in reducing the number of mistakes in the participants diagrams who belonged to the edm group compared to those of the control group.
task completeness.
this variable measures each participant s score for answering task questions correctly .
the questions given in task require both model and domain understanding.
having them as the second task is important so that the participants would have already spent time understanding the model abstractions and the domain to create the object diagram in the rst task.
there is only one correct choice for each multiple choice question and one correct answer for each short answer question except for one question which had two possible correct answers as seen in .
the score for task is calculated as follows mark for each multiple choice question and mark for each concept that needs to be included in the participant s answer for the short answer questions.
for example the answer for the question what are the type s of points that are collected by the bill?
is marked out of mark for basepoints and mark for bonuspoints .
we gave partial credit for partially correct answers.
the maximum score of correctness is .
result we observed an expected signi cant e ect of examples on the participants solutions for task with a pvalue .
indicating that the average task completeness score for the edm group was signi cantly higher than the one for the control group as shown in figure .
e ciency.
in our analysis we use e ciency of the model receptors in solving the questions in task as a dependent variable.
we measure e ciency as the ratio between task completeness score and the time spent in minutes completing the task .
the boxplot in fig.
shows the e ciency scores for the edm group compared to the control group.
result with a p value .
the data shows that there was a signi cant e ect on improving the e ciency scores for the edm group compared to the control group.
.
qualitative analysis we present our qualitative analysis in terms of the partic 960table statistics related to diagram completeness and mistakes task completeness and e ciency.
dep.
var.
diagram completeness diagram mistakes task completeness e ciency treatment edm control edm control edm control edm control mean .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
min .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
max .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
median .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
stdev .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
task completness efficiency control control edm edm figure task completeness and e ciency.
ipant s feedback provided at the end of each experimental session.
first we asked all participants to rate the di culty level of their experience in creating the object diagram and in solving task questions.
on a point likert scale ranging from very easy to very di cult participants from the edm group rated their experience on average .
for di culty in creating the object diagram and .
for di culty in answering task questions.
participants from the control group on the other hand rated their experience on average .
for di culty in creating the object diagram and .
for di culty in answering task questions which indicates a lower perceived di culty by the model receptors to comprehend the model abstractions and solve the comprehension tasks when they had examples.
we veri ed this when we asked the edm participants do you think it would have been hard to understand the class diagram without examples?
.
all participants answered yes .
the di erence in experienced di culty by participants was apparent in the number of questions about the domain raised by the edm versus the control group.
on average each session had domain questions raised by the control group compared to one domain question for the edm group reduction of .
second we asked the participants to indicate the classes and or associations that were most di cult to comprehend.
most of the control group answers included the following classes bonusmechanic redemptionmechanic partneroffer and bill.
as for the most di cult associations these were the associations involving these classes.
some of the reasons the control group found these tasks and associations di cult were i couldn t understand how the attributes propagate through the classes.
where shall i start with points calculation?
when do i use each of the four associations for the points class?
it s confusing without seeing them in context.
i started with a few classes to understand them but whenever i found a constraint it made me change the way i visualized how the classes are linked together and hence atotal shift in my understanding.
and nally the concepts for these classes unlike member or account classes don t hold any previous meaning and hence were di cult to get their idea.
although i understood the meaning of bill and saw the formulas for points calculation i couldn t form a picture of how the classes are combined to form a system for accumulating points.
the edm group mentioned that the same classes and associations were hard to comprehend from the abstractions only but the examples helped a lot.
we asked the edm participants to list the examples they found most useful and helpful.
the majority mentioned examples and .
these examples covered all classes and associations that the control group participants found hard to understand.
the participants found these examples most useful for the following reasons example shows separately how a regular product is treated compared to a one that has an o er example shows how to apply bonus mechanic when you are using the multiplier attribute.
it also shows that the pointsmultiplier and xedamount attributes are mutually exclusive example shows how the attributes from di erent classes relate and the sequence for accumulating points.
for example you have to nish in store points before you apply partner points example shows that the account points balance gets updates with which value in the bill class.
for example it doesn t get the base or bonus points directly and i couldn t have gured out any classes from the redemption process except through this example .
twelve out of edm participants when asked whether having a variety of valid and invalid examples was more helpful than having valid examples only replied that they found the invalid example helpful in understanding the constraint about how one can not apply accumulation and redemption for the same bill.
the only participant who did not nd the invalid examples useful answered incorrectly the following question in task related to the constraint violation illustrated by example can a customer earn and redeem points for the same bill?
.
we also asked the edm participants if having small object diagrams representing partial examples was more useful than having one complete object diagram.
they all preferred the small examples but one participant preferred if he would have had the complete object diagram in addition to the small partial examples as it would have helped him integrate all the concepts together.
finally we asked the participants to rate their con dence level in the answers they provided for both experimental tasks.
on a point likert scale ranging from unsure to very sure the edm group participants rated their con dence level on average .
for their object diagram answers and .
for their task answers.
the control group participants rated their con dence level on average .
for their object diagram answers and .
for their task answers.
these results indicate that model receptors who961see model abstractions together with examples experience a deeper level of understanding which makes them more condent in their answers.
during feedback elicitation the participants from both groups commented on the use of uml or any graphical modeling notation in general.
they mentioned that part of the experiment di culty was not knowing where to start reading the model abstractions.
the class diagram was of signi cant size with lots of concepts classes associations and constraints to digest.
the edm group mentioned that partial examples were very useful in that situation since partial examples helped them focus on a small subset of the class diagram at a time.
one participant commented that the order by which the examples were presented was very important and helped in smoothing the comprehension process where rst they got introduced to the concept of o er which is the basic class for accumulation then a regular product in addition to an o er to emphasize the di erence in points calculation between a regular product and a product having an o er then a constraint about in store points accumulation then partner o ers followed by redemption as he started reading the class diagram from left to right and nally the relation between accumulation and redemption.
we asked the edm participants if they preferred more examples but they all agreed that the provided examples were enough to understand the class diagram and perform the comprehension tasks.
this suggests that one positive example per concept is enough unless there is more than one idea associated with that concept.
for example we had positive examples for accumulation but only one for redemption.
also one wouldn t need an invalid example for every constraint but only when the constraints are related to more than one concept at a time or the ones which express corner cases.
.
discussion in addition to the quantitative and qualitative analysis we performed a detailed task analysis which provided a number of insights on our experimental design and the type of tasks that our approach supports best.
most participants from the edm group agreed that the number and choice of examples were excellent.
they had no comments or issues related to a concept that was not conveyed in the examples nor that the number of examples was too small or too big.
the only participant who preferred valid examples only did solve the question related to the invalid example constraint incorrectly.
all participants agreed that partial examples were better than a single complete object diagram since this helped them focus on a small subset of the model at a time.
the examples bene ted the model receptors the most when there were several associations related to a single class propagation of attributes through classes unfamiliar domain concepts and understanding the system s constraints.
through our detailed task analysis we wanted to see whether the e ect of examples on task completeness was independent from the fact that all model receptors did an instantiation for task rst.
nine out of participants for the edm group chose the xedamount attribute for the bonusmechanic class when instantiating their object diagram.
they were still able to solve q10 andq12 that asked about the optional pointsmultiplier attribute correctly despite not having used that attribute in instantiation.
also although some participants had mistakes or missing classesforbillorfixedperecento mechanics they were still able to solve the related questions in task correctly.
this shows that when using examples the participants were able to solve task correctly despite having mistakes in the instantiation task which suggests that performing instantiation rst might not be necessary for the participants ability to answer task questions correctly.
finally the experiment tested edm only from cause and e ect viewpoints only without considering the cost.
although the presence of examples led to a better performance in terms of diagram completeness diagram mistakes task completeness and task e ciency we didn t take into consideration the cost of creating and maintaining the examples in terms of time e ort or availability of tool support.
we need to investigate this matter in an industrial context.
.
threats to validity this section discusses the threats to internal external construct and conclusion validity according to .
.
internal validity threats to internal validity refer to uncontrolled factors in the environment that may in uence the e ects of the treatments on the variables.
participants.
we ensured that the participants were familiar with the class diagram constructs used in the experiment using a uml assessment exercise in order to reduce the threat that model receptors may not have been competent enough in the modeling notation.
each participant applied one treatment only to avoid the human learning e ect.
we used randomization to assign participants to treatments in order to mitigate the e ect that the participants experience may not have been fairly distributed among treatments.
we prevented communication between the participants during the session in order to avoid one participant s answers affecting the other.
we did not inform the participants of our experimental hypotheses nor what measures we were looking for to avoid their expectations from biasing the results.
to compensate for the e ect of the participants knowledge of the application domain on the dependent variables we selected the participants who evaluated themselves as having no experience with rewards loyalty programs.
tasks.
fatigue during completion of task questions is a possible threat to validity.
the number of wrong answers for both groups is almost the same for questions at the beginning and questions at the end.
therefore there is no evidence of any decrease in performance.
the choice of tasks may have been biased to the advantage of edm.
we alleviate this threat by selecting tasks that target what developers bas do in real life when they don t understand the system in the absence of a sme.
for example questions like what are the classes which represent di erent means of accumulating points?
are considered with the concept location task.
if a novice to the application domain needs to understand how a member in a loyalty program can earn points they will have to determine the di erent classes associated with points accumulation.
another targeted activity was impact analysis.
by impact analysis we mean determining the impact of a change on a system.
this activity requires full understanding of the system.
question targeted this activity.
we gave all participants the same amount of time to nish both tasks of the experiment for fair comparison.
this led to the exclusion of one data point962from the control group when the participant exceeded the allocated time for the experiment.
session di erences.
there were several runs for the experiment to accommodate the availability of the participants and the di erences between them may have in uenced the results.
to mitigate this threat we had participants from both edm and control treatments in each session.
the pilot study also helped us obtain a stable and reliable setup.
.
external validity external validity threats are concerned with whether the results can be generalized outside the experimental setting.
participants.
to mitigate the threat of the representativeness of the participants we could only address their experience level with uml.
however we were not able to include participants from industry.
problem domain.
the representativeness of our domain is another threat.
we chose to perform the experiment with a domain that was inspired from a similar domain used by one of our industrial partners.
the process by which the domain was modeled was also inspired from the industry where the modeler usually has elicitation sessions with the sme to understand the domain.
tasks.
the choice of tasks may not precisely re ect what practitioners do with the models but they certainly re ect the degree to which participants comprehend the models with and without examples.
experimenter e ect.
the experimenter is also one of the authors of this paper.
this could have in uenced the experiment.
one instance of this threat is grading the task solutions correctly.
to mitigate this threat we created a marking scheme before grading the participants solutions and performed double marking.
moreover the experimenters graded the solutions blindly.
.
construct validity construct validity is the degree to which the dependent and independent variables represent the cause and e ect concepts that should be measured in the experiment.
participants.
in the pilot study we relied only on the participants own rating of their expertise in uml class and object modeling.
however in order to ensure that we accurately measured the skill level of the participants we required them to solve a uml assessment exercise.
tasks.
we avoided mono operation bias by having more than one subject perform each treatment and more than one measure of comprehension.
moreover we limited the number of multiple choice questions in task to ve questions while the rest were short answer questions.
this helped imitating a real life context whereby the stakeholders are not guided by a set of prede ned interpretations.
experimental materials.
we avoided the threat that the edm participants would use the partial examples as templates for their object diagrams instead of using them to improve their model understanding through the following the combination of partial examples could not be integrated into a full object diagram as we used di erent instantiations for the same class i.e.
di erent alternatives for the same class in di erent examples we used invalid examples which could not be used as templates as they would lead to incorrect system behaviour and nally the participants would still need to understand the examples to solve task questions.
our results show that the edm par ticipants answers to task were of signi cant improvement over the answers provided by the control participants.
.
conclusion validity conclusion validity is the extent to which correct conclusions are drawn about the relationship between the treatments and the outcomes.
the treatments assume novices to the application domain who are familiar with the modeling notation so we provided homogeneous participants groups with respect to their background and expertise.
the statistical tests used to draw our conclusions have assumptions that needed to be satis ed before they could be applied so we veri ed that the assumptions of the tests before we used them in our analysis.
accurate measurements of treatment outcomes are necessary to re ect the e ects so we used a marking scheme blind and double marking techniques.
.
related work we started the experiment by conducting a survey of research work dealing with experimental validation of software engineering model comprehension approaches and uml modeling studies related to class and object diagrams.
there is a rich body of research on empirical evaluation of model comprehension techniques especially with respect to uml class diagrams.
the experiment presented in tests the e ect of di erent layouts strategies on uml model comprehension.
the results indicate improved accuracy in solving comprehension tasks when having clustered layouts.
similarly the experiment presented in focuses on how the level of detail in uml models impacts model comprehension.
the results show an improved e ect of the level of detail on the comprehension of uml models.
although there exist many studies on model comprehension there are only two studies according to our knowledge that assess the e ect of having object diagrams together with class diagrams on model comprehension.
the rst study used four comprehension tasks to determine the impact of object diagrams on model comprehension.
each task was composed of multiple choice questions for a class diagram di erent than the class diagrams used in the other tasks.
the study used only multiple choice questions which increases the threat of correct results due to participants guessing the answers.
the participants were allowed to communicate during the study and hence one participant s answers might have a ected the other.
also each class diagram was composed of only classes which is signi cantly simpler than any model representing real world systems.
the results show an improved e ect on comprehension only for two tasks out of the four at con dence interval.
the second study is a replication of the rst one but with minor modi cations.
the researchers changed the questions to be open ended and added a dependent variable the amount of time it took each participant to solve each task.
however this dependent variable doesn t take into account that a participant can take longer time to answer the questions and hence achieve a higher score.
the authors still allowed participants to communicate and the four class diagrams were still the same.
the results show an improved e ect of object diagrams on comprehension at con dence interval.
in this work we mitigated the above threats to validity by selecting participants who were novices to the domain to prevent guessing presenting the model receptors a signi cantly963more complex class diagram preventing any communication among the participants including an instantiation task before questions including both multiple choice questions and open ended questions measuring multiple and diverse dependent variables both quantitatively and qualitatively to present a fuller picture of the e ects.
.
conclusions we presented a controlled experiment that aimed at evaluating the e ects of using explicit examples on model and domain comprehension in the context of our proposed structural modeling approach edm.
we used the domain of rewards loyalty programs.
we represented the abstractions part of the model as a uml class diagram and our examples as six partial uml object diagrams.
our participants were graduate and undergraduate students from the university of waterloo.
the main result of our experiment is that the edm approach leads to improvement in all measured variables diagram completeness diagram mistakes task completeness and e ciency .
if on average a participant in the edm group has mistakes in his diagram while a participant in the control group has then the edm participant has fewer mistakes.
for task completeness we converted the average scores for both edm and control as a percentage of the total score marks and then calculated the di erence as a percent.
this result is statistically signi cant which allows us to reject the rst four null hypotheses and accept the corresponding four alternative hypotheses.
we conclude that this improvement in model and consequently domain comprehension is due to augmenting the model abstractions with explicit examples.
we also performed a qualitative analysis for the last three null hypotheses.
the edm participants experienced a reduction in the perceived di culty for creating the object diagram and a reduction in the perceived di culty for solving task questions .
they also experienced an increase in con dence in their created diagrams and an increase in con dence in their task solutions while asking fewer domain questions as compared to the participants in the control group.
although we can not reject the fth and sixth null hypotheses based on qualitative results these results provide insight on the impact of having examples on the model receptors experience in understanding the model abstractions and the domain when they are provided with examples.
our analysis suggests that examples are needed the most when the concepts of the model abstractions are not familiar to the model receptor.
one positive example per concept is generally enough unless there is more than one idea formulating that concept such as with points accumulation or when several associations are associated with a class but are applied under di erent conditions.
negative examples are only needed for corner case constraints that are not readily understandable.
partial examples help the model receptors focus on a small subset of a bigger model at a time which improves domain comprehension.
however for future work we might need to consider having partial examples as views on more complete examples as this might help with integrating the di erent concepts for a better abstracted mental model.
the future work should also evaluate the e ects of using a variety of valid and invalid examples as compared to having valid examples only and verify the usefulness and thecost bene t ratio of applying edm in an industrial context.
our results also provide support for the importance of modeling language design.
we propose that structural modeling languages should not only have explicit notations for examples or instances as an integral part of the model but also support partial examples.
in other line of work we designed a lightweight structural modeling language called clafer and showed how it could be used for edm .
finally we designed our experiment with replication in mind.
we published supplemental meterials consisting of the uml class diagram the set of six partial uml example object diagrams the experimental materials for both the control and edm treatments the de brie ng questionnaire and the grading scheme for both experimental tasks.
this allows the readers to better evaluate our experimental design and the presented results.
it also allows other researchers to replicate the experiment or bene t from the design as the base for their own.
.
figure extracts extracts for illustrative purposes only.
full replication package is available for download .
storepoints int totalbasepoints integer dollaramountbeforetax integer dollaramountaftertax float totalpoints integerbill fixedamount integer pointsmultiplier integer bonusmechanic count integerpoints firstname string lastname string pointsbalance integeraccount pricebeforetax integerownerproductmechanicredemptionmechanic redemptionchannelpromotionvehicle pricemechanic programowner percent integerfixedpercentoff firstname string lastname stringmember multiplier integerbasemechanic amount integerfixedpriceoff startdate enddateoffer bonuspointsbasepoints storepoints totalbasepoints in store bonus pointsconstraint if redemptionmechanic is used it must be the only mechanic applied to the bill.
constraint the points instance that the bill contributes is different from the points instance that is deducted from the accounttotalpoints include partner bonus points.constraint at most one price or bonus mechanic per offer.
accepts .. has uniquely identifies collects .. contributes .. about a .. redeemedvia uses .. contributes contributedby contributes contributedby uses added to includes .. belongs to contains .. addedto promotes .. promotedby .. applies .. appliedto accumulates .. deducted from multiplies .. figure class diagram extract .
dollaramountaftertax .
dollaramountbeforetax storepoints totalbasepoints totalpoints 150john sbill billenddate startdate 1offvitamins offer member sbill redemptionchannel firstname john lastname smith pointsbalance 8000john saccount account 10for5000points redemptionmechanic pricebeforetax 10omega3 bottle ownerproductshoppers programownerpricebeforetax 6vitaminc ownerproductinstoreflyer promotionvehicle count 50005000redemption points points10for basemechanic john member 1off fixedpriceoff count 150john sbillpoints pointscount 150john sbillbase points basepoints member pays only .
added to includesadded toincludes accepts uniquely identifies has deducted frommakespromotedby promotes uses addedtocontainsabout a belongs to appliedtocontributedbycontributes redeemedviaaccumulatesbelongs to appliedto contributes figure invalid partial example accumulation and redemption can not be applied for the same bill .
.